CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SYLVANIA, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted July 6, 1993 
Effective July 6, 1993 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SYLVANIA, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Preston Dees 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ken Austin 
Joseph Cleland 
Ben Mercer 
Craig Lariscy 
Eddie Lovett 
Tripp Sheppard 
City Council 
____________ 
Stacy F. Mathis 
City Manager 
____________ 
Hugh T. Hunter 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Sheila P. Snow 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Sylvania, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code, as supplemented through June 21, 1983, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Roland C. Stubbs, City Manager, and Mr. Hugh T. Hunter, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 328 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Sylvania; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the City Council of the City: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Sylvania, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 78, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 3, 1992, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than six months or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue all remedies available at law or in equity including, but not limited to the following: abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 3, 1992, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective July 6th, 1993. 
Passed and Adopted by the City Council this 6th day of July, 1993. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part I of this Code consists of Ga. Laws 1939, page 81, and the Charter of Sylvania, Ga. Laws 1963, page 2030, as amended. The origin of and amendments to each section are shown in parentheses following each section. Additionally, the comparative tables immediately following this part show the disposition of all Ga. Laws and amendatory ordinances included herein. 
The provisions of Ga. Laws 1963, page 2030, have been arranged by subject matter and numbered consecutively for purposes of indexing and ease of reference. The editors have supplied catchlines and inserted material in brackets where necessary to correct obvious errors or for clarification, and have omitted all titles and enacting, repealing, severability and effective date clauses. Obvious punctuation errors have been corrected without notation and a uniform style of number expression and citation to state statutes has been employed. 

Section 1.101. - Incorporation, name and style. 
The City of Sylvania, in Screven County, Georgia, is hereby incorporated as a city under the name and style of the City of Sylvania, hereinafter referred to as "the city." 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 1) 
Section 1.102. - Continuation of existing laws, rights and liabilities. 
All ordinances and resolutions of said city not inconsistent with this charter shall remain in full force and effect for the city until altered, amended or repealed. All property and property rights held, owned or possessed by the city and all pending suits or claims by or against said city are preserved and unaltered. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 2) 
Section 1.103. - Corporate seal. 
The city shall have a corporate seal which shall consist of a round metal stamp with the words "City of Sylvania, Screven County, Georgia, Corporate Seal" so fixed and arranged in such metal stamp that said seal can be impressed on documents and written instruments to which the city is a party. The city clerk shall have custody of the corporate seal and shall impress documents therewith when duly authorized. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 3) 
Section 1.104. - Territorial boundaries. 
The corporate limits of the city shall extend for a radius of one mile from the center of the county courthouse in the City of Sylvania. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 4) 
Section 1.105. - Specific powers enumerated. 
The city shall have power and authority to: 
(1)  Buy and sell water, gas, electricity and other public utilities at cost or for a profit, both within and without the territorial boundaries of the city. Erect, establish, and operate all facilities including lines, mains, pipes, machinery, plants, and structures necessary for the maintenance and operation of such utilities, including the repair and replacement of the same. 
(2)  Adopt ordinances binding on everyone within the city to protect the health, peace, safety, good order, dignity and general welfare of the city and the inhabitants thereof. 
(3)  Exercise complete control over all the public streets, roads, ways, drives, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, crossings, and parks of the city. They shall have full and complete power and authority to open, curb, locate, relocate, replace, work, straighten, abandon, close, drain, pave and repave the same, or cause the same to be done. 
(4)  Establish a system of numbering houses in the city, and to assign appropriate street numbers to the various houses on the various streets, alleys, roads, lanes, drives and ways of the city, and to compel said houses to be properly numbered. 
(5)  Control by ordinance the time, manner, terms, conditions, and places of all sewer connections and how much surface or drainage water may flow into such sewers, and the terms and conditions on which it will be permitted, and at what points, and generally all matters relating to the construction, use, control, maintenance, repair, replacement, improvement and removal of sewers and sewer connections, and the cutting and replacing of pavement and other adjacent structures shall at all times be under the control and regulation of the city council in its fair and legal discretion. 
(6)  Control by ordinance the construction, maintenance and removal and replacement of all city culverts, pipes, sewers, drains, private drains, water closets, urinals, privies, toilets, and the like, and provide for their location, structure, size and use, in all particulars, as may be deemed best for the health, comfort and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. The city council shall have power and authority to prescribe by ordinance the kind of water closets, urinals, privies and plumbing which shall be used in the corporate limits, and to condemn and compel the disuse of same when they shall become and are declared a nuisance by a court having jurisdiction. The city council shall also have power and authority to compel the owner or owners of property within the city to connect water closets, sinks, commodes and urinals on their property with the sewers and sanitary system of said city when such property is located within a reasonable distance of such sewer, and under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by ordinance. If any property owner shall fail or refuse to make connections as required by city ordinance or resolution, such owner shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
(7)  Contract with other municipalities and political subdivisions, and to cooperate with the other municipalities and political subdivisions, in acquiring, establishing, constructing, building, maintaining, and/or operating such garbage disposal, water, sewerage, electric and/or gas plants, lines and/or facilities, and streets, sidewalks and parks within and/[or] without the limits of the city, as well as library and other institutions, utilities and/or services, in addition to existing plants, systems, building[s], facilities, lines and services as the city council may at any time deem for the best interest of said city. 
(8)  Levy, assess and collect taxes to raise sufficient revenue to pay for the improvements, services, equipment and/or facilities provided for in any contract or agreement to which the city is or may become a party. 
(9)  Issue and sell bonds for the purpose of paying bonds of the city and interest thereon, and for any public or other purpose allowed by the constitution and laws of this state, and to issue and sell revenue anticipation certificates as now or hereafter allowed by law. 
(10)  Provide by ordinance for reporting all property in the city subject to taxation by the city, whether such property be realty or personalty, tangible or intangible, and to require all persons owning such property to file a written statement and description of such property with the fair market value thereof under oath. 
(11)  Prescribe by ordinance a penalty for failure to make such return or report within the time prescribed by ordinance; provided such penalty shall not exceed the sum of double the amount of tax levied against such person or taxpayer failing to make or file such return. Such penalty shall be a lien upon property of the defaulter and shall be collected in the same manner as the taxes of the city. Such penalty shall be established at the discretion of the mayor and council at the time taxes are levied. 
(12)  Assess the costs of sewers against abutting lots of real estate and the owners thereof on each side of a street in which such sewer is laid or constructed, and the owners of such abutting real estate shall have the right to have the drains from their abutting lots connected with such sewer at their cost under such rules and regulations as the city council may prescribe by ordinance. 
(13)  Control and/or prohibit the manufacture and/or sale of all alcoholic beverages, and to tax, license, regulate and control hotels, boardinghouses, apartments, restaurants, theatres, dance halls, athletic and sporting events and places and all other entertainment activities and places, regulate the operation of all vehicles used for pleasure or business, and garages, mills, factories, ginneries, gas and water companies; regulate the use of its streets for all purposes, and prevent their use for business, or regulate business use by taxation and otherwise, including the right to impose a reasonable license tax for use of streets for business purposes; to prevent stock and poultry from running at large, and to seize and impound any domestic or wild animal or fowl found at large within the city limits; and to provide by proper ordinance for the redemption or sale of the same; and to adopt such ordinances as may be considered necessary to carry out the provisions of this act. 
(14)  Grant franchises, easements and rights-of-way over, in, under and on public streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parks and other property of said city on such terms and conditions and for such lengths of time as it may fix; provided, franchises shall not be granted without fair and adequate compensation provided for in the franchise ordinance; and provided further, that no such franchise shall be granted until notice has been published at least one time one week preceding the week in which the city council meets to consider such application, stating the nature of the franchise, the streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parks or other property on or through which it is desired, the terms of such grant and the time at which the city council will act upon such application. 
(15)  Employ or cause to be employed a certified public accountant to examine and audit all books of account and pertinent records of all officers, employees, and agencies of said city relative to the financial affairs of the city whenever and as often as the city council shall consider proper, and shall fix his compensation. The compensation of such accountant may be fixed on an hourly or other basis before, after, or at the time of his employment. It shall require at least one examination and report every year. 
(16)  Pave or otherwise improve the whole or any part of any street, sidewalk or alley of said city, without giving any railroad company, or other property holder or occupant on the street the option to pave or otherwise improve the same or any part thereof by themselves or by contract. 
(17)  Define a nuisance in the city and provide for its abatement. The recorder's court of the city shall have jurisdiction of all nuisance abatement proceedings in the city. 
(18)  Remove any building, stall, booth, tent, awning, steps, gate, fence, post, wires, stump, tree, structure, pole, or other obstruction or nuisance in a public street, sidewalk or way or so near thereto as to constitute a defect or render the city liable in damages for not removing it, or cause the aforesaid to be removed at the owner's expense if the owner shall fail or refuse to remove the same within such reasonable time as may be fixed by order of the city recorder, or mayor when acting as recorder, and execution shall issue against said owner for the expense thereof as in case of executions for unpaid taxes, and said owner shall also be subject to punishment for maintaining a nuisance. 
(19)  Regulate, lay out, open, relocate, straighten, improve, grade, and control old and new streets, lanes, alleys, street curbing, street crossing and sidewalks, and no person or corporation shall at any time hereafter lay out, locate, relocate, open, extend, or close any street, lane, road, alley, way, sidewalk, park or square contrary to the plan of the city nor without the consent of the city council, and any application for this purpose shall, with an appropriate plat, first be filed with the city engineer or such officer as the city council may designate by ordinance, and notice thereof shall be given the public or parties in interest by publication of notice as required by law and the ordinances of the city. If such application is granted, the owner shall relinquish all rights and titles to the area involved and the same shall pass to and become vested in the city, and all management and control over the same shall pass unequivocably to the city. 
(20)  Impose and collect a license and a tax on dogs within the city in such a manner and mode as it may deem best. 
(21)  License electricians, plumbers, contractors and others and to require examinations as conditions precedent to granting of such license; create examining boards and prescribe by ordinance the minimum requirements in such examinations, and to appoint the members of such boards. 
(22)  Condemn or cause worn out sewers, street pavement, street curbing, or sidewalks within the city to be condemned, reconstructed, replaced or repaired, as the case may require, at the expense of owners of lots of real estate abutting thereon (or against the real estate and owner or owners thereof for whose sole benefit such improvement exists in case of sewers laid solely for the benefit of persons other than owners of real estate abutting thereon), and assess the cost thereof (or in case of street paving such part of the costs as the city council shall deem just and proper) against such abutting lots of real estate and the owners thereof (or in cases of sewers constructed solely for the benefit of a person or persons other than abutting lot owners against other real estate, and the owners thereof for the sole benefit of which such sewer exists), as in the case of original construction of the same kind of improvements. 
(23)  Provide, by ordinance, a civil service system for city officers and employees and/or provide by ordinance for a system of retirement for city officers and employees, which retirement system may be that of old age and survivor's insurance. 
(24)  Regulate the subdivision of land in the city by requiring and regulating the preparation and presentation of preliminary plats, by establishing minimum improvements to be made or to be guaranteed to be made by the subdivider, by setting forth the procedure to be followed by the planning commission in applying rules, regulations, and standards, and by providing for penalties for violation of aforesaid rules, regulations and standards. 
(25)  Advertise the advantages of the city and promote the growth and interests of the city, or the welfare of its inhabitants, in such manner as shall be determined by the mayor and council of the city, including, but not limited to, the encouragement and promotion of economic development, including retail, commercial and residential development, to contract with public and private entities to carry out such purposes, and to appropriate funds for such purposes. 
(26)  To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, corporations and other private entities. 
(27)  To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city. 
(28)  Receive and accept federal and state funds for, and to engage and participate in, any "transportation enhancement activity" as defined in 23 USC § 101 or other federal or state law now existing or hereinafter enacted, whether within or outside of the City, and to appropriate funds and provide in-kind services, labor, materials or real estate required for the local contribution to receive such federal or state funds. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 9; Ord. No. 460, § 1, 3-16-10; Ord. No. 468, § 1, 12-21-10; Ord. No. 478, 11-20-12) 
Section 1.106. - Real estate. 
The city shall have power and authority to rent, lease, buy, sell or otherwise hold or dispose of any or all of its buildings, parks or other real estate for a fair and adequate consideration. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 7) 
Section 1.107. - Power of eminent domain. 
The city, as a body politic, shall have the full power and authority to acquire, by the exercise of the power of eminent domain, any real property or any interest therein, within or without the corporate limits of the said city, which it may deem necessary for any corporate purpose. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 51) 
Section 1.108. - Power to condemn land and property for public use. 
The city shall have the power and authority to condemn under the rules and methods and regulations provided by law, land and property for any public use, to wit: for streets, alleys, sidewalks, ditches, drainage, public playgrounds, parks, public libraries, waterworks, light plants, cemeteries, jails and for any and all public uses, when needed. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 52) 
Section 1.109. - Board of health, authorized. 
The mayor and city council shall also have authority to provide by ordinance for a board of health to be composed of such members as may be provided for in said ordinance; to prescribe their terms of office and define their powers, authority and compensation. The mayor and council in their discretion may provide for a joint city-county board of health. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 75) 
Section 2.101. - Mayor and councilmen. 
The office of mayor and three seats on the city council, presently filled by a mayor and councilmen whose terms expire on December 31, 1963, shall be filled for an initial period of three years or until December 31, 1966, in an election to be held on Thursday after the first Monday in December, 1963, and thereafter said three council seats and the office of mayor shall be filled by elections for terms of four years. The three seats on the city council, the terms of which expire on December 31, 1964, shall be filled by an election to be held on Thursday after the first Monday in December, 1964, for four-year terms all of which shall expire on December 31, 1968. 
After the expiration of the terms of three members of the city council and the mayor, all of which terms shall expire on December 31, 1966, all seats on the city council shall then be filled by election for a term of four years for the mayor and all city councilmen. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 22) 
Section 2.102. - Vacancy in office of mayor, councilmen. 
In the event there shall occur a vacancy in the office of mayor, caused by the death, resignation or removal of the incumbent, the city council shall immediately call an election to fill such vacancy, which election shall be called to be held within ten days. In the filling of such vacancy they shall give due and timely notice by appropriate notice and advertising. But in the event of vacancy occurring in the office of councilmen, the mayor and city council, as soon thereafter as possible, shall elect some qualified citizen to fill such vacancy and he shall hold office until the next regular municipal election. Provided, however, that should a vacancy occur in the office of mayor from one of the above causes, the mayor pro tem shall assume all of the duties of the office of mayor until the vacancy is filled by the election aforesaid. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 23) 
Section 2.103. - Qualifications of mayor and councilmen; oath. 
(a)  No person shall be eligible to qualify or hold office of mayor or councilman of said city unless he shall have been a resident thereof for a period not less than one year immediately preceding the election in which he is to be a candidate; and shall be a qualified voter in the municipal elections for officers of said city; and shall qualify as a candidate by filing his name with the city clerk and by giving to the city clerk, in writing, the oath hereinafter prescribed; and shall not be indebted for any tax due said city which is more than 12 months past due. 
(b)  Any person desiring to qualify as a candidate for office of mayor or councilman in said city shall take the following written oath, setting forth the information called for therein, which oath shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office: "I do solemnly swear that I have resided in the City of Sylvania, Screven County, Georgia, for a period not less than one year immediately preceding the election in which I am a candidate; further that I am a qualified voter in the municipal elections for officers of the City of Sylvania; further that I am not indebted to the City of Sylvania for any tax which is more than 12 months past due; so help me God." 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 24) 
Section 2.104. - Oath of office. 
On January 1, or within ten days thereafter after the election of said mayor and councilmen, and before they enter upon the discharge of their official duties, the mayor shall, before some officer authorized to administer oaths, take and subscribe the following oath: "I do solemnly swear that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties of the mayor of the City of Sylvania during my continuance of office, so help me God," and the mayor, after being so qualified, shall have full power and authority to administer a like oath to each member of the council. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 25) 
Section 2.105. - Mayor's duties and powers. 
Said mayor shall have the same power as the justice of the peace, to witness and attest papers, to administer oaths, to issue criminal warrants and to hold courts of inquiry; he may commit offenders tried before him as a court of inquiry, or may admit them to bail in cases where a justice of the peace has power to bail. He shall have the right to remit or reduce the fines imposed by the municipal court imposed upon defendants charged with violating any of the city laws; he shall have authority to pardon all offenders convicted before the recorder's court. He shall be clothed with the power of veto; it shall be his right to veto all ordinances, resolutions, permits and privileges passed on or granted by said council if he sees fit to do so, and said veto shall in no wise be affected except by a two-thirds vote of council. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 26; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2835, § 1) 
Section 2.106. - Salaries. 
The mayor, municipal court judge and each member of the council shall be paid such salaries for their services as may be fixed each year by the mayor and city council in December of each year prior to the annual election, to apply to the ensuring term of office. The salary of the mayor shall not be less than $600.00 per annum nor more than $4,800.00 per annum; the salary of the municipal court judge shall be not less than $1,200.00 per annum nor more than $7,200.00 per annum; and the salary of the members of the city council shall not be less than $300.00 per annum nor more than $2,400.00 per annum, which amounts shall not be increased or diminished during the terms of office. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 27; Ord. No. 248, 1-5-85; Ord. No. 316, 8-20-91) 
Section 2.107. - Mayor pro tempore; election of; duties; etc. 
At the first regular meeting after election and organization, the council shall elect some one of their number as mayor pro tempore who shall preside over their body in the absence of the mayor and shall be clothed with all the rights and powers of the mayor during the absence of the mayor. Before entering upon any of the duties as such mayor pro tempore, he shall take such oath as the council shall prescribe for the faithful discharge of his duties; in the event of the absence of both the mayor and mayor pro tempore, the council shall elect a chairman from their body who shall be clothed with all the rights and powers of the mayor and shall serve during the absence of both the said mayor and mayor pro tempore upon his taking the same oath as mayor. In case of the death, resignation, removal, or disqualification of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore upon taking the oath as mayor shall serve as mayor with all rights, powers and duties of the latter officer. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 28) 
Section 2.108. - Municipal officers. 
The mayor and council at their first meeting in January of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, shall elect the following officers, a majority of the votes cast being in every case sufficient to elect, to wit: a municipal court judge, a city attorney, and a board of tax assessors consisting of at least three members and no more than five members, and the said mayor and council shall by ordinance prescribe the duties, fix the bonds and fix the compensation of said officers elected by their body, each of the said officers before entering upon the discharge of their duties shall give bond and take and subscribe an oath to discharge the duties of the office to which he has been elected. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 29; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2835, § 2) 
Section 2.108(a). - City physician. 
The mayor and council, at their first meeting in January of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, shall elect by majority vote a city physician for a term of one year, or, in the discretion of the mayor and council, for a term of less than one year, and provide for the appointment on a rotational basis of any two or more physicians within the said one-year period for a term or terms as may be prescribed by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 320, 2-4-92) 
Section 2.109. - Council meetings, time and place; presiding officer; quorum. 
The mayor and council shall meet for the transaction of business at such times and places as they may prescribe. At all the meetings of the mayor and council, the mayor, if present, shall preside, and he may vote in all cases of a tie; he may also vote in all elections for officers who are elected by the board, whether there be a tie or not, the mayor and four members of the council to constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A less number, in the absence of a quorum, may adjourn a regular meeting to future time. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 32) 
Code reference— Council meetings, § 2-26. 
Section 2.110. - Power to enact ordinances; maximum penalty. 
Said mayor and council shall have full power to pass all ordinances, bylaws and regulations which they may deem necessary to the good government of said city, the protection of property, peace, good order, health, comfort and convenience of the citizens thereof, and to fix suitable penalties for the violation of the same. They may provide for punishing violators of their ordinances, bylaws, resolutions by fine, imprisonment in the city prison, or working in the public works camp; the fines in no case to exceed $1,000.00 and the imprisonment in the city prison not to exceed six months, and sentence in the public works camp not to exceed six months, and either one or all of said penalties may be imposed at the discretion of the municipal court. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 33; Ord. No. 460, § 1, 3-16-10) 
Section 2.111. - Legal publication. 
After being read in the council meeting all ordinances shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and, in addition, a copy shall be posted on the bulletin board in the lobby of the city hall for a period of at least five days; the newspaper publication of such ordinances may be by title only, but in such event it shall give notice that a complete copy of such ordinances shall be posted as hereinabove provided; no ordinance shall come up for passage prior to the expiration of the aforementioned five-day period. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 5) 
Section 2.112. - Failure or refusal to vote on measure. 
The failure or refusal of a member of the city council or of any commission, committee, board, bureau or agency of the city to vote when the proper time comes to vote, on a question pending before such city council, commission, committee, board, bureau, or agency, at a meeting legally held and at which such member is in attendance, shall be construed as a vote in favor of the pending proposal. The failure or refusal of a majority of the members of any body duly convened shall be counted as votes in favor of the measure under consideration and amounts to its adoption. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 34) 
Section 2.113. - Existing ordinances preserved. 
This act shall not abolish any of the ordinances now in effect in said city except where they are in conflict with the provisions of this act, but the same shall be preserved and continued. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 76) 
Section 2.114. - Compensation of employees. 
The salary or compensation of heads of departments and other administrative employees shall be fixed by ordinance or resolution of council upon the recommendation of the city manager, such ordinance or resolution of council to provide uniform compensation for like services except that an increase in compensation of any department head of [or] employee may be granted upon the basis of seniority and efficiency. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2835, § 6) 
Section 2.115. - Ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations, passage for good order, peace, health and general welfare. 
The said mayor and council shall have the authority to make and pass such ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations for the government of said city as may be necessary and proper to carry into effect the powers herein enumerated and to provide for the good order, peace, health and general welfare of said citizens of said city as the mayor and council may deem proper and necessary, being also authorized to appoint such committees of counsel as may be necessary and such boards, bureaus and officials as may be necessary to carry into effect the power herein granted. The said mayor and council shall also have the power and authority to appropriate and pay out such funds as may be necessary for carrying into effect the powers above granted. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 35) 
Section 2.116. - Committees of council. 
The mayor and city council may provide by ordinance for such committees as they may deem fit for the best interest of said city, prescribing the duties of such committees and define their authority. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 36; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2835, § 9) 
Section 2.117. - Impeachment; causes. 
If the mayor or any member of the city council of said city shall be guilty of malpractice, willful neglect of their duties, abuse of their powers, or any other unbecoming conduct, they shall be subject to impeachment by the city council, and upon conviction, shall be removed from office. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 37) 
Section 2.118. - Same; trial. 
In impeachment trials before the city council, the affirmative vote of at least four members shall be required to convict, and the mayor shall be entitled to vote, except in case he is on trial, in which case he may not vote. The city recorder shall preside in all impeachment trials unless he is disqualified, in which case the presiding judge of the Superior Court of Screven County shall designate some qualified lawyer to preside over such trial, but such officer presiding over said impeachment trial shall not vote, even in case of a tie. The city recorder shall not be qualified to preside over such impeachment trial unless he shall have been engaged actively in the practice of law for at least five years next preceding such trial. On an impeachment trial, a tie-vote shall acquit the accused. An impeachment resolution against the mayor shall not be subject to his veto. A judgment of conviction in an impeachment proceeding shall vacate the office of the convicted mayor or councilmen. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 38) 
Section 2.201. - Election for mayor and council. 
On Thursday after the first Monday in December of each even numbered year, except as set out in section 2.101, there shall be held in the City of Sylvania at some public place designated by the mayor and councilmen, a general election to fill vacancies in the offices of mayor and councilmen, whose terms of office shall be for four years concurrent with the calendar year. Any qualified person seeking election as mayor or councilman in such election shall file notice of his intention to be a candidate with the clerk of council at least two weeks prior to such election, before noon. Should there for any cause fail to be an election at the time specified, the mayor and council, shall order an election to be held and shall post a notice of the time of such election in the City of Sylvania at the public place designated by the mayor and councilmen for at least ten days previous thereto. At all such elections the polls shall not be opened earlier than 7:00 a.m., and shall close at 7:00 p.m. All elections shall be held by a justice of the peace, or ordinary of Screven County, assisted by two or more freeholders, all of whom shall be citizens of said city and own real estate therein, and each of said managers before entering upon his duties shall take and subscribe before some officer qualified to administer an oath, or before each other, the following oath: "We, and each of us, do swear that we will faithfully and impartially conduct this election and prevent illegal voting to the best of our skill and power, so help us God." Such election shall be conducted under the rules and regulations governing elections for members of the General Assembly, except that only two lists of voters and two tally sheets shall be kept. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 48) 
Code reference— Elections, § 2-51. 
Section 2.202. - Voter registration. 
The mayor and city council may provide by ordinance for the registration of voters, and no person shall be allowed to vote at any city election except such persons as shall have duly registered in compliance with the terms of said ordinance. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 49) 
Section 2.203. - Preservation of election ballots. 
In all city elections after the votes have been counted by the election managers, they must sign a certificate stating the number of votes each person voted for received, which certificate shall be delivered to the city clerk at the city hall not later than 10:00 in the morning after the said election. The ballots shall not be examined by the managers or bystanders, but shall be carefully sealed in a strong envelope or box, together with all tally sheets which must bear the signatures of the managers. Said box or envelope shall then be securely sealed with the names of the managers across the seals thereof and delivered immediately after the completion of the election (and the counting of the ballots) to the ordinary of Screven County, by whom they shall be kept, and who shall securely lock same in his vault and they shall be kept unopened and unaltered for a period of 30 days, after which time if said election is not contested, the said ballots shall be destroyed by said ordinary, without examining the same himself, or permitting others to do so. And if said ordinary or any other person shall violate any of this section he shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 27-2506 of the Code of Georgia of 1933. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 50) 
Section 2.301. - City manager. 
The city council after the passage of this act shall select and appoint a city manager whose salary shall be fixed by council and whose term of office shall be indefinite and whose duties, powers and qualifications shall be as hereinafter provided. The mayor and members of the city council shall be ineligible to hold any other municipal office, and shall further be ineligible for employment in any capacity by the city during the term of office for which the mayor or councilmember was chosen unless he first resigns as mayor or councilman before entering such other municipal office or other employment with the city. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 30; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2835, § 3; Ord. No. 254, 8-6-85) 
Section 2.302. - Qualifications. 
It shall be the duty of the city manager to execute and administer the policies of the city government fixed by the mayor and council and the city manager shall be vested with sole authority over all administrative matters of the city, and he shall be accountable only to the city council. The city manager first appointed under the provisions of this act and all persons subsequently appointed to such office shall be selected by the council on the basis of ability, experience in, or his knowledge of acknowledged practice in respect to the duties of his office. During his tenure in office, he shall reside within Screven County and shall devote his entire time to the duties of his office and shall not engage in any other business or profession. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2835, § 4; Ord. No. 479, 1-15-13) 
Section 2.303. - Administrative duties and powers. 
The city manager shall have the power to appoint, prescribe the duties or supervise and remove all administrative employees, except the city recorder, city physician, city attorney and the board of tax assessors. The affairs of each department of the city, including the collection and disbursement of revenue, are to be administered under his supervision and control, and he is to be responsible therefor. Neither the council nor any of its committees shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from office by the city manager, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administrative service of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager, and neither the council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately. The city manager shall give bond for the faithful administration of his office in such amount as council may determine, but in no event in the sum less than $100,000.00, the premium for which is to be paid by the city. The city manager may require subordinate employees to likewise give bond in an amount to be determined by him, but subject to the approval of the council, the premiums of such bond as may be required to be paid by the city. 
It shall also be the duty of the city manager to act as chief conservator of the peace within the city; to supervise the administration of the city; to see that the ordinances of the city and the laws of the state are enforced therein; to make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the city as may seem to him desirable; to keep the council currently advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city; to prepare and submit to the council regular quarterly reports of the affairs and finances of the city, these reports to be in such form as to be readily understood by the public, and cause the same to be published in some local newspaper of general circulation; to act in an advisory capacity to the city council in the formulation of policies of the city government; it shall be the duty and the responsibility of the city manager to do all the buying for the different departments of the City of Sylvania; said department heads shall make written requisition for the needs of their department and present the same to the city manager; the city manager shall then make such purchases not exceeding amounts prescribed by ordinance and for which funds are provided in the budget. To perform such other duties and exercise such other authority as city council may fix by resolution or ordinance [sic]. All formal contracts on behalf of the city shall be executed by the city manager, or in his absence, by the mayor, and attested by the city clerk, or in his absence, the assistant city clerk, after an approving resolution of city council. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2835, § 5; Ord. No. 270, 11-4-86) 
Section 2.304. - Combination of offices, authorized. 
The city manager is authorized at his discretion to combine two or more of the city officers so that one person may hold and discharge the duties of more than one office, provided, however, that no member of the city council shall be eligible to hold any other municipal office during the term for which he was elected. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 31; 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2835, § 8) 
Section 2.305. - Removal of city manager. 
Removal of city manager; substitute during his absence or disability. While council has the right to remove the city manager at any time, at least 30 days before such removal becomes effective, the manager shall be furnished with a formal statement in the form of a resolution passed by a majority vote of the members of council, stating council's intention of removing him and the reasons therefor. If requested in writing by city manager so to do the council shall fix a time for a public hearing upon the question of his removal, giving a notice of the time and place of same by publishing said notice in some local newspaper of general circulation, and the final resolution, removing the city manager, shall not be adopted until such public hearing shall be had. The action of council in removing the city manager shall be final. In the case of the absence or disability of the city manager, council may designate a qualified administrative officer of the city to perform the duties of the city manager during such absence or disability. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2835, § 7) 
Section 2.306. - City clerk; secretaries to agencies. 
The city clerk may be required to act as clerk or secretary to any board, commission, committee, agency or authority of said city. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 43) 
Section 2.307. - Group insurance for city officers and employees, authorized; deductions, etc. 
The mayor and council of said city is hereby authorized and empowered to make deductions periodically from the wages and salaries of its employees and officers, including the mayor and council themselves, with which to pay the premium for life, health, accident, hospitalization or annuity of such officers or employees, upon a group insurance plan, and to that end to enter into agreements with insurance companies whereby the kind of group insurance desired by the employees may be furnished to them and the premiums therefor remitted periodically by said city. 
The participation in such group insurance by such officers or employees shall be entirely voluntary on the part of such persons at all times. Any officer or employee, upon any pay day, may withdraw or retire from such group plan upon giving notice in writing to his employer directing the discontinuance of deductions from his wages or salary in payment of such plan. 
The mayor and council of said city in carrying out any provision of this section shall have the right to contribute or pay any part of the premium due on the coverage afforded its officers or employees in an amount not to exceed 50 percent of the amount of said premium being charged for the plan of protection afforded out of the general funds of said city. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 71) 
Section 2.401. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of and for the city shall be from the first day of January through the thirty-first day of December of each year. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 59) 
Section 2.402. - Budget. 
No money shall be expended by the mayor and council during any year until a budget has been prepared and adopted, as herein provided. The budget shall include in its anticipations for the year a sum not to exceed the normal revenue collections by the city from all sources during the preceding year. The council shall appropriate a sum sufficient to cover the debt service, including the sinking fund and interest on bonded indebtedness, which sum shall not be diverted to any other department or departments by the mayor and council during the year. Should the income of the city be decreased by law or otherwise, it shall be the duty of the mayor and council to immediately adjust its budget so as to comply with such decreased revenue. In the event of an increase in revenue, which increase has become definite and reasonably certain by an increase in tax rate or the schedule of charges for city services, the mayor and council may revise the budget accordingly and take such anticipated receipts into consideration in the budget. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 60) 
Section 2.403. - Transfer of funds. 
After the budget has been adopted, the mayor and council may transfer or reallocate funds, with the exceptions of appropriations for debt services. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 61) 
Section 2.404. - Deficit. 
Should at any time during any year the expenditures exceed the revenue collected, and a deficit be created, it shall be the duty of the mayor and council, before appropriating any other sum for any other purpose, to appropriate a sufficient sum to immediately discharge any such deficit which has accrued during the preceding year. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 62) 
Section 2.405. - Audit of finances. 
The mayor and council are hereby required, at the end of each fiscal year, to have an annual audit made covering all of the financial transactions made and entered into by said mayor and council for that year. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 63) 
Section 2.406. - Taxes, power to levy and collect. 
The said mayor and council may levy and collect for city purposes a tax not to exceed $0.50 on every $100.00 value of real estate, stock and trade, and all other property therein that may at the time be taxable by the laws of Georgia. The said mayor and council shall also have power to levy and collect out of the property aforesaid such additional tax as may be necessary to provide for the payment of the principal and interest of any bonded debt of said city now existing or hereafter to be created by said city. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 64) 
Section 2.407. - City tax assessors; returns of assessments, etc.; appeals. 
The mayor and council shall annually appoint three disinterested freeholders, who shall be discreet, upright persons, citizens and qualified voters of said city, and owners of real estate therein, as city tax assessors, whose term of office shall be one year, and who shall be sworn to assess the real and personal property, including notes, bonds, accounts, and every other species of property of said city at a fair market value, according to the best of their skill and knowledge. The mayor and council shall have authority to prescribe rules for the government of said assessors. Said assessors shall make returns of the assessments made by them to the said mayor and council each year, 30 days before the time for collecting taxes. When said return has been made, said mayor and council shall appoint a place and time for hearing objections to the assessments, said objections to be heard by said mayor and council, of which public notice shall be given as may be prescribed by ordinances, and the recorder shall give each owner of property whose tax returns have been increased at least five days' notice of such hearing, stating therein the amount of such increase. If the property has been given in by an agent, executor, administrator or guardian notice to such agent, executor, administrator or guardian shall be sufficient. If the owner is not a resident of said city and has no agent residing therein, the mayor and council shall prescribe by ordinance what notice, if any, shall be given. Said mayor and council shall have the power to provide by ordinance for assessing all property, both real and personal, not returned for taxation, and for double taxing defaulters. Such city tax assessors shall take such oath and receive such compensation as the mayor and council shall prescribe. Such city tax assessors shall have the power to require all taxpayers in said city to furnish them with a list of all notes, accounts, mortgages, stocks, bonds and other securities and investments, when in their opinion their production is necessary for a correct and true assessment. All assessments made by said assessors shall become final if no objection is made on or before the time set for a hearing of objections by the mayor and council, notice—such as the mayor and council may, by ordinance, prescribe—having been given of such hearing; and if no objection is made at the said hearing to any assessment, the decision of the mayor and council, on the hearing of subjects, may increase or decrease the assessment as made by the city tax assessors, and in all cases the decision of the mayor and council is final; the said board of assessors, as well as the mayor and council, shall have authority to punish for a contempt any person failing or refusing to furnish any of the evidences of investment, such as notes, accounts, stocks, bonds and mortgages heretofore set out. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 65) 
Section 2.408. - Defaulters, back taxes, double taxing defaulters. 
In case any property which is subject to taxation was not assessed, or for any reason has not been assessed in any past year, the city tax assessors may, at any time, assess said property for said year or years, and double tax it if there has been a failure to return it for taxation as required by law, and if the mayor and council have provided for double taxing of defaulters, execution shall then issue therefor, as in other cases, at the rate obtaining the several years in which no taxes were paid. This section shall apply to the assessment of property which before the passage of this act in any year was not assessed for taxation, or was not returned for taxation and taxes collected thereon, as well as to property which in the future may be omitted for any cause from return or assessment, and the collection of taxes omitted in any year. The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for notice to parties whose property has been or may be assessed for back taxes, and the hearing of any complaint. All assessments referred in this section shall be made by the city tax assessors. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 66) 
Section 2.409. - License tax, authority to levy, etc. 
The mayor and council shall have full power and authority to license, regulate, control or prohibit theatrical exhibitions, merry-go-rounds, circuses, dance halls, skating rinks, shows and exhibitions of all kinds, drays, automobiles, jitneys, taxis, and public or private vehicles of all kinds, traveling vendors of patent medicines, soaps, notions and all other articles; also hotels, boardinghouses, restaurants, lunch stands, fish stands, or markets, meat markets, mercantile establishments, chain stores, laundries, billiard, pool and other kinds of tables, tenpins, shooting galleries, and bowling alleys, slot machines or any games operated by "coin-in-slot" devices for carrying on games, as well as vending machines, generally; also bakeries, dairies, barbershops, livery stables, sale stables, slaughterhouses, tanyards, garage or motor vehicle repair shops, blacksmith shops, gins, sawmills, planing mills; also auctioneers, peddlers and pawnbrokers; all agents of fire, health, accident, indemnity, casualty and life insurance companies; the sale of all kinds of beverages, cigars, cigarettes, and tobacco products of all kinds; also retailers of malt, vinous, and spirituous liquors; also dealers in and/or dispensers of gasoline, either at wholesale or retail, from tanks or otherwise; and all businesses, occupations, professions, callings, trades, or avocations which, under the laws of the state, are subject to license. The city shall have the power to require registration of, to assess and to collect a license tax on, all such businesses, etc., and all other businesses, trades, professions, occupations, or callings conducted or engaged in within the corporate limits of the city, and such occupation tax or license tax shall constitute a lien upon all the property of the taxpayer or person liable and shall take rank and be enforceable in the same manner as ad valorem taxes due the city; and the city may require the registration of, and payment of license tax on, all such businesses, etc., as a prerequisite to the right to operate or engage in said business in the city; and the city shall have power to punish anyone conducting or engaging in any such business, etc., without first registering and paying said license taxes. The city shall have full and complete power to provide by ordinance for classification of all classes and businesses, and all other rules and regulations necessary and proper in the premises. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 67) 
Section 2.410. - Executions; fi. fas. 
In all cases where any taxes, fines, or license fees are not paid when due, the tax collector shall issue executions against the delinquents, which executions shall be directed to the chief of police of said city and his deputies, and it is hereby made the duty of the chief of police and his deputies to proceed to levy and collect all such fi. fas., as in the case of fi. fas. issued for the state and county taxes. To any execution issued by the city, the defendant shall have the right to file an affidavit denying for any reason that the whole or any part of the amount for which the execution issued is due, stating the reason why the same is not due by and from the defendant, and stating what amount is admitted to be due, if any; and said amount admittedly due shall be paid before the affidavit shall be received for the balance; and said affidavit so received shall be returned to the Superior Court of Screven County, and there be tried and the issued [issue] determined as in cases of illegality, subject to all the penalties provided for in cases of illegality for delay. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 68) 
Section 2.411. - Executions; issuing; carrying out, etc. 
All executions for the enforcement or collection of fines, assessments, forfeitures, public improvement costs or other claims, demands, or debts, except ad valorem taxes, shall be issued by the city clerk and bear teste in the name of the mayor or mayor pro tempore (unless otherwise provided), and shall be directed to the city marshal, chief of police, all police officers of the city, and to all and singular the sheriffs and constables of this state, and shall state the purpose or purposes for which issued, and shall be made returnable to the city council 90 days after the date of its issue; and it shall be the duty of the city marshal or other levying officer into whose hands such executions are placed to levy the same, to advertise the sale of the property so levied upon, and to sell the same in the same manner as sheriff's sales of real estate and constable's sales of personal property, are levied, advertised, and sold under common law executions, as nearly as is practicable. In such cases, the defendant in execution shall have the right to file an affidavit of illegality if such execution shall have issued illegally or if it is proceeding illegally in either of which cases such execution shall be returned by the levying officer to the Superior Court of Screven County for trial as in other cases of affidavit of illegality; provided bond shall be made as in other cases of illegality. Such sale shall have the same force and effect as a sheriff's or constable's sale of similar property, and the officer making such sale shall have the same power as a sheriff to put purchasers in possession. Whenever at any such sale no one present shall offer as much for the property levied upon as the amount of such execution together with all interests and costs thereon, after such property shall have been offered a reasonable time the city, through its authorized agent, shall bid on such property and shall purchase the same on behalf of the city for not more than the amount of such execution and costs, if the value of such property is sufficient to cover such principal, interest and cost, and the marshal or other officer making the sale shall make and deliver to the city a deed to the property so sold, and the title thus acquired by the city shall be and become perfect and valid when the owner's right of redemption, if any, shall have expired, and the marshal or other officer making the sale shall put the city in possession, and the city council shall have no right or authority to divest or alienate the title of the city to the property so purchased except by public sale for cash to the highest bidder in the manner prescribed by law or by ordinance of the city. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 14) 
Section 2.412. - Same; forms. 
The forms of executions for taxes, costs of construction of streets, street curbing, sidewalks and sewers and for repairs or improvements thereof and for fines and forfeitures in the recorder's court of the city and for any other expenses, costs, charge, license or assessments shall be prescribed by ordinance, provided this section shall not invalidate any form now in use by the city. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 15) 
Section 2.413. - Donations for public institutions. 
The mayor and city council shall have authority to make donations out of the funds in the city treasury, not otherwise appropriated, for the support of the poor, for public libraries, and for public hospitals, public rest rooms and other institutions of like character. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 70) 
Section 2.414. - Refunding bonds; tax. 
Article 7, section 7, paragraph 1, of the Constitution of Georgia, which has heretofore been amended, shall be further amended by adding at the end thereof a new paragraph in the following words to wit: 
And except that the City of Sylvania, in Screven County, Georgia, may issue refunding serial bonds not in excess of the aggregate sum of $20,000.00, for the purpose of refunding and retiring any bonded indebtedness of said city outstanding, passed due and unpaid up to and including January 1, 1940, and providing for the assessment and collection of an annual tax sufficient in amount to pay the principal and interest of said bonds as they fall due; the proceeds of all such refunding bonds so issued by the City of Sylvania to be used exclusively for the purpose of paying and retiring said bonded indebtedness that is or may become due and unpaid as of January 1, 1940. Said refunding bonds shall be issued when authorized by a vote of the mayor and councilmen and shall be validated by law. 
(1939 Ga. Laws, page 81, § 1) 
Section 3.101. - Police arrests without warrants, authorized. 
It shall be lawful for the chief of police or any special policeman lawfully appointed to arrest, without warrant, any and all persons violating the ordinances and laws of said state and city, in the city limits, and to confine such person or persons so arrested in the city prison, until a hearing can be had before the proper officer; said chief of police or policeman shall have power and authority to call to his assistance to arrest and detain such offenders any bystander, and such person when summoned shall be bound to aid and assist said officers; should such person fail to do so, he shall be liable to prosecution pursuant to section 9.101. The chief of police or policeman may call sheriffs and their deputies, constables, and other state or counties' officers for assistance, in the arrest, detention, investigation and conviction of offenders. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 46) 
Section 3.102. - Fire department. 
The city shall provide by ordinance for the establishment and maintenance of a fire department for said city, and for this purpose they may acquire property and equipment therefor to be paid out of the revenues of said city or by municipal bonds properly voted and validated therefor, as now prescribed by law. They may provide either for a voluntary service or for a paid service if the revenues of said city authorize such payment, and they may provide by ordinance such rules and regulations as they may deem necessary for the government and control of said fire department, which ordinance shall provide officers therefor and prescribe their duties, authority, terms of office, manner of election and compensation. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 74) 
Section 4.101. - Streets, etc., powers conferred. 
Said mayor and council shall have the superintendence and control of the streets, sidewalks, bridges, and alleys and of the public square, parks and cemeteries of said city, and may prohibit or remove all obstructions of or encroachments thereon or interference therewith. They are vested with the power to lay out new streets or alleys; to widen or straighten any of the streets or sidewalks or alleys of the city. Said mayor and council shall have the power and authority to pave or otherwise permanently improve the sidewalks of said city with whatever material and in whatever manner they deem proper and best and to assess one-half the cost of so paving or otherwise improving the sidewalks, including all necessary curbings, against the real estate abutting on the sidewalk so paved or otherwise improved, and to enforce the collection thereof they shall have power to issue executions against the owner or owners of said abutting property, as city tax executions are issued, and to order, levy on and sell the abutting property. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 53) 
Section 4.102. - Streets, powers generally. 
The city shall have the power and authority to open, lay out, grade, widen, construct, pave, repave, curb, and otherwise permanently improve any and all streets, sidewalks, and ways, and to maintain, relocate, repair, repave, extend, abandon or close them, and to construct, maintain, repair, replace and remove street curbing, sidewalks, alleys or ways. To provide funds for these purposes, all sidewalks, curbing and service sewer construction costs, except costs of service sewers which cannot serve the abutting real estate nor the owners thereof, shall be assessed against the abutting real estate and owners thereof, as previously provided in section 4.101, but only on the side of the street on which such improvements are made, if on one side only. One-third of the cost of street construction may be assessed against abutting real estate and owners thereon on one side of such street, and one-third against abutting real estate and the owners thereof on the other side, the city paying the remaining one-third. In real estate subdivisions all street construction costs shall be assessed against the abutting real estate and owners. Cost of maintenance and repair of all city streets shall be paid out of the city treasury, except in special cases provided for by the city ordinances. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 55) 
Section 4.103. - Bond issues authorized for street improvements. 
The city may, in the manner prescribed by law, provide by ordinance for the issuing of bonds for enlarging or extending the public utilities of the city, including waterworks, sewerage, electric lights, natural gas, street and/or other public improvements. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 56) 
Section 5.101. - Utilities; furnishing services and facilities. 
The city shall have the power and authority to operate, enlarge, expand, extend, improve, construct, lay, maintain, remove, repair and replace water, electric and natural gas lines, sewer and sanitary systems and facilities, within and without the city, and to charge, contract for and receive compensation for such service, and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the city ordinance, and for such purposes the city shall have the power of eminent domain which it is hereby authorized to exercise to acquire by condemnation any lands, easements, rights-of-way and other properties or rights therein deemed needful or convenient for any purposes when necessary to acquire the same. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 16) 
Section 5.102. - Same; owning, maintaining and operating electric plants, waterworks and gas system. 
The city shall have the right, power and authority to own, maintain and operate a system of waterworks, a natural gas system, and an electric plant and distribution system and to purchase, generate and sell electric energy and to sell water and gas and to fix rates for all the aforementioned and to develop, maintain and operate parks and recreation facilities. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 17) 
Section 5.102.1. - Telecommunications. 
The City shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, maintain, operate and contract with respect to a telecommunications systems network in order to provide telecommunications services and similar other services, including cable television services (CATV), to establish and charge rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished or made available by such undertaking; to interconnect its system or services or both with the systems or services of consumers and other providers, to use telecommunications to respond to community needs, encourage the development of information-based organizations in the City of Sylvania, Georgia, to finance from time to time any such telecommunications systems through the issuance of revenue bonds as then permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; and to make any contract with respect to and furnish the services of any said systems to consumers within or outside the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. No. 408, § 1, 8-6-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 408, § 1, adopted August 6, 2002, enacted provisions intended for use as § 17.1 of the Georgia Laws of 1963, page 2030. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the direction of the city, said provisions have been redesignated as § 5.102.1. 
Section 5.103. - Same; contracting to furnish. 
The city council shall have power and authority to make or cause to be made contracts to furnish customers with electric energy, lights, water and gas within and without the territorial limits of the city when this can be done without adversely affecting the inhabitants of the city. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 18) 
Section 5.104. - Same; jurisdiction. 
The city shall have complete power, authority and jurisdiction for all purposes over all of the lands on, over, or through which trunk or intercepting sewer, gas, water and/or electric transmission lines and/or facilities have heretofore been or may hereafter be constructed and maintained by the city or over which an easement is secured by the city and which it is the duty of the city to inspect, improve and maintain within or without the limits of the city; said power, authority and jurisdiction shall extend the full distance of said lines or facilities and a specified number of feet, to be determined by the mayor and council, in all directions from the same as well as over the land purchased by said city for the location and maintenance of such facilities, and all such lands are hereby incorporated in and made a part of said city, except such as is located within the corporate limits of another municipality. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 19) 
Section 5.105. - Same; lien for charges. 
For electricity, water and gas furnished and for all sewerage and sanitary services rendered, said city shall have a lien against the property served by said utilities and services; said lien shall run from the date the contract is made or the services commence up to and until all charges therefor shall have been paid in full. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 20) 
Section 5.106. - Same; referendum for sale of facilities. 
No sale, conveyance or disposition by the city of its water, electric and/or gas properties and franchises, or of its sewer system, or of any interests therein shall ever be of any force or effect unless or until approved by the duly qualified voters of the city voting at an election specially called for this purpose; a notice of which election shall be published once a week in the official newspaper of the city for four weeks next preceding such election, which notice shall state the name of the proposed buyer, the terms and conditions of the proposed sale, the date of the election, the location of the voting precincts, and such other information as the city council may order. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 21) 
Section 5.107. - Utilities, referendum required for sale of; rights-of-way, easements, etc. 
(a)  The city shall continue to supply all the public utilities of said city, to wit: waterworks, sewerage, electric lights; and for such purposes the mayor and city council shall be invested with all the authority to enlarge such systems of public utilities as they may deem necessary, and they may have authority to prescribe by ordinances for the government and regulation of all public utilities. Provided, that before said mayor and council shall dispose of any one or all of the herein named public utilities by absolute sale in fee simple, an election shall be called submitting the matter to the qualified voters of said city for their approval or disapproval. Said election to be called, held, and the result determined under the election laws now in force, or that may be hereafter prescribed for creating a bonded indebtedness against said city. 
(b)  The city shall have the power and authority to extend, construct, maintain and operate its water, sewerage, electric light and power lines and systems in all directions beyond the corporate limits of said city, as the same now exist or may hereafter be established; and the city shall have authority to furnish water, lights, power and sewerage connections to persons, firms and corporations within and without the corporate limits of said city, and to charge for the same; to purchase electrical current from any source, either within or without the city limits; to make reasonable rules and regulations, and the city may make different charges for the use of such utilities within and without the corporate limits of said city. 
(c)  The city is hereby authorized and empowered to acquire, by contract, purchase, or condemnation, rights-of-way, easements, and privileges for water, sewerage, electric lights and power lines and systems within the corporate limits of the city, and without the corporate limits of the city in any direction beyond the corporate limits of the city as the same now exist or may be hereafter established. 
(d)  The city is hereby authorized and empowered to furnish and supply electric power to any person, firm or corporation, at its distribution plant in the city, or at the point from which said city acquires its electric power, for serving nonresidents of said city, and to fix the rules and regulations on which the same may be furnished, and likewise to fix the terms on which the same are to be furnished, the manner of payment therefor, and the charges to be paid therefor. 
(e)  The city is hereby authorized to purchase, construct, operate and maintain a system for the sale and distribution of natural or other gas within the city limits and in any direction beyond such corporate limits as now exist or as shall hereafter exist, and in connection therewith the city is authorized to acquire, by contract, purchase, or condemnation, all rights-of-way, easements, and property necessary to carry out these purposes; provided, that the power of condemnation granted in this section shall not apply to property within the limits of any other municipality, except with the prior approval of the mayor and council of said municipality. The city is hereby authorized and empowered to furnish and supply gas and gas services to any person, firm or corporation at its distribution plant in the city or at the point from which said city acquires its supply of gas for serving nonresidents of said city, and to fix the rules and regulations under which the same may be furnished, and likewise fix the terms on which the same are to furnished and the manner of payment therefor, and the charges to be paid therefor. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 58) 
Section 5.108. - Franchises. 
The mayor and council is hereby vested with the right to exercise and control franchise rights within the corporate limits of the city over all public utility corporations, to charge for the use of streets and alleys, and to control the use of poles, wires and other equipment used by the grantee of the franchise right. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 57) 
Section 5.109. - Conveyance of franchise. 
No franchise granted by said city may be sold, transferred, leased, or assigned to or used by anyone other than the grantee without adequate compensation and written consent of the city council. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 8) 
Section 6.101. - Regulating use of streets. 
The city council shall have power and authority by ordinance, to tax, license and regulate the operation of automobiles, railroad trains, steam engines, locomotives, street cars, buses, trolley cars, bicycles, motorcycles and other vehicles within the city limits and fix maximum and minimum speed limits for them, and to prescribe both minimum qualifications of operators of such vehicles and the manner in which the same may be operated, and to require such machines and their owners to be registered, and said council may make such other provisions as may seem prudent for the safety of the driver, passengers and the public. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 39) 
Section 6.102. - Regulating charitable solicitations. 
Soliciting charity or relief campaigns within the city shall be subject to ordinance regulation by the city council. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 40) 
Section 6.103. - Regulating the sale, storage and keeping of inflammables and explosives. 
The mayor and council shall regulate by ordinances the sale, storage and keeping of gasoline, kerosene, gunpowder, dynamite, nitroglycerine and other inflammable or explosive materials within the city limits. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 41) 
Section 6.104. - Regulation of public entertainment, shows, etc. 
The mayor and city council may prescribe by ordinance for the regulation of all public entertainments, shows, circuses, parades, [and] may prescribe when such entertainments, etc., may be held, as well as the manner in which the same may be conducted. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 73) 
Section 7.101. - Regulating vehicular traffic. 
The city shall have power and authority to regulate vehicular traffic and relieve congestion of the same by use of devices known as parking meters, by means of which the time a vehicle occupies a designated area for parking in a street is measured by a timing device which is operated by depositing a coin therein, and to use the proceeds from the operation of parking meters to pay for off-street parking facilities or to contract with one or more persons, firms or corporations to provide such off-street parking facilities, and to rent such facilities and use the rents therefrom to further provide off-street parking for all kinds of vehicles. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 10) 
Section 7.102. - Control of streets, sidewalks and bridges. 
The mayor and council shall have exclusive control of the streets, sidewalks, and bridges of the city; they may enact such ordinances as they may deem best for the regulation of traffic upon said streets, sidewalks and bridges, and provide suitable punishment for the violation of these ordinances. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 54) 
Section 7.103. - Providing off-street parking facilities, authority. 
The city council shall have the power and authority to construct, maintain and operate off-street parking facilities, and to acquire land and other necessary property for such purposes and to charge, contract for and receive rentals and parking fees for the use of such facilities and parking spaces therein. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 42) 
Section 8.101. - Building regulations. 
The mayor and council may prescribe by ordinance such rules and regulations as they see fit for the regulation of all buildings erected within the corporate limits of said city, or for the repair of such buildings, they may prescribe the materials to be used and the manner of erecting the same. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 72) 
Code reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
Section 8.102. - Authority to adopt codes. 
The city council is hereby authorized to adopt, or incorporate by reference in an adopting ordinance, any code relating to a subject in regard to which the city council has authority to legislate. "Code" as used in this section means a printed or otherwise reproduced compilation of rules and regulations which have been prepared by a technical trade association or group, and shall include, but without being limited to, the following: building codes, plumbing codes, electrical codes, health or sanitation codes, fire prevention codes, together with any other codes embracing rules and regulations pertaining to subjects which are proper municipal legislative matters. Prior to the adoption or incorporation by reference of any such code, at least three copies of same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall remain there on file subject to public inspection so long as such code remains in effect. 
Any penalty clauses contained in such codes may not be adopted by reference, but shall be set forth in full in the adopting ordinance. 
Amendments to or revisions of such codes may be adopted or incorporated by reference in the same manner as authorized for their original adoption. 
The city council is hereby authorized to appoint officers, boards and commissions to administer and enforce codes adopted under authority of this section. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 69) 
Section 8.103. - Fire limits. 
The city council shall by ordinance establish fire limits, enlarge or reduce same as the safety of the city requires. When fire limits are established it shall be lawful to prohibit the erection of any structure therein of any substance except incombustible material, or such as may be allowed by ordinance. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 6) 
Section 9.101. - [Municipal court.] 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 472, adopted August 2, 2011, repealed the former § 9.101, and enacted new §§ 9.101.1—9.101.7 as set out herein. The former § 9.101 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 45; Ord. No. 361, adopted November 3, 1998; Ord. No. 428, adopted January 18, 2005 and Ord. No. 460, adopted March 16, 2010. 
Section 9.101.1. - Name. 
There shall be a court known as the Municipal Court of the City of Sylvania. 
(Ord. No. 472, 8-2-11) 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1, the term "recorder's court" has been changed to "municipal court." 
Section 9.101.2. - Judge. 
a.  The municipal court shall be presided over by a judge appointed by the city council; 
b.  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge of the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and serve until a successor is appointed and qualified; 
c.  Compensation of the municipal court judge shall be fixed by the city council; 
d.  The municipal court judge shall serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council; 
e.  Before assuming office, the municipal court judge shall take an oath that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor or partiality. 
(Ord. No. 472, 8-2-11) 
Section 9.101.3. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals and at a place set by resolution of the mayor and city council, or in absence thereof, by the municipal court judge. 
(Ord. No. 472, 8-2-11) 
Section 9.101.4. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
a.  The municipal court shall have jurisdiction and authority to try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law; 
b.  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail, either or both; 
c.  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 180 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law or by city ordinance; 
d.  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation, and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law; 
e.  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary; 
f.  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons', subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law; 
g.  The judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charges with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and the judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(Ord. No. 472, 8-2-11) 
Section 9.101.5. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judgment of the Superior Court of Screven County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 472, 8-2-11) 
Section 9.101.6. - Rules for court. 
The Uniform Rules of the municipal courts of Georgia promulgated by the Georgia Supreme Court, as they may be amended from time to time, shall govern the operations of the Municipal Court of the City of Sylvania. 
(Ord. No. 472, 8-2-11) 
Section 9.101.7. - Clerk. 
The city manager, or in absence thereof, the municipal court judge, is authorized to appoint a clerk of the municipal court together with any deputy clerks as needed, to prescribe the duties of such offices. 
(Ord. No. 472, 8-2-11) 
Section 9.102. - Appearance bonds. 
The mayor and city council of Sylvania may provide by ordinance for the taking of appearance bonds, to be made by persons charged with violations before the municipal court. The mayor and city council may prescribe by ordinance for the taking of cash collateral bonds or have bonds issued by personal solvent securities or property bonds, and they provide for the summary forfeiture of all cash bonds and for the summary forfeiture of all other appearance bonds by order of the municipal court, which order when entered may be enforced by executions therefor, issued by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 472, 8-2-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 472, adopted August 2, 2011, repealed the former § 9.102, and enacted a new § 9.102 as set out herein. The former § 9.102 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from 1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 47. 
Section 10.101. - Nuisances; order adjudging and abatement. 
The city shall provide by ordinance for any building, structure, or condition maintained in violation of any valid law of this state or any valid ordinance of the city to be adjudged a nuisance and for its abatement at the owner's expenses upon his failure or refusal to abate same within ten days after written notice from the city to do so. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 11) 
Section 10.102. - Same—Abatement notice to nonresidents. 
In nuisance abatement proceedings by said city in the recorder's court of said city, where the nuisance consists of a condition or conditions of property of an individual residing without the limits of the city or of a corporation having its office without the limits of the city, notice shall be served upon such owner or his agent within Screven County, if either can be found within the county, but if said owner cannot be served in such manner, a warrant for the arrest of such individual owner shall issue against such owner and shall be executed by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, marshal, policeman or coroner of any city, town or county in this state, and the city recorder of Sylvania shall cause such nuisance to be abated at the expense of such owner, and an execution for such expense shall be issued by the city clerk, which execution shall be levied on any real estate or personal property of the accused which may be located within the city or wherever it may be found, and such expense and execution shall constitute a lien against all property of such accused owner, which lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens except liens for taxes. Property levied upon under such action shall be advertised and sold as property is sold for taxes in the city, unless such levy is arrested by affidavit of illegality or other appropriate proceedings, and all further proceedings in relation to such execution shall be the same as in [the] case of executions of the city for street paving costs and similar assessments. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 12) 
Section 10.103. - Subpoena power generally. 
The city council, municipal court, all boards, commissions, committees or other agencies of the city charged with the administration of the affairs of the city (excluding individual officers, except in cases in which they are specially authorized by law or ordinance) shall have power and authority to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant and admissible documents in proper cases, and any person failing or refusing to attend as a witness or to produce relevant and pertinent documentary evidence within his power, custody or control when duly notified or called upon to do so in a proper case shall be subject to punishment prescribed by ordinance of the city. 
(1963 Ga. Laws, page 2030, § 13) 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location herein of sections of the Laws of Georgia. 

 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location herein of local ordinances amending the Charter or Related Laws included herein. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Sylvania, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
Charter. "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Sylvania, Georgia as printed in Part I of this volume. 
City. "City" means the City of Sylvania, Georgia. 
City council. "City council" means the mayor and members of the city council of Sylvania, Georgia. 
Code. "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Sylvania, Georgia as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Corporate limits. "Corporate limits" means the corporate limits of the City of Sylvania. 
County. Whenever the term "county," "the county" or "this county" is used it shall refer to Screven County, Georgia. 
Court. "Court" means the court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether the same shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Governor. "Governor" means the governor of the State of Georgia. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Legislative intent. In all interpretations of this Code or of ordinances or resolutions, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in mind at all times the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate any provision, and a transposition of words and phrases may be resorted to when a clause or sentence is without meaning as it stands. 
Month, year. "Month" and "year" mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Sylvania" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. 
Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
Oath. "Oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" and "sworn." 
Officer. "Officer" includes those officials appointed by the city council on a part-time or temporary basis, including the city attorney and municipal court judge. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. "Owner," when applied to buildings or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
Person. "Person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
Personal property. "Personal property" includes every species of property except real property as defined in this section. 
Preceding and following. "Preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
Property. "Property" includes real and personal property. 
Real property. "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Requirements. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another more general provision, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed controlling. 
Residence. "Residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Right-of-way. "Right-of-way" means land that is dedicated or otherwise legally established for public use. 
Roadway. "Roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Schedule of fees and charges. "Schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Shall; may. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" means that portion of the street right-of-way which is improved and designated for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. A "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. Whenever the term "state," "the state" or "this state" is used it shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
Statute references. Whenever reference is made, for example, to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, it shall be construed to refer to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 1-3-3, as amended, or to whatever section is cited. 
Street. "Street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, lane, path, viaduct, bridge or any other name a street is commonly known by, or any public place and the approaches thereto within the city when any part thereof is open to the use of the public and established for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory hereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and the present. 
Title of office. The title of any office shall be construed to include the words "of the City of Sylvania, Georgia." 
Writing, written. The word "writing" or "written" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
Year. "Year" means calendar year. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1012) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1003) 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1013) 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Sylvania, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Sylvania, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows: …." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1015) 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code is declared uncon- stitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1014) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-11. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1006) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and by imprisonment in the city or county jail not to exceed six months, and to work on the city streets not exceeding 60 days. Any one or more of these punishments may be inflicted, and the fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. Each day any violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, §§ 1-1008, 1-1009; Ord. No. 461, 3-16-10) 
Cross reference— Offenses, ch. 50; uniform rules of the road adopted, § 70-1. 
State Law reference— Penalty to be imposed in certain criminal and traffic cases and upon violation of bond, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to confine persons convicted of violating ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; punishments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(c); limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers relating to administration of government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor and councilmembers, § 2.101 et seq. 

Sec. 2-26. - Regular meetings; time and place. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the city council shall be held in the council chamber at city hall on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  Where the day for a meeting falls upon a day which is a legal holiday in this state, these meetings shall be held upon a day and at an hour to be designated by the mayor at least four days before the legal holiday, at which meeting all matters shall be taken up which might have come before the meeting as regularly set. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1001; Ord. No. 344, 2-6-96; Ord. No. 357, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 394, 3-7-00) 
Charter reference— Council meetings, § 2.109. 
State Law reference— Requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of city council, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-27. - Adjourned meetings. 
Any session of the mayor and council may be continued or adjourned from day to day, or for more than one day, but no adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting thereafter. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1002) 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-28. - Order of business. 
The order of business for each meeting of the mayor and council shall be as prescribed by the council rules. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1003) 
Sec. 2-29. - Rules of procedure. 
Rules of procedure shall be as prescribed by the mayor and council and in the absence of any such rule, Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1004) 
Sec. 2-30. - Absence or disability of officers. 
In the absence of charter or Code provision, in the absence or disability of any city officer, the mayor and council may appoint a suitable person to serve during this absence or disability. 
(Code 1976, § 2-1005) 
Secs. 2-31—2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Elections, § 2.201 et seq. 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-51. - Superintendent. 
The mayor and council shall by resolution annually appoint a municipal election superintendent, who shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-31 and other applicable provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
(Code 1976, § 2-2001) 
State Law reference— Powers and duties of municipal superintendents, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-31. 
Sec. 2-52. - City to maintain registration of electors. 
The city shall maintain its own registration of electors. 
(Code 1976, § 2-2003) 
State Law reference— Municipality may elect to maintain its own registration, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-125(d). 
Sec. 2-53. - Election by plurality vote. 
(a)  The three candidates for membership on the council who receive the highest number of votes shall be declared elected and shall succeed to the office of councilmember regardless of whether or not either candidate receives a majority of votes cast in the election. 
(b)  The purpose of this section is to elect to the office of councilmember those candidates receiving the highest number of votes cast in the election without the necessity of a runoff election and without the necessity of any candidate declaring himself as a candidate for any particular post or naming his opponent. 
(c)  In any special election for councilmember where less than three councilmembers are to be elected, the candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. That is to say, the one receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected if only one position is to be filled and if two positions are to be filled the two receiving the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. 
(d)  In the event of a tie vote whereby all three positions are not filled by this method, a runoff election between the tied candidates shall be held and the position or positions filled by the candidate or candidates receiving the highest number of votes. However, no runoff election shall be necessary if the two or three candidates receiving the largest number of votes are tied in the first election. 
(Code 1976, § 2-2005) 
State Law reference— Vote required for nomination or election, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-407. 
Secs. 2-54—2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Regulations pertaining to city employees on such subjects as employment policy, employee benefits, holidays and leaves of absence, travel and employee appraisals are contained in the City of Sylvania Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual which is compiled and published separately by the city. An official copy of such manual is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Charter reference— Administrative organization, § 2.301 et seq. 
State Law reference— City's power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of all municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2). 

Sec. 2-76. - City attorney. 
The city attorney shall: 
(1)  Conduct the law business of the city. 
(2)  Represent the city in legal proceedings in which the city is a party. 
(3)  Represent the city where an officer of the city, in his official capacity, is a party. 
(4)  Prepare, when requested by the mayor and council, deeds, leases, contracts and other legal documents required by the business of the city. 
(5)  Furnish written opinions upon subjects involving the business and operations of the city when requested by the mayor and council. 
(6)  Render other legal services consistent with the usual duties of city attorneys. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3001) 
Sec. 2-77. - City physician. 
The city physician shall perform such duties as prescribed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3002) 
Sec. 2-78. - Officers' bond and compensation. 
The bond and compensation of municipal officers shall be fixed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3003) 
Secs. 2-79—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-101—2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-111. - Created. 
There is hereby established a recreation commission, to be known as the Sylvania-Screven County, Georgia, recreation commission. The commission shall be composed of five persons who shall serve without pay, two of whom shall be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council, two by the chairman of the county board of commissioners with the advice and consent of the members of the board, and the fifth shall be appointed by the four members selected by the governing bodies. The terms of office shall be for three years or until their successors are appointed and qualified, except that the members of such commission first appointed by the mayor and council shall serve for a term of three years; the members appointed by the board of commissioners of the county shall serve for a term of two years; and the fifth member selected by the four governmental appointees shall serve for a term of one year. Vacancies on the commission occurring by reason of resignation, death, or expiration of terms shall be filled by the original appointing authority for the vacated position. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6041) 
Sec. 2-112. - Officers; bylaws; rules and regulations. 
Immediately after its appointment, the recreation commission shall meet and organize by electing one of its members president and such other officers as may be necessary. The commission shall have power to adopt bylaws, rules and regulations for the proper conduct of recreation for the county/city. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6042) 
Sec. 2-113. - Powers and duties. 
The recreation commission shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, playfields, indoor recreation centers and other recreation facilities owned or controlled by the county/city. It shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the people in a wholesome or constructive manner. It may conduct these activities on properties under its own control, on public properties with the consent of the authorities thereof and on private properties with the consent of the owner. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6043) 
Sec. 2-114. - Appointment of superintendent, other personnel. 
The recreation commission shall have the power to appoint or designate someone to act as superintendent who is trained or properly qualified for the work, and such other personnel as the commission deems proper. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6044) 
Sec. 2-115. - Finance. 
(a)  Annually, the recreation commission shall submit a budget to the governing authority for approval. The commission shall submit quarterly requisitions to the city and county for anticipated financial needs during an ensuing quarter so that disbursements by the city and county shall be made quarterly to the commission. The aggregate of the four quarterly requests for funds shall in no event exceed the annual budget submitted by the commission and approved by the city and the county. 
(b)  The commission may also solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied, principal, or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6045) 
Sec. 2-116. - Reports. 
The recreation commission shall make a quarterly report to the governing bodies and such other reports as from time to time may be requested. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6046) 
Secs. 2-117—2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING COMMISSION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 

Sec. 2-126. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The provisions of the 1976 Code set out as sections 2-6001 through 2-6007 and the provisions of Ordinance No. 230 adopted September 7, 1983, are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 2-127—2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DESIGN COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 

Sec. 2-136. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The provisions of Ordinance No. 304 adopted July 17, 1990, relating to a design commission for the city are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 2-137—2-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 

Sec. 2-156. - Workers' compensation coverage for volunteer firefighters. 
All volunteer firefighters serving with the city shall be considered municipal employees for purposes of workers' compensation coverage to the extent that any accident or other injury occurs to such volunteer firefighter while such firefighter is engaged in firefighting activities for the city. 
(Ord. No. 236, 12-6-83) 
Sec. 2-157. - Declaration of policy. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal social security administration, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this chapter, the benefits of the system of old-age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act, the state enabling act and amendments thereto. 
(b)  In pursuance of this policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5001) 
Secs. 2-158—2-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINANCE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 2; discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1; disposition of municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; local political subdivision purchases, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq. 

Sec. 2-181. - Authority of clerk to accept moneys, give receipts. 
Except for the acceptance of cash appearance bonds and fines by the city clerk, no other official or officer of the city other than the city finance director shall accept or receive monies belonging to the city, nor shall they give any receipt of any nature therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4001; Ord. No. 415, § II(a), 5-7-03) 
Sec. 2-182. - Location restricted as to receipt of moneys. 
The city finance director shall not accept or receive any moneys belonging to the city in any place other than the city hall or such other place as the office of the city finance director shall be located. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4002; Ord. No. 415, § II(b), 5-7-03) 
Sec. 2-183. - Checks. 
(a)  The city finance director shall not receive any checks in the name of the city except in settlement of account. 
(b)  The city finance director shall not cash any checks out of city funds in excess of the amount to be applied on account. 
(c)  The city finance director may not accept any postdated check or agree to hold any check for any length of time, but shall promptly, at least once each week, deposit to the credit of the city in its usual depository all moneys received since the time of the last deposit. 
(d)  The city finance director shall not be required to deposit repeatedly instruments returned by the depository as noncollectible, but shall make every reasonable effort to collect these items, and failing to do so shall take the necessary steps to protect the city from further loss. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4003; Ord. No. 415, § II(b), 5-7-03) 
Sec. 2-184. - Purchases over certain amount require council approval. 
No contract, purchase or obligation involving more than $2,500.00, for which funds are provided in the budget, shall be valid and binding upon the city until after approval by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4011; Ord. No. 388, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 2-185. - Emergency purchase orders. 
On absence of the city manager for periods over one day, the city finance director may issue emergency purchase orders for materials within the limitations set out in section 2-184 and section 2-186. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4012; Ord. No. 415, § II(b), 5-7-03) 
Sec. 2-186. - Payment of bills. 
The city manager shall: 
(1)  Approve all bills for payment and countersign checks prepared and signed by the city clerk for payment thereof. 
(2)  Cause bills to be paid upon receipt where a discount and saving will accrue to the city. 
(3)  Advise the mayor and council at each regular council meeting, the amount of bills paid the preceding month. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4013) 
Sec. 2-187. - Limitations on paycheck transactions. 
If any person employed by the city finds it necessary to assign or transfer his paychecks for wages or salaries to banks, loan companies, business establishments or individuals to secure loans or purchase furniture, food or other items, but not including real estate or automobiles, the following regulations or limitations shall apply: 
(1)  The city finance director or other city employee will not be liable should checks so assigned be delivered to the wrong business or individual. 
(2)  An assignment of checks will not be accepted for periods over six bimonthly paydays or 90 days. 
(3)  Check assignments will be notarized prior to acceptance. 
(4)  Businesses or individuals must pick up checks in person at the city hall on paydays, when so assigned. 
(5)  The city finance director may accept only one check assignment per employee at any given time on first delivered basis. This will apply also should more than one assignment per employee bear the same date. 
(6)  Businesses or individuals shall check with the city finance director prior to accepting any check assignment to ascertain whether an employee has an assignment in force as protection to themselves. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4021; Ord. No. 415, § II(b), 5-7-03) 
Secs. 2-188—2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CODE OF ETHICS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 466, § 1, adopted November 16, 2010, repealed the former Art. VIII, §§ 2-201—2-207, and enacted a new Art. VIII as set out herein. The former Art. VIII pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 393, adopted February 15, 2000. 

Sec. 2-201. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 466, § 1, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 2-202. - Scope. 
The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. 
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This ordinance shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the charter. 
(Ord. No. 466, § 1, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 2-203. - Definitions. 
Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
City official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees, but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote for formal action by that body. 
Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed (a) $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or (b) ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 466, § 1, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 2-204. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  Any official who has proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Sylvania nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the City of Sylvania on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Sylvania. 
(Ord. No. 466, § 1, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 2-205. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 466, § 1, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 2-206. - Municipal court jurisdiction. 
The Municipal Court of the City of Sylvania shall hear and render decisions on all proper verified complaints filed under this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 466, § 1, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 2-207. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the clerk of the Municipal Court of the City of Sylvania. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the clerk of the Municipal Court shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. 
(b)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this ordinance. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the municipal court shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The municipal court is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the municipal court shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the municipal court is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the municipal court is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the municipal court shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(e)  The municipal court is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)  The municipal court is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(g)  Findings of the municipal court shall be submitted to the city council for action. 
(h)  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, ethics complaints against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, which are filed between the date of qualifying for municipal office and the date of certification of the election results will be held and will not be processed until the election results for that office have been certified. 
(Ord. No. 466, § 1, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 2-208. - Service of complaint. 
The municipal court clerk shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable, but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be made by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The municipal court shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the municipal court shall be rendered to mayor and council within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the municipal court, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right, but not the obligation, of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this section of the ordinance shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint, or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the municipal court or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. No. 466, § 1, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 2-209. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the municipal court may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Screven County, Georgia, within 30 days after the decision of the municipal court. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. No. 466, § 1, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 2-210. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)  Public reprimand or censure by the city council; or 
(2)  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 466, § 1, 11-16-10) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 411, adopted October 2, 2002, repealed and reenacted chapter 6 to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 401, adopted January 2, 2001. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 38; municipal court, ch. 46; offenses, ch. 50; disorderly conduct, § 50-5; signs, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. 3, sec. 9, par. 6; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age, use of false identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Chain grocery store means a grocery store with gross annual sales exceeding $1,000,000.00 in this city, or projected annual sales at the location for which the license is sought exceeding $1,000,000.00 based upon the operation of another of the chain's stores of similar size in a municipality with a population of 6,000 persons or less. 
Corporation means a legal entity organized and existing under the laws of any state of the United States in the form of a corporation or a limited liability company, which is authorized to do business in the state under the laws of the state. 
Grocery store means a business offering for retail sale to the public grocery and related items excluding gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including but not limited to hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). 
Licensee means the applicant for or holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, larger beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means, in the case of malt beverages, any brewer. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Package licensee means the applicant for or holder of a license for the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine by the package. 
Person having an ownership interest in the licensee means any natural person, partnership, limited partnership or corporation who possesses a 25 percent or greater ownership interest in the licensee. 
Person having the primary responsibility for managing the business means a person actively involved in the day-to-day operations of the business located on the licensed premises, and who has authority to prescribe any/or enforce rules, regulations and guidelines prescribed by the licensee for employees engaging in the sale or dispensing of malt beverages and/or wine on the licensed premises, and who has the final authority to discipline any employee violating such rules, regulations and guidelines. 
Person holding license on behalf of licensee means a natural person that holds the license on behalf of a sole proprietor, a corporation, a partnership, or other legal entity. 
Pouring licensee means the applicant for or holder of a license for the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine by the drink. 
Purchase of a going business means the sale by a licensee to a separate person or entity of substantially all of the stock in trade of the licensed business at the licensed premises, including the good will of the licensed business, and including the continued use of the trade name, together with an agreement by the seller not to use the same or confusingly similar trade name in the county. However, a purchase shall not be considered a "purchase of a going business" unless the business continues to be operated under the same trade name and at the same location for a period of 12 months subsequent to the date of purchase. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, air conditioned, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served on at least three days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations, and period of redecoration, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the service of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A restaurant shall provide at least 24 seats for its customers, and shall derive at least 50 percent of its gross revenue from the sale of food prepared on the premises. A restaurant must also have a valid food service establishment permit as required by O. C. G. A. § 26-2-371. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02; Ord. No. 420, § Ia., 1-20-04) 
Sec. 6-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter has been enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community; to establish reasonable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing, sale and dispensing of malt beverages and wine; to protect and preserve the schools; to give effect to existing land use; to protect those of minor age in the community; and to preserve reasonable and orderly land use, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining the stability of neighborhoods and property values; to protect against the evils of concentration of outlets for malt beverages and wine in one person or entity or to prevent undesirable persons or entities from controlling the malt beverage and wine industry in the city; and to ensure that only grocery stores are licensed to sell malt beverages and wine in the city as an incidental part of their business and to protect against the evils of beer and wine stores per se; and to insure that only restaurants (and not bars per se) are authorized to sell malt beverages and/or wine by the drink. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-3. - License required. 
It shall be lawful to sell malt beverages and wine by the package, both wholesale and retail, in the city when granted a license by the city. Additionally, it shall be lawful to sell malt beverages and wine by the drink only when granted a license by the city. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-4. - Retail licensee qualifications—General requirements for individual licensees and persons holding a license on behalf of a sole proprietor, corporation or partnership. 
All individual licensees and/or persons holding a license on behalf of a sole proprietor, a corporation or a partnership shall meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  Such person shall be a resident of the United States. 
(2)  Such person shall be of good moral character and shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to any felony, any violation of controlled substance laws, any violation of law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, or any violation of law prohibiting operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, in any state of the United States, within the five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(3)  Such person shall not have had his license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind revoked for cause by any city, county or state of the United States within five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(4)  Such person shall be the owner of the premises, or the holder of a valid written lease thereon, or the person with a primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-5. - Same—Sole proprietor. 
The person having the primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the licensed premises, or the owner of the premises, or the holder of a valid lease thereon shall be the holder of the license on behalf of a sole proprietorship, and shall possess all of the qualifications set forth in section 6-4. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-6. - Same—Corporation. 
The person having the primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the licensed premises, or the holder of the majority of shares in the corporation shall be the holder of the license on behalf of the corporation, and shall possess all of the qualifications set forth in section 6-4. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-7. - Same—Partnerships. 
The person having the primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the licensed premises, or a general partner, shall be the holder of the license on behalf of the partnership, and shall possess all of the qualifications set forth in section 6-4. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-7.1. - Change of person holding license. 
In the event there is a change in the person holding the license for an entity licensed by the city to sell alcoholic beverages, and said entity timely files with the city manager the information regarding the change as required by subsection 6-12(b), the new person who shall be the "person holding the license on behalf of licensee" shall be given a period of 90 days to meet the qualifications under this chapter before such entity's license is cancelled, suspended, or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 420, § Ib., 1-20-04) 
Sec. 6-8. - Same—Persons having an ownership interest in licensee. 
Any person having an ownership interest in the licensee: 
(1)  Shall not have been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to any felony, any violation of controlled substances laws, any violation of law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, or any violation of law prohibiting operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs in any state of the United States within the five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(2)  Shall not have had an ownership interest of 25 percent or greater in any entity which has had its license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind revoked for cause by any city, county or state of the United States within five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-9. - Grocery sales for package sales of beer and wine. 
(a)  General qualifications. A package licensee must prove that it is a grocery store. 
(b)  Making application. The licensee must prove that it has experienced grocery sales of at least $25,000.00 during the three months immediately preceding the filing of the application at the licensed premises or the premises to be licensed, excluding the sale of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including but not limited to hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). Such proof shall be made by providing copies of sales tax returns and cancelled checks or other evidence of payment of sales tax together with an affidavit from the licensee or the person who shall hold the license on behalf of the licensee, swearing or affirming under oath that the premises have experienced grocery sales of at least $25,000.00 excluding the sale of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including but not limited to hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). The mayor and council may, in their discretion, require an audited financial statement by a certified public accountant providing for a detailed analysis of sales, categorizing sales of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes, and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including but not limited to hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). The cost of such audited financial statement shall be borne by the licensee. 
(c)  Checks and audits after issuance. The licensee is subject to subsequent checks and audits of its books and records after issuance of the license by the city clerk or his designated agent during regular business hours, the cost of which shall be borne by the city. The licensee shall maintain grocery sales of at least $50,000.00, excluding the sale of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including but not limited to hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items), during the 12-month period immediately preceding such licensee's application for renewal. If the license has been issued for a period of less than 12 months immediately preceding the filing of the application for renewal by such licensee, the $50,000.00 grocery sales requirement shall be prorated for the period in which such licensee has held a license immediately preceding the filing of the application for renewal. 
(d)  Checks and audits prior to renewal. The licensee must prove that it has experienced grocery sales of at least $50,000.00 for the period immediately preceding the filing of the application as set forth in subsection (c). Such proof shall be made by providing copies of sales tax returns and cancelled checks or other evidence of payment of sales tax together with an affidavit from the licensee or the person who holds the license on behalf of the licensee, swearing under oath that the premises have experienced grocery sales of at least $50,000.00 during the 12-month period immediately preceding such licensee's application for renewal (or in an amount prorated for the period in which such licensee has held a license immediately preceding the filing of the application for renewal) excluding the sale of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including but not limited to hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). The mayor and council may, in its discretion, and upon reasonable suspicion that the licensee has not experienced the requisite grocery sales, require an audited financial statement by a certified public accountant, providing for a detailed analysis of sales, categorizing gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes, and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including but not limited to hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items), the cost of which shall be borne by the licensee. 
(e)  Exceptions, chain grocery stores; purchase of going business. 
(1)  Chain grocery stores. The provision of this section requiring an applicant to prove grocery sales of at least $25,000.00 during the three months immediately preceding the filing of the application shall not, at the option of any chain grocery store applicant, apply to chain grocery stores. If such applicant's sales do not equal or exceed $250,000.00 for the first three months of operation subsequent to the issuance of a malt beverage and wine license, such license shall be revoked and the applicant must reapply for a malt beverage and wine license, which application shall not be considered for a period of three months subsequent to revocation under this section. The holder of the license on behalf of the applicant must furnish the city clerk sales tax returns and cancelled checks or other evidence of payment of sales tax for its first three months of operation within 30 days of the end of the three-month period in order to demonstrate requisite grocery sales, together with an affidavit from the person holding a license on behalf of the licensee that the subject chain grocery store has experienced grocery sales of at least $250,000.00 during the three-month period. Additionally, the mayor and council may, in its discretion, require an audited financial statement providing for a detailed analysis of sales, categorizing sales of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including but not limited to hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). The cost of such audited financial statement shall be borne by the licensee. 
(2)  Purchase of going business. The provision of this section requiring an applicant to prove grocery sales of at least $25,000.00 during the three months immediately preceding the filing of the application shall not, at the option of the purchaser of a going business holding a valid malt beverage and wine license in the city, apply to such applicant. If such applicant's sales do not equal or exceed $25,000.00 for the first three months of operation subsequent to the issuance of a malt beverage and wine license, such license shall be revoked and the applicant must reapply for a malt beverage and wine license, which application shall not be considered for a period of three months subsequent to revocation under this section. The holder of the license on behalf of the applicant must furnish the city clerk sales tax returns and cancelled checks or other evidence of payments of sales tax for its first three months of operation within 30 days of the end of the three-month period in order to demonstrate requisite grocery sales, together with an affidavit from the person holding a license on behalf of the licensee that the subject grocery store has experienced grocery sales of at least $25,000.00 during the three-month period. Additionally, the mayor and council may, in its discretion, require an audited financial statement providing for a detailed analysis of sales, categorizing sales of gasoline, motor oil, cigarettes and prepared food cooked or heated on the licensed premises (including but not limited to hot dogs, hamburgers, pizza, fried chicken, sandwiches and bakery items). The cost of such audited financial statement shall be borne by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-10. - Pouring license—Restaurant. 
(a)  General qualifications. A pouring licensee must prove that it is a restaurant. 
(b)  Making application. The licensee must prove that it meets or shall meet before commencing business the definition of a restaurant as provided in this chapter, except for the percentage of food sales, which must be subsequently proven as hereinafter set forth. 
(c)  Proof of food sales after issuance. 
(1)  Initial proof. The licensee must prove that at least 50 percent of its gross revenue for the first three months that it began selling beer and/or wine by the drink was derived from the sale of food prepared on the licensed premises, or such license shall be immediately revoked. Such proof as hereinafter set forth shall be provided to the city clerk within four months of the issuance of the license. Such proof shall be made by providing copies of sales tax returns, cancelled checks or other evidence of payment of sales tax; records of the licensee providing proof of the dollar amount from sales of alcoholic beverages; and an affidavit from the licensee or the person who holds the license on behalf of the licensee, swearing or affirming on oath that 50 percent of the gross revenue for the first three months that the licensee began selling alcoholic beverages by the drink was derived from the sale of food prepared on the licensed premises. The mayor and council may, in its discretion, require an audited financial statement by a certified public accountant providing for a detailed analysis of the sources of the gross revenue. The cost of such audited financial statement shall be borne by the licensee. 
(2)  Checks and audits after issuance. The licensee is subject to subsequent checks and audits of its books and records after issuance of the license by the city clerk or his designated agent during regular business hours, the cost of which shall be borne by the city. 
(3)  Checks and audits prior to renewal. The licensee must prove that at least 50 percent of its gross revenue is derived from food prepared on the licensed premises during the 12 months immediately preceding such licensee's application for renewal (or, if licensed for less than 12 months, for the period that the license has been held). The mayor and council may, in its discretion, and upon reasonable suspicion that the licensee has not met the requisite food sales for such period, require an audited financial statement by a certified public accountant, providing for a detailed analysis of the sources of gross revenue. The cost of such audited financial statement shall be borne by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-11. - Sale of malt beverages or wine near churches, schools. 
No license to sell malt beverages and wine shall be granted at a location within 100 yards of any church, school building, school grounds, or college campus. As used in this chapter the term "school building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690. The 100-yard distance shall be measured along the most direct legal route of travel on the ground and from building to building at any part thereof. However, this provision shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, nor at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of malt beverages and wine was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding application for a malt beverage and wine license. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-12. - Application forms; contents; change in information. 
(a)  All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made on forms furnished the applicant by the city clerk and shall indicate the following: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all persons having an ownership interest in the business applying for the license to sell malt beverages and wine, together with the interest each person or any member of his immediate family has in any other business license to sell malt beverages and wine in the city. 
(2)  The ownership of the land and building where the business is to be operated, together with a copy or copies of deeds to and leases thereon. 
(3)  Whether the licensee, the person who shall hold the license on behalf of the licensee, or any person having an ownership interest in the licensee, has been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to any felony, any violation of controlled substances laws, any violation of law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, or any violation of law prohibiting operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, in any state of the United States within the five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(4)  Whether the licensee, the person who shall hold the license on behalf of the licensee or any person having an ownership interest in the licensee has had his license to sell alcoholic beverages of any kind revoked for cause by any city, county or state of the United States within five years immediately preceding the filing of the application. 
(5)  The name of the licensee (business entity), and the name, address and telephone number of the person who shall hold the license on behalf of the business entity, if different. 
(6)  A set of fingerprints of persons having an ownership interest in the licensee as well as the person holding the license on behalf of the licensee, which fingerprints must be processed through the Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC) and the National Crime Information Center (NCIC). 
(7)  Photographs of the person primarily responsible for managing the business, together with photographs of all persons with an ownership interest in the business. 
(8)  Any other information called for by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Any change in any relationship declared in the application with regard to persons interested in the ownership of the business, or in the relationship between the person holding the license on behalf of the business and the business itself, must be filed with the city manager when the change is made. The failure to so file within a period of 30 days after the change is made shall be grounds for cancellation, revocation or suspension of the license by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-13. - Application fee. 
A fee in the amount of $100.00 shall be paid to the city at the time of the filing of the application under this chapter to defray costs and expenses in connection with the filing of the application and the investigation of the applicant and of the facts contained in the application. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-14. - Public hearing on application. 
All applications for licenses shall be acted upon by the mayor and council after a public hearing and advertisement thereof in at least two consecutive issues of the legal organ of the city, which notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and the name of the person who shall hold the license on behalf of the applicant, if different, and if a partnership, the names of all general and limited partners, and if a corporation, the names of the person who shall have primary responsibility for managing the business together with the owners of at least 25 percent of the shares of stock in the corporation, together with the names of the officers and board of directors. The public hearing shall be held not sooner than ten days nor more than 20 days subsequent to the date of the first advertisement. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-15. - Issuance of license. 
When the malt beverage and wine license has been approved by the mayor and council and the applicant has deposited with the city manager the required application fee, business license fee and any other fees and taxes due the city by the applicant, a license will be issued. The license, when issued, shall authorize the licensee to conduct the retail sale of either malt beverages, wine, or both. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-16. - Term of license. 
Licenses issued under this chapter shall have a term beginning January 1 of the year of issuance and shall terminate on December 31 of the year of issuance at midnight. Licenses issued after January 1 of any given year shall be valid only through December 31 of that year at midnight, and such licensee shall pay all fees and taxes owed for a full year. In the event of revocation, surrender or suspension of the license prior to the expiration of the term, the holder shall not be entitled to receive any refund of any fees or taxes whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-17. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  Generally. Licenses under this chapter shall not be transferable except as provided in this section. 
(b)  Sole proprietor. If the holder of this license is the sole proprietor of the business, the license may, in the discretion of the mayor and council, be transferred to the personal representative of his estate or to a member of his immediate family upon the sole proprietor's death, provided that such person meets all of the qualifications set forth in section 6-5. If the holder of the license on behalf of the sole proprietor is not the owner of the business, but rather is the person having the primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the premises, and such person ceases to be the person with such primary responsibility, the license may, in the discretion of the mayor and council, be transferred to a person meeting all qualifications set forth in section 6-5. 
(c)  Corporations. If the holder of the license on behalf of a corporation ceases to be either the person having the primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the premises, or the holder of the majority of shares in the corporation, subsequent to the issuance of the license, the license may, in the discretion of the mayor and council, be transferred to a person meeting all qualifications set forth in section 6-6. 
(d)  Partnerships. If the holder of the license on behalf of a partnership ceases to be either the person having primary responsibility for managing the business to be operated on the premises, or a general partner in the business, subsequent to the issuance of the license, the license may, in the discretion of the mayor and council, be transferred to a person meeting all qualifications set forth in section 6-7. 
(e)  Sale of licensed premises. No license shall be transferred from one business entity to another upon the sale or lease of the licensed premises. However, this subsection shall not apply to a sole proprietor or to a partnership which continues its business on the licensed premises in the form of a corporation after issuance of the license provided that the sole proprietor remains the owner of 100 percent of the shares in the corporation, or in the case of a partnership, as long as the same partners remain the owner of 100 percent of the shares in the corporation. 
Provided further, if there is a transfer in ownership of the licensee, but the manager for a new applicant remains the same as the former licensee, and that manager was the holder of the license on behalf of the former licensee, and shall be the holder of the license on behalf of the new applicant, the license may, in the discretion of the mayor and council, be transferred to the new applicant for a period of 90 days commencing with the date of the sale or transfer in ownership, in order for the new applicant to have the time needed to complete the application process for a license for the new applicant. 
(f)  Transfer of location. The holder of a valid license issued as provided in this chapter may request that the license be transferred from the licensed premises to a new location of the licensed business, which license may be transferred upon approval by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02; Ord. No. 419, 10-21-03) 
Sec. 6-18. - Renewal of license. 
(a)  Renewal process. All holders of malt beverage and wine licenses in the city shall apply for renewal thereof for the subsequent year between November 1 of the current year for which the licensee holds a valid license and November 30 of such year. In the application for renewal, the licensee shall state any changes in information that was provided on the licensee's original application to the city for a malt beverage and wine license. A package licensee shall also provide proof of grocery sales as provided for in subsection 6-9(d). A pouring licensee shall also provide proof of sales of prepared foods on the licensed premises as provided for in subsection 6-10(c)(3). All malt beverage and wine licenses shall be deemed automatically renewed for the subsequent year unless the mayor and council deny renewal thereof on or before December 31 of the current year. There shall be no application fee for renewal of an existing license. If an application for renewal is not filed within the requisite time limits set forth herein, such licensee shall begin anew the application process as though the licensee had never held a malt beverage and wine license in the city. All applications for renewal shall be accompanied by payment of the malt beverage and wine license tax, which amount shall be returned if renewal of such license is denied. 
(b)  Change in information. In the event there has been a change in any person having an ownership interest in the licensee, or in the person holding the license on behalf of the licensee, a set of fingerprints of such new person or persons shall be made and processed through the Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC) and the National Crime Information Center (NCIC). If any such person has been convicted of or pleaded nolo contendere to any felony, any violation of controlled substances laws, any violation of law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, or any violation of law prohibiting the operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, in any State of the United States within five years immediately preceding the filing of the application for renewal, said license shall not be renewed, or if already renewed, shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-19. - Allowing or permitting of breaking of packages or drinking of contents thereon on premises. 
No holder of a license which authorizes the sale of malt beverages and wine by the package in the city, nor any agents or employees of the licensee, shall knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking of any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the premises where sold or allow or permit the drinking of the contents of such package or packages on the premises where sold. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-20. - Prohibited acts on licensed premises. 
No holder of a license which authorizes the sale of malt beverages and wine at retail in the city by the package or by the drink, nor any agents or employees of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell malt beverages or wine to any person while this person is in an intoxicated condition; 
(2)  Permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct or breach of the peace; 
(3)  Sell, offer for sale, or possess on the licensed premises any kind of alcoholic liquor, the sale of or possession of which is not authorized under this chapter; 
(4)  Sell malt beverages or wine, either retail or wholesale, within 100 yards of any church, school building, school grounds, or college campus; 
(5)  Sell malt beverages or wine to persons under the legal drinking age as provided by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-21. - Proper identification required for purchase. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or for any person to purchase malt beverages or wine in the city unless the purchaser exhibits proper identification to the seller. For purposes of this chapter, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes without being limited to a passport, military identification card or driver's license. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate. This section applies to all persons regardless of age, and regardless of whether such person appears to be of proper and lawful age to purchase malt beverages or wine. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-22. - Wholesalers; license required for delivery. 
The wholesale dealers shall be licensed under this chapter before they can sell or deliver any malt beverage or wine to any establishment in the incorporated areas of the city, and if properly licensed, these sales or deliveries shall only be made to retailers properly licensed under this chapter for the operation of establishments in the city. Deliveries shall be made in a conveyance owned, leased and operated by a wholesaler licensed under this chapter, and his license or permit shall at all times when deliveries are made in the city be in the conveyance making these deliveries and shall be subject all times to inspection by all duly authorized authorities of the city. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-23. - Retailers; licensee required to accept delivery. 
The retail dealers in malt beverages and wine, licensed under this chapter shall not buy or accept deliveries of malt beverages or wine from wholesalers or other persons offering them for sale except from wholesalers duly authorized under this chapter. These retailers shall not accept delivery of malt beverages or wine except directly to the premises for which their license and permit was issued, and by no other means than a conveyance owned or leased and operated by a wholesaler licensed under this chapter to make deliveries of malt beverages and wine in the city. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-24. - Beverages must be sold on licensed premises. 
All the malt beverages and wine in the possession of a licensed retailer shall be stored and sold in and upon the premises for which the license was issued, which premises shall be described in the application for licenses hereinabove referred to, and at no other place. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-25. - Hours of sale regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away or offer for sale, or in any other manner dispense or deliver any malt beverage or wine within the corporate limits of the city during the hours of 12:00 midnight on each Saturday and until 7:00 a.m. on each Monday. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-26. - Public consumption. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any malt beverage or wine on or upon the public streets, roads or alleys in the city, or any public park or playground, or on any other public property. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-27. - Prohibition against consumption on premises. 
Persons obtaining retail licenses under this chapter for the sale of malt beverages and wine by the package shall not allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of their respective places of business. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-28. - Brown bagging prohibited. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring in his own malt beverage or wine in any restaurant in the city. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-29. - Signs, advertisements. 
(a)  No package licensee under this chapter shall advertise the sale of malt beverages or wine at his establishment by any sign or similar device on the exterior of the building in which his business is located, or at any other exterior location on the lot or parcel of land on which his building is located, or on any other tract or parcel of land within the city limits. Within the building in which his business is located, such licensee may display any number of signs, but such signs shall not be so prominently visible from outside such building as to defeat the intent of the restriction on exterior advertisement. 
(b)  Signs which are located in a window of a building in which a package licensee's business is located and all lighted signs, wherever located, shall be considered to be so prominently visible from outside such building as to defeat the intent of the restriction on exterior advertising. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-30. - Purchase of malt beverages or wine on election days. 
There shall be no prohibition against the sale and purchase of malt beverages or wine on election days. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-31. - License tax. 
(a)  Package license. There shall be a license tax levied on all package licensees in the amount of $1,000.00 per year, which tax shall be due and payable upon the filing of the application for the license. 
(b)  Pouring license. 
(1)  Beer pouring license. There shall be a license tax levied on all pouring licensees for malt beverages only in the amount of $250.00 per year, which tax shall be due and payable upon the filing of the application for the license. 
(2)  Wine pouring license. There shall be a license tax levied on all pouring licensees for wine only in the amount of $250.00 per year, which tax shall be due and payable upon the filing of the application for the license. 
(3)  Combined beer and wine pouring license. There shall be a license tax levied on all pouring licensees for beer and wine in the amount of $500.00 per year, which tax shall be due and payable upon the filing of the application for the license. 
(c)  Refund of license tax. If the license is not issued in connection with such application, the license tax shall be returned. 
(d)  Renewal. In the case of renewal, the tax shall be due and payable at the time application is made for renewal, which amount shall be returned if renewal is denied by the mayor and council. 
(e)  Possible pro-ration. The city council in its discretion, may pro-rate the license tax for that portion of a year in which the issuance of a new or renewed license is delayed due to any mistake, error, or unreasonable delay caused by the city, the state, or the United States, but only where such mistake, error, or unreasonable delay is not caused by or contributed to by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-32. - Excise tax—Imposed upon wholesale dealers. 
There is hereby imposed upon each licensed wholesale dealer an excise tax, in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, as follows: 
(1)  Malt beverages. 
a.  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
b.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(2)  Wine. For wine, a tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-33. - Same—Payment. 
Excise taxes imposed under section 6-31 shall be paid on or before the 20 th day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of within the city by the wholesale dealer. Each wholesale dealer responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report itemizing for the previous calendar month the exact quantities of malt beverages and wine, by size and type of container, sold during the month within the city. The wholesale dealer shall remit to the city on the 20 th day of the month following the calendar month in which the sales were made the tax imposed under this section. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-34. - Limitation on number of licenses per person. 
No natural person, partnership, limited partnership, corporation or other entity shall hold more than two malt beverage and wine licenses in the city; nor shall any such person or entity possess a 25 percent or greater ownership interest in more than two holders of malt beverage and wine licenses in the city. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-35. - Suspension and revocation—For due cause. 
(a)  Grounds. The mayor and council may suspend, revoke or deny renewal of any malt beverage and wine license for due cause. For purposes of this section, due cause is defined as follows: 
(1)  The conviction of or a plea of nolo contendere by the licensee or any employee or agent of the licensee to a violation of any federal, state, county or municipal law or ordinance relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages, which violation occurred on the licensed premises. 
(2)  The conviction of or a plea of nolo contendere by any person having an ownership interest in the business located on the licensed premises to any felony, any violation of controlled substances laws, any violation of law regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages, or any violation of law prohibiting operation of a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs in any state of the United States subsequent to the date of issuance of the license. 
(3)  The revocation for cause by any city, county or state of the United States subsequent to the date of the issuance of the license with respect to an entity that a person having an ownership interest in the business located on the licensed premises as defined herein held an ownership interest in any such entity equaling or exceeding 25 percent. 
(4)  The failure to provide any change in information set forth in the licensee's original or renewal application for a malt beverage and wine license within 30 days after the date of such change. 
(b)  Hearing. 
(1)  Probable cause suspension by mayor. The mayor may, upon probable cause that there is due cause to suspend or revoke a malt beverage and wine license, immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter after an informal hearing with the licensee or the holder of the license on behalf of the licensee. Such hearing shall be held at city hall between 8:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day, Sunday through Saturday, upon two hours' notice, verbal or written, by the city council or its designated agent, to the licensee or the person holding the license on behalf of the licensee. If the licensee or the person holding the license on behalf of the licensee fails to appear at the hearing, or if neither can be notified after reasonable effort, the mayor may, in his discretion, suspend any such license without hearing. 
(2)  Hearing before council. A hearing before the full mayor and council shall then be held after written notice to such licensee, or the person holding such license on behalf of the licensee, not sooner than two days nor later than ten days subsequent to the date of suspension. Such licensee shall be given at least two days' written notice of the hearing. All decisions of the mayor and council regarding the suspension or revocation of licenses issued under this chapter shall be in writing and the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee. 
(c)  Notice requirements where no probable cause suspension. In all other cases where there is no probable cause suspension by the city council, a licensee against whom suspension or revocation proceedings are being commenced shall be given at least five days' notice of a hearing before the mayor and council, which notice shall be in writing, and shall be mailed or delivered to such licensee or the person holding such license on behalf of the licensee. All decisions of the mayor and council regarding the suspension or revocation of licenses issued hereunder shall be in writing and the reasons therefore stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-36. - Suspension and revocation—Violation of chapter or state law. 
(a)  Grounds. The mayor and council may suspend, revoke or deny renewal of any malt beverage and wine license issued under this chapter for a violation by the licensee or by any employee or agent of the licensee of any provision of this chapter relating to the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, or any amendment thereto, or any provisions of state law relating to the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, or any amendment thereto. It shall not be a prerequisite to proceeding under this provision that the licensee or any employee or agent of the licensee be convicted or plead nolo contendere in a court of law to such violation. 
(b)  Hearing. 
(1)  Probable cause suspension by mayor. The mayor, upon probable cause that a violation of this chapter has occurred, or that there has been a violation of state law relating to the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, immediately suspend any license issued under this chapter after an informal hearing with the licensee or the holder of the license on behalf of the licensee. Such hearing shall be held at city hall between 8:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on any day, Sunday through Saturday, upon two hours' notice, verbal or written, by the mayor or his designated agent, to the licensee or the person holding the license on behalf of the licensee. If the licensee or the person holding the license on behalf of the licensee fails to appear at the hearing, or if neither can be notified after reasonable effort, the mayor may, in his discretion, suspend any such license without hearing. 
(2)  Hearing before council. A hearing before the full mayor and council shall then be held after written notice to such licensee, or the person holding such license on behalf of the licensee, not sooner than two days nor later than ten days subsequent to the date of suspension. Such licensee shall be given at least two days' written notice of the hearing. All decisions of the mayor and council regarding the suspension or revocation of licenses issued under this chapter shall be in writing and the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee. 
(c)  Notice requirements where no probable cause suspension. In all other cases where there is no probable cause suspension by the mayor, a licensee against whom suspension or revocation proceedings are being commenced shall be given at least five days' notice of a hearing before the mayor and council, which notice shall be in writing, and shall be mailed or delivered to such licensee or the person holding such license on behalf of the licensee. All decisions of the mayor and council regarding the suspension or revocation of licenses issued hereunder shall be in writing and the reasons therefore stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-37. - Conduct of hearings. 
At all hearings before the full council on the issue of suspension, revocation, or the denial of the renewal of any malt beverage and wine license, the licensee shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and to cross-examine opposing witnesses. Strict rules of evidence shall not apply. A majority vote of the council members present shall carry any motion. The mayor shall vote only in the case of a tie. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-38. - Revocation, suspension and other penalties. 
If a majority of the council present at the hearing finds by a preponderance of the evidence that there are grounds for revoking or suspending a license, revocation of such license is authorized. The mayor and council, may, in its discretion, upon consideration of mitigating factors, impose a lesser penalty of suspension for a specific period of time. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Sec. 6-39. - Minimum suspensions for underaged sales. 
In cases of sales of malt beverages or wine to persons under the legal drinking age in violation of state law and/or this chapter, the following minimum suspension periods shall apply for any given calendar year: 
(1)  First violation (during current calendar year): 15 days 
(2)  Second violation (during current calendar year): 30 days 
(3)  Third violation (during current calendar year): Revocation 
In determining the number of violations under this subsection, only violations which occur on or after January 1, 2001 shall be considered. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the mayor and council from completely revoking a license or from suspending any license for a period of time in addition to the minimum periods set forth in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 411, 10-2-02) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances, § 30-26; noise, § 30-81. 
State Law reference— City's and county's authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(3); livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

Sec. 10-1. - Poisoning animals. 
No person shall put out or cause to be put out any poison within the city for the killing of any dog or other domestic animal. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5001) 
Sec. 10-2. - Manner of keeping; complaints. 
(a)  No person shall keep, maintain or permit any animal or fowl in the city in such manner as to create an unsanitary or obnoxious condition, or to become noisy, offensive or a nuisance to the neighbors or citizens of the city, or to disturb the peace of the city. 
(b)  Should a complaint arise from the causes referred to in subsection (a) of this section the person involved will be properly notified and given adequate time to either dispose of the animal or fowl or eliminate the cause of the complaint. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5002) 
Sec. 10-3. - Vicious animals. 
(a)  No owner or other person shall maintain or harbor within the limits of the city a manifestly vicious dog or other animal unless it is securely, but humanely, confined or restrained in such manner as to prevent this dog or other animal from attacking or biting a person or another animal. 
(b)  It shall be prima facie evidence of viciousness if a dog or other animal, without provocation, fiercely attacks or bites persons or animals not on the owner's premises. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5003) 
Sec. 10-4. - Disposal of dead animals. 
(a)  No person shall bury the carcass of any dead animal other than household pets anywhere inside the city limits. 
(b)  No person owning or interested in any animal which has died shall leave the body or carcass thereof anywhere inside the city limits. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5004) 
Sec. 10-5. - Bird sanctuary. 
(a)  The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wildfowl or to rob bird nests or wildfowl nests. However, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the city, the health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, or as many of the clubs as are to be found in the city, after having given the clubs at least three days' actual notice of the time and place of the meeting to the representative of the clubs. 
(c)  If as a result of the meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate this nuisance, the birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed available by the health authorities under supervision of the chief of police. 
(d)  Anyone violating this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5005) 
Sec. 10-6. - Rabies inoculation required. 
No person shall keep a dog or cat that is three months old or older unless the person has had the dog or cat inoculated for rabies. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5011) 
Sec. 10-7. - Dogs, cats to wear inoculation tags. 
All dogs or cats inoculated as provided in section 10-6 shall have attached to or affixed about their necks a collar, with a tag attached thereto, stating the date of the inoculation. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5012) 
Sec. 10-8. - Dogs, cats running at large—Prohibited. 
No owner or keeper of any dog or cat shall allow it to run at large upon the streets of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5013) 
Sec. 10-9. - Same—Impoundment; redemption procedure, fees. 
(a)  Any dog or cat running at large shall be caught by the police department and placed in a compound for three days. 
(b)  The owners of these dogs or cats may appear within the three days' time and redeem the dogs or cats by paying the required amount per day for board. 
(c)  If the dog or cat is not called for within a period of three days, the police department may destroy the dog or cat in a sound, painless manner. 
(d)  No dog or cat shall be released unless proof of inoculation for rabies is furnished by the owner. 
(e)  The owner of any impounded dog or cat is hereby required to pay the sum of $1.75 per day while his dog or cat is impounded and the additional sum as charged by the person in charge of the pound for the dog's or cat's maintenance. These sums are to be paid to the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5014) 
Sec. 10-10. - Nuisances. 
(a)  No person shall allow a dog or cat over which he has custody or control to remain on his property or premises if it shall constitute a nuisance as the term is defined by the law of this state. 
(b)  For purposes of this section it shall constitute a nuisance per se for a dog or cat to bark, howl, whine or emit any noises whatsoever in a continuous manner for a period of 30 minutes or longer so as to disturb any occupant of any adjoining or adjacent property within hearing distance of such property. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5015; Ord. No. 325, 10-20-92) 
Sec. 10-11. - Livestock running at large—Prohibited. 
No person shall permit any horses, cattle, sheep, goats or other livestock to run at large on the streets of the city, or to be staked so that they can go upon the streets of the city, or shall drive or lead these animals or livestock along or on the sidewalks in the city, or shall drive or lead these animals or livestock along and over the streets of the city, unless fastened to a rope, chain or other substantial leading device which rope, chain or other substantial leading device is securely held by a responsible person during all the time that these animals or livestock are being led or driven along and over the streets of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5021) 
Sec. 10-12. - Same—Impoundment. 
Any livestock running at large or so staked to go upon the streets, or so driven upon the streets as prohibited in section 10-11 shall be impounded by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5022) 
Sec. 10-13. - Same—Redemption or sale; disposition of proceeds of sale. 
(a)  If any animal impounded as provided in section 10-12 is not claimed and redeemed by the owner, or keeper thereof, within three days after impounding, the chief of police shall advertise it for sale by posting three written or printed notices of this sale, one at the gate or door of the pound and two at any other conspicuous place within the city, for not less than five consecutive days prior to this sale. 
(b)  On the day named for this sale, unless the animal shall be redeemed, the chief of police shall sell the animal at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. 
(c)  The chief of police shall pay over the proceeds to the city clerk, who shall pay out of these proceeds all expenses, and hold any balance subject to the order of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5023) 
Sec. 10-14. - Same—Charges for impounding, selling, etc. 
The charges for impounding, keeping and selling livestock as provided in this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  For taking up and impounding each animal ..... $ 5.00 
(2)  For feeding each animal, per day ..... 1.00 
(3)  For posting notice for sale ..... 0.50 
(4)  For selling each animal ..... 0.50 
(Code 1976, § 10-5024) 
Sec. 10-15. - Same—Records and reports of impoundment, sale, etc. 
(a)  The chief of police shall keep a record, in a book to be kept for this purpose, of all livestock impounded, fully describing the animal, the date impounded, the name of the owner, if known, the day of redemption or sale, the penalty, costs and charges due, the amount received and the amount paid the city clerk. 
(b)  The chief of police shall present to the city manager monthly an abstract of this record for the preceding month. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5025) 
Sec. 10-16. - Stables, pens, yards for cows or hogs. 
(a)  No person shall erect any stables, pens or yards within the corporate limits of the city for the keeping, storing or selling of cows or hogs. 
(b)  No person shall use any stables, pens or yards within the corporate limits of the city for the keeping, storing or selling of cows or hogs, unless this person shall first obtain the approval of the mayor and council as to the location, erection and use of these stables, pens or yards. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5026) 
Sec. 10-17. - Commercial poultry raising prohibited. 
No person shall raise poultry on a commercial basis within the city limits. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5031) 
Sec. 10-18. - Fowl running at large. 
(a)  No owner of chickens or other fowl shall allow them to run at large within the city limits. 
(b)  The owner shall keep the chickens or fowl confined to his own premises. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5032) 
Sec. 10-19. - Tampering with animal control device. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Animal control device means an object designed to trap, capture, or restrain an animal. 
(2)  Animal control officer means the duly appointed animal control officer of the city, or other person or persons acting under the authority of the animal control officer. 
(b)  Damaging and tampering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or to tamper with any animal control device utilized by the animal control officer within the city limits. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 334, §§ III—V, 6-7-94) 
Sec. 10-20. - Tethering of dogs. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Tethering means attaching a dog to a stationary object by a chain, cable or similar device commonly used for the size and type of dog involved. A dog is not considered tethered when the dog is attached to a stationary object, as long as the owner or custodian is physically within reach of the dog. 
(b)  Tethering prohibited. Tethering of a dog is prohibited. 
(c)  Running cable or trolley system. A dog may be attached to a running cable or trolley system provided that: 
(1)  Only one dog may be attached to each running cable line or trolley system; 
(2)  Tethers and cables attaching the animal to the running cable line or trolley system must be made of a substance which cannot be chewed by the animal and shall not weigh more than five percent of the body weight of the animal tethered; 
(3)  The running cable line or trolley system must be at least ten feet in length and mounted at least four feet and no more than seven feet above ground level; 
(4)  The length of the tether from the running cable line or trolley system to the dog's collar should allow access to the maximum available exercise area and allow the dog free access to food, water and shelter; 
(5)  The tethers and cables shall be attached to a properly fitted harness or collar not used for the display of a current rabies tag and other identification, and with enough room between the collar and the dog's throat through which two fingers may fit. Choke collars and pinch collars are prohibited for the purpose of attaching a dog to a running cable line or trolley system; 
(6)  The cable or trolley system shall be set up such that the dog is reasonably protected from injury and strangulation; 
(7)  A dog may not be attached to a cable or trolley system for more than 12 hours in a 24-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 444, §§ I—III, 8-9-07) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Building regulations, § 8.101 et seq. 
Cross reference— Planning commission, § 2-126; design commission, § 2-136; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 18; table of communications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; fire lanes, § 34-61 et seq.; private water wells and water systems, § 38-26; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 66; telecommunications towers and antennae, ch. 68; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); adoption and continuation of state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; statewide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Technical building and construction codes adopted. 
(a)  Statement of intention to enforce the mandatory state minimum standards for construction. It is the intent of the mayor and council to enforce the latest edition of the following state minimum standard codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs: 
(1)  Standard Building Code; 
(2)  Standard Mechanical Code; 
(3)  Standard Gas Code; 
(4)  Standard Plumbing Code; 
(5)  National Electrical Code; 
(6)  Standard Fire Prevention Code; 
(7)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code; 
(8)  Georgia State Energy Code (CABO Model Energy Code). 
(b)  Adoption of appendices of the state minimum standard codes. The following appendices of the codes identified in section 14-31, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copies fully in this section: 
(1)  Standard Building Code: Appendixes A, C, D, E, F, G, H and I; 
(2)  Standard Mechanical Code: Appendixes A and C; 
(3)  Standard Plumbing Code: Appendixes B, C, D, E, F and G; 
(4)  Standard Gas Code: Appendixes A, C, D and E; 
(5)  Standard Fire Prevention Code: Appendixes B, C and D; 
(6)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code: Appendixes C, D, E and F; 
(7)  National Electrical Code: Appendixes A, B and C; 
(8)  Georgia State Energy Code (CABO Model Energy Code): The Appendix. 
(Ord. No. 458, 3-2-10) 
Sec. 14-2. - Illegal use of licensed plumber's name. 
(a)  No licensed plumber shall allow his name or license to be used by any person, either directly or indirectly, for the purpose of obtaining a permit or doing work under his license. 
(b)  In case his license is violated the plumber and the person using the plumber's name will be equally guilty and shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1033) 
Sec. 14-3. - Gas contractors liability and property damage insurance. 
(a)  Every person, before entering upon the installation, construction, reconstruction or repair, of any gas piping in the city and its gas service territory, shall be required to furnish the city clerk with satisfactory proof of coverage by a policy or policies of liability and property damage insurance, which insurance shall be in the following amounts: 
(1)  Bodily injury coverage—$100,000.00 per person/$300,000.00 each incident. 
(2)  $100,000.00 property damage. 
(b)  The type of liability and property damage insurance shall include coverage of completed operations so that coverage under such policy or policies will continue to be afforded to a particular operation even when completed, but the coverage shall be limited to liabilities and hazards directly attributable to the particular operation. 
(c)  Failure to have such liability and property damage insurance shall operate to void any license issued under the city gas code until such insurance coverage is in effect. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1024) 
Sec. 14-4. - Roof pitch. 
It is required that all principal buildings in all zoning districts within the city, with the exception of designated mobile home parks, shall have the following minimum roof pitch: 2 × 12. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 1, 3-4-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 413, §§ 1—5, adopted March 4, 2003, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as §§ 14-4—14-8 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 14-5. - Minimum building width. 
All principal buildings within every zoning district in the city, with the exception of designated mobile home parks, shall have a minimum building width of 18 feet. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 2, 3-4-03) 
Note— See editor's note at § 14-4. 
Sec. 14-6. - Modular housing foundation requirements. 
All modular homes within the city shall be placed on a permanent foundation which meets the requirements of the Building Codes adopted by the city in force at the applicable time. Additionally, all modular homes shall have a brick curtain wall, or a masonry curtain wall with a stucco exterior finish, unpierced except for the required ventilation, and access such that it encloses the area under the modular home to the ground level. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 3, 3-4-03) 
Note— See editor's note at § 14-4. 
Sec. 14-7. - HUD-approved homes. 
Only mobile homes, or manufactured homes to be used in the city as a modular home, which have been approved by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and which are in compliance with 24 CFR Part 3280 as presently existing or as hereinafter amended, shall be located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 4, 3-4-03) 
Note— See editor's note at § 14-4. 
Sec. 14-8. - Installation of pre-owned manufactured homes. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. 
(1)  Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the city limits of the City of Sylvania. 
(2)  Building inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the municipal building official or any of his or her assistants or designees; 
(3)  Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this section, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
(4)  Guarantee of condition bond means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by paragraphs a. and b. of subsection (1) of subsection (c) of this section reasonably portray or represents the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the city. 
(5)  Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
(6)  Jurisdiction means the areas within the city limits of the City of Sylvania, Georgia. 
(7)  Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U. S. C. Section 5401, et seq. 
(8)  Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
(b)  Conditions. All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U. S. C. Section 5401, et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
(c)  Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
(1)  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
a.  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by this Act; 
b.  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that home meets the minimum health and safety standards of subsection (d) of this section; 
c.  A $1,000.00 refundable guarantee of condition bond or $1,000.00 refundable cash deposit; and 
d.  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
(2)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(3)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this section have been met. 
(4)  Fee. A permit and inspection fee of $75.00 shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the city to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow-up inspection. The applicant shall be charged $25.00 for each additional follow-up inspection that may be necessary. 
(5)  Alternative inspection. At the request of the Applicant, the building inspector may, at his or her discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the city. 
(d)  Minimum health and safety standards. All pre-owned manufactured home shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(1)  HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U. S. c. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(2)  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(3)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(4)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checks upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(5)  Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Un-vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(6)  Electrical systems. Switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc. shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
(7)  Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(8)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(9)  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(10)  Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(3)  The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after 90 days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the 90 days or an extension has been issued in writing by the building inspector. 
(f)  Penalties. Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by a fine up to $1,000.00. Each day any violation under this section continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 464, § 1, 9-21-10) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 464, § 1, adopted September 21, 2010, repealed the former § 14-8, and enacted a new § 14-8 as set out herein. The former § 14-8 pertained to similar subject matter relocation of used mobile or modular homes and derived from Ord. No. 413, adopted March 4, 2003. 
Secs. 14-9—14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SATELLITE RECEIVING STATIONS 

Sec. 14-31. - Permitted subject to conditions. 
Dish-type satellite signal receiving stations (hereinafter referred to as "stations") subject to the regulations in this article may be located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 244, § 1, 9-4-84) 
Sec. 14-32. - Location. 
Stations shall be located in the yard rear as defined in the city's zoning rules and regulations. Provided however, in the event that a satellite receiving station at issue has a diameter of one meter or less, and such placement precludes reception of an acceptable quality signal, such satellite receiving station may be placed in an area other than the yard rear where an acceptable quality signal can be received, such placement to be approved by the design commission at a place and upon such conditions as the design commission may reasonably require so that such satellite receiving station is as compatible with the surrounding neighborhood, and is as aesthetically pleasing as reasonably possible. 
(Ord. No. 244, § 2, 9-4-84; Ord. No. 442, 3-6-07) 
Sec. 14-33. - Height; diameter. 
The height of the station shall not exceed 15 feet above the ground when the station is in a position perpendicular to the ground; and the maximum diameter of any dish antenna shall not exceed 12 feet. 
(Ord. No. 244, § 3, 9-4-84) 
Sec. 14-34. - Existing stations. 
This article shall not apply to stations in existence at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(Ord. No. 244, § 4, 9-4-84) 
Sec. 14-35. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply only to those areas within the city which are zoned R-1, R-2 and R-3 as defined by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 244, § 5, 9-4-84) 
Secs. 14-36—14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 407, §§ I—VIII, adopted August 6, 2002, did not specify manner of inclusion, hence inclusion as Ch. 14, Art. III is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 14-51. - Definitions. 
Air inflated structure means a structure whose shape is maintained by air pressure in cells or tubes forming all or a part of the enclosure of the usable area. Occupants of such a structure do not occupy the pressurized area used to support the structure. 
Air supported structure means a structure whose shape is maintained by air pressure and occupants of the structure are within the elevated pressure area. 
Membrane structure means a building or portion of a building incorporating an air-inflated, air-supported, tensioned-membrane structure; a membrane roof; or a membrane-covered rigid frame to protect habitable or usable space. 
Tensioned-membrane structure means a membrane structure incorporating a membrane and a structural support system such as arches, columns and cables, or beams wherein the stresses developed in the tensioned membrane interact with those in the structural support so that the entire assembly acts together to resist the applied loads. 
Tent means a temporary structure, the covering of which is made of pliable material that achieves its support by mechanical means such as beams, columns, poles, arches, rope, and/or cables. Tent might also include a temporary tensioned-membrane structure. 
(Ord. No. 407, § I, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 14-52. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to tents and membrane structures which have the potential to be used for a gathering together of 50 or more persons under or within such structure. 
(Ord. No. 407, § II, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 14-53. - Allowance temporary. 
Tents shall be allowed only on a temporary basis, and for no longer than 30 days. Membrane structures which are not a part of a permanent structure affixed to the realty upon which it is situated shall be allowed only on a temporary basis, and for no longer than 30 days (and for purposes of this article, shall be considered a temporary membrane structure). 
(Ord. No. 407, § III, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 14-54. - Structural requirements. 
(a)  Tents and temporary tensioned-membrane structures. 
(1)  All supporting members shall be of sufficient size and strength to support the structure. 
(2)  The poles and their supporting guys, stays, stakes, and fastenings shall be of sufficient strength and attachment to resist a minimum wind pressure of 20 lbf/ft (0.96 kPa) of projected area of the tent. 
(3)  Tents shall be adequately guyed, supported, and braced to withstand a minimum pressure or suction of 10 lbf/ft (0.48 kPa). 
(4)  Pull-down ropes (jump ropes) shall be provided on all poles. 
(b)  Air supported, air-inflated temporary membrane structures. 
(1)  Structural requirements. 
a.  Envelope design. The design, materials, and construction for the structural envelope shall conform to the requirements of this section. Membrane structures shall be designed by a licensed architect or engineer knowledgeable in this type of construction. 
b.  Material strength. Calculation of fabric stresses shall include consideration of inflation pressure; the radius of the structure; and wind, ice, snow and earthquake loads. The minimum design criteria for material strength shall comply with the requirements of ASI 77, Air Structures Design and Standards Manual. Minimum design criteria shall be for 80 mph (129 km/hr) wind conditions. More severe design loads, as specified in local building codes, shall be required as a result of local climatic conditions. All material characteristics shall be verified by an approved test method. Material strengths shall be certified by the manufacturer and verified by test date from an organization acceptable to the authority having jurisdiction. 
c.  Joint strength. All seams shall develop the full strength of the envelope material as specified in ASI 77, Air Structures Design and Standards Manual. 
(2)  Load distribution. 
a.  The envelope shall be patterned and constructed to minimize stress concentrations in crown areas, around openings, and where rigid components such as door frames, vent pipes, and structural members are attached to the envelope. 
b.  There shall be sufficient clearance between the envelope and rigid components to permit free movement under load. 
c.  Reinforced areas, such as around openings, shall provide a flexible but airtight seal. 
(3)  Pressurization (inflation) system. 
a.  The operating inflation pressure for the structure shall be adequate to withstand a wind velocity of 80 mph (129 km/hr). Pressurization for higher wind conditions shall be provided where required by local climatic conditions, as determined by local authorities. 
b.  The pressurization system shall consist of one or more operating blower units. The system shall include automatic control of auxiliary blower units to reliably maintain the required operating pressure. This equipment shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Blowers shall be powered by continuous-rated motors at the maximum power required. 
2.  Blowers shall have adequate personnel protection, such as inlet screens and belt guards. 
3.  Blower systems shall be weather protected. 
4.  Blower systems shall be equipped with backdraft check dampers. 
5.  There shall be no fewer than two blower units, each of which has adequate capacity to maintain full inflation pressure with normal leakage. 
6.  The blowers shall be designed to be incapable of overpressurization. 
7.  The auxiliary blower unit(s) shall operate automatically if there is any loss of internal pressure or if an operating blower unit becomes inoperative. 
8.  The design inflation pressure and the capacity of each blower system shall be certified by a professional engineer. 
(4)  Standby power system. 
a.  Design. A fully automatic standby power system shall be provided. The system shall be either an auxiliary engine generator set capable of running the blower system or a supplementary blower unit that is sized for one times the normal operating capacity and is powered by an internal combustion engine. 
b.  The standby power system shall be fully automatic to ensure continuous inflation in the event of any failure of the primary power. This system shall be capable of operating continuously for a minimum of four hours. 
c.  Certification. The sizing and capacity of the standby power system shall be certified by a professional engineer. 
(5)  Anchorage design. 
a.  Basic requirements. A positive anchorage system shall be provided to securely anchor the envelope to the ground or to the structure. 
b.  Specific requirements. Anchor loading shall be determined and verified by analytical data prepared by a professional engineer. The minimum requirements for anchorage designs shall be in accordance with the requirements of ASI 77, Air Structures Design and Standards Manual. 
c.  Accessory equipment. The design and use of accessory equipment for heating, air conditioning, lighting, and similar functions shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 10 and to approved recognized standards. 
(Ord. No. 407, § IV, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 14-55. - Flame resistance. 
(a)  Fabric. All fabric on tents, temporary tensioned-membrane structures, and air supported, air-inflated temporary membrane structures shall meet the requirements of the large-scale test contained in JFPA701, Standard Methods of Fire Tests For Flame-Resistant Textiles and Films (1995 Edition). 
(b)  Certificate. The city shall require a certificate or other evidence of approval by a laboratory of recognized standing or the report of tests made by other inspection authorities as evidence that the fabric materials have the required flame resistance. 
(Ord. No. 407, § V, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 14-56. - Permission and liability insurance. 
(a)  Permission. Any person or entity who erects a tent or temporary membrane structure on any property within the city shall first provide proof to the city in the form of written permission from each and every owner of the land upon which the tent or temporary membrane structure is to be erected, and shall include the duration for which such permission is granted, not to exceed 30 days. 
(b)  Premises liability insurance. Any person or entity which erects a tent or temporary membrane structure within the city shall first provide proof to the city that such person or entity has in effect a policy of premises liability insurance in the minimum amount of $500,000.00, covering bodily injury and property damage on the premises for the entire time that such tent or temporary membrane structure shall remain erected within the city. 
(Ord. No. 407, § VI, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 14-57. - Compliance with other ordinances. 
(a)  Compliance. Any person or entity erecting a tent or temporary membrane structure within the city shall comply with all other applicable ordinances and laws in effect. Without in anyway limiting the generality of the foregoing, such persons shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Section 8-3013-1, special use exceptions where the use sought on a temporary basis is one of the uses set forth in Section 8-3013-1.2. 
(2)  Section 30-81 and section 30-82 regarding noise and nuisances. 
(b)  Final approval. In the event the planning and design commission approves a special use exception for a tent or temporary membrane structure, the person or entity erecting such tent or temporary membrane structure shall first appear before the mayor and council of the city, and demonstrate compliance with this article and all applicable ordinances of the city. In the event the mayor and council, based upon evidence presented at such meeting, determines that such person or entity is in compliance with this article as well as all other applicable ordinances and laws, the mayor and council shall provide final approval. 
(Ord. No. 407, § VII, 8-6-02) 
Sec. 14-58. - Penalties. 
Any person, persons or entities violating the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $500.00, and imprisonment not exceeding six months. 
(Ord. No. 407, § VIII, 8-6-02) 
Secs. 14-59—14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HISTORIC PROPERTIES AND DISTRICTS 

Sec. 14-81. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people. 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business. 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law. 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same. 
The city council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the article. 
(Ord. No. 448, § I, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 485, 2-17-15) 
Sec. 14-82. - Definitions. 
Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features mean the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features mean all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the city council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 14-84(b). 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 14-84(c). 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or façade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenance features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure means a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern or organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. No. 448, § II, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 485, 2-17-15) 
Sec. 14-83. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Sylvania Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within the city government. The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(c)  Commission members—Number, appointment, terms and compensation. The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. To the extent available in the city, at least one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions. 
Except for the initial terms hereinafter set forth, members shall serve three-year terms, and any member may serve more than one term, if reappointed. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial terms shall be: One member for one year; two members for two years; and two members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)  Statement of commission's power. The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review application for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of façade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10.1—44-10.5). 
(7)  Conduct education programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary to appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties of historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program; 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the Commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent. 
(14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the national register of historic places; and 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commissions power to adopt rules and standards. The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in state statues and in the city charters. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. The Commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. No. 448, § III, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 485, 2-17-15) 
Sec. 14-84. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation. The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation or proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. contributing, non-contributing or historic, non-historic, vacant, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character of special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city, or in the absence of zoning, on an official map designated as a public record. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic district. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Non-contributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in subsection (b)(1); 
-OR- 
a.  Historic (more than 50 years old); 
b.  Non-historic (less than 50 years old, yet possessing architectural character); 
c.  Intrusion (structure less than 50 years old which do not contribute to the character of the district); 
d.  Vacant. 
(c)  Designation of a historic property; criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, the region or the state for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state or the region, or 
(4)  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts of property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts. A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties. A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district and describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and be kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Require public hearings. The commission or the city council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission much submit the report, required in subsection (a)(3), to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(6)  The city council actions on the commission's recommendations. Following receipt of the commission's recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States mail shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(8)  Notifications of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. No. 448, § IV, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 485, 2-17-15) 
Sec. 14-85. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans and documentation as may be required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearing on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. Commission action: The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
(1)  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features, and to the secretary of interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings. 
(2)  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
a.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
b.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
c.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
d.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
(3)  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, trees judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
a.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree or object. 
b.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree or object to the ambiance of a district. 
c.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
d.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
e.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and that the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
f.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree or object from collapse. 
g.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications, interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The commission and the city council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months, and is renewable. 
(l)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and/or all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(m)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection (h)(1), or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action, subsection (h)(2). Appeals for properties within the city shall be made to the city council. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the termination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the Superior Court of Screven County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction of the city ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 448, § V, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 485, 2-17-15) 
Sec. 14-86. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance of repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect. 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 14-87 and, at the direction of the city council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this article shall be constructed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 448, § VI, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 485, 2-17-15) 
Sec. 14-87. - Penalty provisions. 
Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for punishment of violations of validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 448, § VII, 1-20-09; Ord. No. 485, 2-17-15) 
Secs. 14-88—14-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSTRUCTION CODE ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 14-101. - Adoption. 
The administrative procedures set forth in this article are adopted for the enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction and in the city. 
(Ord. No. 459, 3-2-10) 
Sec. 14-102. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the state minimum standard codes for construction, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs. The state minimum standard codes for construction shall be referred to as "the construction codes" in this article. 
(Ord. No. 459, 3-2-10) 
Sec. 14-103. - Code remedial. 
(a)  Generally. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the build environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electric, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as "service systems." 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection not to be construed as warranty. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the county nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Ord. No. 459, 3-2-10) 
Sec. 14-104. - Scope of article. 
(a)  Applicability. 
(1)  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these construction codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(2)  Building. The provisions of the Standard Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(4)  Gas. The provisions of the Standard Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(5)  Mechanical. The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one-family and two-family dwellings. 
(6)  Plumbing. The provisions of the Standard Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewer system. 
(7)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(8)  Energy. The provisions of the CABO Model Energy Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and law air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(9)  CABO One and Two Family Dwelling. The provisions of the CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every one-family or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(10)  The Unsafe Building Abatement Code. The provisions of this code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing or the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(d)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. No. 459, 3-2-10) 
Sec. 14-105. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement. The enforcing officer shall be the building inspector of the city or his delegated representative who is given the authority to perform the enforcement functions under this article. At the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, the building inspection services had been delegated pursuant to contract between the City of Sylvania and Screven County, Georgia to the building inspector for Screven County, Georgia. The building inspector for the city is appointed under authority of section 8-3015-1. 
(b)  Enforcement under this article supplemental. It is the intent that the enforcement provisions contained in this article are in addition to and supplemental to the administration, enforcement and penalties set forth in section 8-3015-1 et seq. of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sylvania. This article shall govern as it relates to the enforcement of the minimum standard codes as set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 459, 3-2-10) 
Sec. 14-106. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Alterations, repairs, etc. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes provided with the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building inspector shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 459, 3-2-10) 
Sec. 14-107. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building inspector to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 459, 3-2-10) 
Sec. 14-108. - Building inspector; powers and duties. 
(a)  Enforcement; interpretation. The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provision of the construction codes. The building inspector is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building inspector may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect such building or premises or to perform any duty imposed upon the building inspector by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such building or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building inspector shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as provided in this section, to promptly permit entry therein by the building inspector for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building inspector, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building inspector shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building inspector may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building inspector may revoke a permit upon determination by the building inspection that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by or the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided that any such alternate has been reviewed by the building inspector. The building inspector shall approve any such alternate, provided that the building inspector finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building inspector shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 459, 3-2-10) 
Sec. 14-109. - Permits. 
(a)  Application. 
(1)  When required; exception. 
a.  In addition to any additional circumstances where a building permit is required under section 8-3015-2 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sylvania, any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building inspector and obtain the required permit for the work. 
b.  Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
1.  Any portable heating appliance; 
2.  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
3.  Any portable cooling unit; 
4.  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the construction codes; 
5.  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
6.  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
7.  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 w) or less. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided that such work is shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building inspector without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building inspector on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building inspector. 
(5)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building inspector for the application, provided that the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building inspector, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying date shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building inspector may require details, computations, stress diagrams and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and by the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professionals; exception. 
a.  The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to such drawings, specifications and accompanying data for the following: 
1.  All group A, E and I occupancies; 
2.  Buildings and structures three or more stories high; 
3.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 sq. m) or more in area or $100,000.00 or more in total cost. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
b.  Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building inspector may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building inspector may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
b.  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exists, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building inspector shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and al other pertinent laws of ordinances. 
(2)  Affidavits. The building inspector may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and is accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building inspector may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided that the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building inspector copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building inspector relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuance. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building inspector shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building inspector is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building inspector shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending the issuance of such permit, the building inspector may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet the provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building inspector for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where such building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate such building; and it shall be the duty of the building inspector to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in Chapter 22 of the Standard Building Code. 
(e)  Contractor responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before he is permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with his license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)  Conditions. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building inspector from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building inspector. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building inspector, are hazardous or complex, the building inspector shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, the architect or engineer shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building inspector written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. If such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building inspector. 
(3)  Plans. When the building inspector issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building inspector and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building inspector or his authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc. system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building inspector shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee shall be paid as required at the time of issuance of permit, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the city council which are on file with the building inspector. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building inspector, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building inspector. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building inspector may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufactures and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building inspector, he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building inspector may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (h)(6) of this section. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building inspector shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building inspector or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building inspector. 
(6)  Required inspections. The permit holder, his agent and the licensed contractor shall be jointly and severally responsible for ensuring that required inspections are called for before proceeding with construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder, his agent and the licensed contractor to provide access to and the means for conducting any inspections required by this Code. The building inspector or his designee, upon notification from the permit holder, his agent or the licensed contractor, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder, his agent or the licensed contractor of any violations to be corrected in order to comply with the construction code: 
a.  Buildings. 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected and before any backfill or concrete is poured. 
2.  Subfloor inspection. 
3.  Slab: After all forms, rebar, wire and water proofing and before concrete is poured. 
4.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts, and vents are complete and before work is covered. 
5.  Insulation inspection: After all insulation is installed and before it is covered. 
6.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed and before any backfill is put in place or concrete poured. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed and before any backfill is put in place or concrete poured. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all soil, waste and vent piping are complete and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed and before any backfill is put in place or concrete poured. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other concealed components are complete and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspections: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected and before concrete is poured. 
2.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
2.  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building inspector. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building inspector. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building inspector after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building inspector has been received. 
(i)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. Such certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building inspector. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
c.  Temporary or partial occupancy. A temporary or partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
d.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building inspector and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building inspector, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building inspector and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building inspector shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building inspector shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building inspector may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building inspector on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 459, 3-2-10) 
Sec. 14-110. - Tests. 
The building inspector may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 459, 3-2-10) 
Sec. 14-111. - Construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of three members. The mayor and council shall appoint the board. 
(b)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  Membership. The construction board of adjustment and appeals should consist of three members. Such board members should be composed of individuals with knowledge and experience in the construction codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(2)  Terms. The terms of office of the board member shall be a three-year term, staggered so no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any 12-month period. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(3)  Quorum and voting. A simple majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of the construction codes, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building inspector, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. 
(4)  Secretary of board. The building inspector shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (c) of this section, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building inspector and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(c)  Powers. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in subsection (d) of this section, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building inspector and consider variances of the construction codes. 
(d)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decision of the building inspector. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building inspector to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building inspector rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
b.  The provisions of the construction codes do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of the construction codes or any of the regulations under such codes have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Variances. The construction board of adjustment and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the construction codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or the construction codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the construction codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
d.  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
e.  The grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the construction codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(3)  Condition of variances. In granting the variance, the construction board of adjustment and appeals may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed, or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the construction codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the construction codes. 
(4)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building inspector renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building inspector. 
(5)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building inspector, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building inspector may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(e)  Rules and regulations. The board may establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after a notice of appeal has been received. 
(f)  Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building inspector, or varies the application of any provision of the construction codes, the building inspector shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building inspector for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject, however, to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 459, 3-2-10) 
Sec. 14-112. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or who shall fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 459, 3-2-10) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to levy license tax, § 2.409. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; cable communications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; offenses, ch. 50; signs, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 66; telecommunications towers and antennae, ch. 68; utilities, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 78. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization of cities to levy and collect taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-26. - Application. 
On or before January 1 of each year, every person who shall conduct or carry on any business, trade, profession or vocation within the corporate limits of the city must first, before engaging in this business, trade, profession or vocation, apply to the city clerk for a license and at the same time render to the city clerk the applicable license fee as hereinafter designated in this article. Each applicant for a city license shall disclose to the city clerk the type of business, trade, profession or vocation to be conducted; the locations thereof if more than one; the name and style thereof, and such other pertinent information as shall be necessary to carry out and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1001) 
Sec. 18-27. - Issuance. 
Upon receipt of the application of any person for a license to carry on any lawful business, trade, profession or vocation, not inconsistent with the laws of the United States, this state or the lawful ordinances of the city, and not contrary to or detrimental to the public health, morals and welfare of the citizens of the city, and when the application shall be accompanied by the prescribed fee and pertinent information required by this article, it shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue to this person a license for the conduct of the particular business, trade, profession or vocation to be carried on. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1002) 
Sec. 18-28. - Valid period. 
All licenses issued by the city clerk under the provisions of this article shall be valid from January 1 of the fiscal year when purchased and shall expire on December 31 of the same year. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1003) 
Sec. 18-29. - Display of licenses. 
All licenses issued under the provisions of this article must be prominently displayed in the place of business or office of the person to whom issued. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1005) 
Sec. 18-30. - Businesses having more than one location; multiple businesses at one location. 
All persons engaging in or carrying on any business, trade, profession or vocation at two or more disjoined locations shall be required to pay the applicable license fee, as hereinafter designated for each of the business locations or places. Any person who shall conduct more than one type of business, trade, profession or vocation at the same location or place of business shall be required to pay the applicable license fee for each business, trade, profession or vocation being conducted. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1006) 
Sec. 18-31. - Suspension; revocation. 
(a)  All licenses issued by the city clerk under the provisions of this article shall be subject to suspension by the mayor or revocation by the mayor and council upon the following terms and in the following manner: 
Upon information being furnished by any person that the holder of any license issued under the provisions of this article has, in connection with the business, trade, profession or vocation for which this license was issued, committed acts or is guilty of conduct contrary to the laws of the United States, the state, the city or is guilty of conduct contrary to the public health, morals, peace or welfare of the citizens of the city, it shall be the duty of the mayor to issue or cause to be issued a written notice, directed to the holder of the license, requiring the license holder to appear before the mayor and council and show cause why the license should not be revoked. The notice shall disclose the charges against the holder of the license and shall state the time, date and place of hearing, which hearing shall not be held less than five days nor more than 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice by the license holder. If, upon final hearing, the mayor and council shall, in accordance with the opinion they entertain as to the evidence and testimony submitted, believe that the license holder is guilty of the charges made, it shall be their duty to revoke the license of the person to whom it was issued or by whom it was held. 
(b)  The mayor may, if he shall deem it necessary for the protection or welfare of the people of the city, suspend the license of any person against whom charges have been made, pending final hearing on the issue of whether or not the license of this person should be revoked. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1008) 
Sec. 18-32. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person who shall conduct any business, trade, profession or vocation within the corporate limits of the city without obtaining a license and any person who shall fail to comply with or violate the several sections of this article shall be deemed guilty of disorderly conduct and upon each conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1011) 
Sec. 18-33. - Late payment of license fee. 
In addition to other penalties for the violation of this article, 20 percent of the license fee shall be added to this fee for each month that a business, trade, vocation or profession is carried on without a license. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1012) 
Sec. 18-34. - Transfer of license. 
A license issued under this article to any person may not be transferred to any other person doing business within the city, whether engaged in the same business or not. Should a person holding a valid business license issued hereunder change its place of business from one location to another, but continue to do the same business in the new location, and where such person maintains only the one place of business, then such license may be transferred from one place of business to another place of business. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1013) 
Secs. 18-35—18-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OCCUPATION TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 343, adopted Nov. 21, 1995, amended in its entirety Art. III (which had pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 337, adopted Dec. 9, 1994), §§ 18-45—18-75, to read as herein set out. Prior to the enactment of Ord. No. 343, Ord. No. 337, adopted Dec. 9, 1994, set out provisions which repealed the former Art. III, "License Fee Schedule." At the editor's discretion, the provisions of Ord. No. 337 were codified as a new Art. III. The former Art. III, §§ 18-56—18-58, derived from Code 1976, § 6-1009; Ord. No. 258, adopted Dec. 30, 1985; Ord. No. 271, adopted Feb. 17, 1987; Ord. No. 272, adopted Feb. 17, 1987; Ord. No. 282, adopted Nov. 17, 1987; Ord. No. 285, adopted Jan. 19, 1988; Ord. No. 286, adopted Feb. 16, 1988; Ord. No. 318, adopted Sept. 17, 1991; and Ord. No. 322, § I, adopted July 28, 1992. 

Sec. 18-45. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the city. 
For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the chief of police or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-46. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term Sylvania is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean Sylvania, Georgia; wherever the term city is used herein, it shall be construed to mean Sylvania, Georgia. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Employee means the following: 
a.  Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph b. of this subsection, "employee" means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I. R. S. W-2 but not a form I. R. S. 1099. 
b.  An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I. R. S. W-2. 
(2)  Full-time employee means an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly, and, in addition, the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sums shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents, and each full-time position equivalent shall also be considered a full-time employee for purposes of this article. Fractional equivalents shall be rounded down to the nearest whole. 
(3)  Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
(4)  Number of employees means: 
a.  For an occupation, profession, trade, business or calling operating and having a location within the city during the calendar year prior to the calendar year in which the tax is being levied, the number of full-time employees (as defined herein) employed on August 31st during the calendar year prior to the calendar year in which the tax is being levied. For an occupation, profession, trade, business or calling that has no business location in the city on August 31st during the calendar year prior to the year in which the tax is being levied, such occupation, profession, business or calling shall fall under subsection 18-2(5)b. hereof; 
b.  For an occupation, profession, trade, business or calling not operating and having a business location within the city during the calendar year prior to the calendar year in which the tax is being levied, the number of full-time employees (as defined herein) employed during the first three months of operation at a location within the city. 
(5)  Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business and enacted by a local government as a revenue-raising ordinance or resolution. 
(6)  Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the City of Sylvania acknowledging payment of the occupation tax. 
(7)  Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 75 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
(8)  Practitioners of professions and occupations are those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18), but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 404, §§ I, II, 9-4-01) 
Sec. 18-47. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  Generally. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: The number of employees of the business or practitioner at each business location within the city. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule; number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows: 

 
(c)  Restrictions. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 387, 1-5-99) 
Sec. 18-48. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-49. - Registration and occupation tax certificate. 
Each business shall provide information on a registration form provided by the city identifying the line or lines of business that the business conducts, the number of locations of the business, and the number of employees at each location. No business shall conduct any line of business without having that line of business, the number of locations of the business, and the number of employees at each location registered with the city clerk, and such information being noted by the city clerk on the registration form. The registration form shall be signed under penalties of perjury, and the registration form shall so indicate that it is being signed under penalties of perjury. Unless such business would be in violation of any state, federal, or local law, the city clerk shall issue an occupation tax certificate, which shall be displayed by the business in a conspicuous location. The issuance by the city clerk of an occupation tax certificate shall not be determinative for any purpose that such business is in compliance with federal, state and local law, and such registration is subject to suspension and revocation as provided for elsewhere in this article. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 426, § 1, 1-4-05) 
Sec. 18-50. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in Sylvania. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-51. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), paragraphs 1 through 18. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees. 
(2)  A fee of $200.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be made by January 10 of each year. If no such election is made, the occupation tax shall be based on number of employees. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-52. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-53. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-28. All other applicable businesses and occupations may be taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-54. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Such registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by April 1 of each year, be subject to a ten percent penalty for delinquency. On any new profession, trade, business or calling begun in the city in 1996 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business. Such new business shall estimate the number of full-time employees to be used in its business at its city location during its first three months of operation, and the occupation tax shall be paid on that basis prior to the commencement of business. The new business shall file an additional registration within 30 calendar days of its initial three months of operation with the city clerk indicating the actual number of full-time employees during its first three months of operation. At that time, the correct tax shall be calculated, and any additional tax or refund shall be due. Provided, however, for any new profession, trade, business or calling which commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax due for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. 
(b)  In the event of a delinquency in payment of the occupation tax at the times provided for herein, a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax owing shall be assessed by the city clerk. Such occupation tax and penalties shall be collected in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-55. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from such registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 75 percent or more of the entire proceeds from such business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-56. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the occupation tax certificate may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-57. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-58. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to file the necessary registration and to obtain an occupation tax certificate from the city clerk as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to file a registration and obtain an occupation tax certificate. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise file a registration and obtain an occupation tax certificate as herein provided before commencing business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation that are subject to this article without first having filed a registration and obtaining an occupation tax certificate, shall be subject to penalties provided for herein. The penalty for perjury on an occupation tax registration form shall be the same as for persons who fail to file a registration and obtain an occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 426, § 2, 1-4-05) 
Sec. 18-59. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax certificate shall be for the calendar year in which the occupation tax certificate was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate occupation tax certificate and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before April 1 of each year, and on April 1 each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the occupation tax certificate required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained such occupation tax certificate shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 18-60. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The occupation tax certificate herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain an occupation tax certificate shall, after such occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained such occupation tax certificate, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 404, § III, 9-4-01) 
Sec. 18-60. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 404, § IV, adopted September 4, 2001, repealed § 18-60 in its entirety, which pertained to penalty of article violation and derived from Ord. No. 343, adopted November 21, 1995. 
Sec. 18-61. - Chief of police; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The chief of police and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal/business inspectors with full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business tax ordinance for 1996 and succeeding years. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 404, § V, 9-4-01) 
Sec. 18-62. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. Title 46, Chapter 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-63. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
On any new profession, trade, business or calling begun in the city in 1996 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business. Such new business shall estimate the number of full-time employees on the registration form to be used in its business at its city location during its first three months of operation, and the occupation tax shall be paid on that basis prior to the commencement of business. The new business shall file an additional registration form within 30 calendar days of the end of its initial three months of operation with the city clerk indicating the actual average number of full-time employees during its first three months of operation. At that time, the correct tax shall be calculated, and any additional tax or refund shall be due. Provided, however, for any new profession, trade, business or calling which commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax due for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-64. - Inspections. 
The city clerk, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books and records of any business subject to the occupation tax, as well as the business premises of any such business, to insure compliance with this article. Failure to submit to an inspection during regular business hours, or to provide access to the books and records of the business within 48 hours of being requested, shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the occupation tax certificate. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city clerk at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of 125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount deficient will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreported tax is due. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-65. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the city clerk, upon any tax or installment of such tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of the tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for the tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for the tax, all as provided by law. The lien of such occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the chief of police of the city upon the property of defendant located in the jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charter of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-66. - Suspension; revocation. 
(a)  All occupation tax certificates issued by the city clerk under the provisions of this article shall be subject to suspension by the mayor and suspension or revocation by the mayor and council upon the following terms and in the following manner: Upon information being furnished by any person that the holder of any occupation tax certificate issued under the provisions of this article has, in connection with the business, trade, profession or vocation for which this occupation tax certificate was issued, committed acts or is guilty of conduct contrary to the laws of the United States, the state, the city or is guilty of conduct contrary to the public health, morals, peace or welfare of the citizens of the city, it shall be the duty of the mayor to issue or cause to be issued a written notice, directed to the holder of the license, requiring the license holder to appear before the mayor and council and show cause why the license should not be suspended or revoked. The notice shall disclose the charges against the holder of the certificate and shall state the time, date and place of hearing, which hearing shall not be held less than five days nor more than 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice by the certificate holder. If, upon final hearing, the mayor and council shall, in accordance with the opinion they entertain as to the evidence and testimony submitted, believe that the certificate holder is guilty of the charges made, it shall be their duty to suspend or revoke the certificate of the person to whom it was issued or by whom it was held. 
(b)  The mayor may, if he shall deem it necessary for the protection or welfare of the people of the city, suspend the occupation tax certificate of any person against whom charges have been made, pending final hearing on the issue of whether or not the occupation tax certificate of this person should be further suspended or revoked. Prior to any such suspension, the mayor shall hold an informal hearing with the holder of the occupation tax certificate to hear such holder's response to the charges and the proposed suspension. The mayor shall then make the decision regarding suspension pending final hearing. In the event of either suspension or revocation, such person shall immediately cease to conduct the business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, for which the occupation tax certificate was issued, or suffer the penalties set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-67. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-68. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-69. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk and chief of police to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-70. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-71. - Public hearing requirements. 
(a)  After April 11, 1995, the council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax. 
(b)  In any year when revenue from the occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year for the city, then council shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. Such hearing may be included in the public hearing portion of the city budget process. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-72. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority, or in any such subsequent resolution or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-73. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-74. - Severability. 
If any section, provision, or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-75. - Saving provision. 
Chapter 6 of this Code, sections 6-1 through 6-36, inclusive, as may be amended from time to time, shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-76. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 343, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 18-77. - Civil penalties. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, any court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of ordinances of the city may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax in an amount not to exceed $500.00, and said civil fine may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(Ord. No. 404, § VI, 9-4-01) 
Secs. 18-78—18-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS, ANTIQUES, AND OBJECTS D'ART[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Duties of purchasers of gold bullion, gold dust, etc., O.C.G.A. § 12-4-120 et seq.; junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1 et seq.; dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; dealers in used watches, O.C.G.A. § 43-49-1 et seq.; jeweler's lien for repairs, O.C.G.A. § 44-14-430 et seq. 

Sec. 18-81. - Compliance required. 
Any person who wishes to conduct a business within the corporate limits of the city for purposes of purchasing from individual citizens at large gold, silver, other precious metals, antiques, similar artifacts or objects d'art, shall comply with the requirements set out in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1014) 
Sec. 18-82. - Regular place of business. 
A person conducting a business under this article shall have a regular office or place of business, which shall be a permanent structure located within the corporate limits of the city, and either owned or leased by such person as shall conduct the business. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1014(A)) 
Sec. 18-83. - Records; inspection; copies furnished to chief of police. 
(a)  A person conducting a business under this article shall maintain complete records of each purchase made, to include the name of the seller; a description of the item or items purchased; describing same in detail; the date and time of the sale; and the price paid therefor. 
(b)  Such records shall be available for inspection by the city manager, city clerk, and chief of police of the city or their designated agents, at all times. 
(c)  Copies in quadruplicate of the information for the preceding seven calendar days shall be furnished to the chief of police on or before 4:00 p.m. of every Friday, when such person shall have had any transaction within the corporate limits during the preceding seven days. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1014(B)—(D)) 
Sec. 18-84. - Waiting period after purchase. 
Any item so purchased under this article must be retained in the same size, shape, configuration and design as it is in when purchased for a period of ten days after such purchase. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1014(E)) 
Sec. 18-85. - Violations; penalty. 
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 upon conviction. In addition, any complaint of violation shall be immediately investigated by the police department and should such investigation disclose probable cause for citation for violation of this article then this shall cause the immediate suspension of any business license issued hereunder and termination of such license upon conviction of such offense. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1014(F)) 
Secs. 18-86—18-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTRICAL CONTRACTORS' LICENSES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors, and utility contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-106. - Application. 
Any person doing any type of electrical work within the city must have a current electrical license issued by the city. Such electrical license shall be issued upon such individual presenting to the city clerk a valid license issued under the Georgia Electrical Contractors Act, which is sometimes also referred to as a state electrical card, together with such additional information as shall be reasonably required to establish that the person tendering such card is the same person whose name appears thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1081) 
Sec. 18-107. - Renewal. 
Any person who, on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, already has a license to do electrical work under any provision of the charter and Code of the city as same existed prior to the enactment of this article, shall be entitled to the issuance of a new license hereunder without the necessity of going through the procedure outlined in the Georgia Electrical Contractors Act. Such license, however, shall expire annually. Upon such annual expiration the license shall be renewed by application to the city clerk within 30 days of the expiration date, which application shall state that the applicant has held a city electrical license for the preceding year and shall be accompanied by such fee as shall be set from time to time by the mayor and council. Should such license not be renewed within 30 days of the annual expiration thereof, the holder of such expired license may obtain a new license only upon complying with the requirements of the Georgia Electrical Contractors Act, as well as paying whatever fee shall be set by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1082) 
Sec. 18-108. - Fee. 
The mayor and council shall from time to time establish the fee for the granting of a city electrical license. The amount of such fee shall be readily available to the public at the offices of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1083) 
Sec. 18-109. - Installation and disconnection of electric load management devices. 
(a)  Any electrical contractor licensed under this article to do business in the city: 
(1)  Shall not disconnect a load management device which is installed, connected and operating without giving prior notice to the city manager. 
(2)  Shall notify the city manager immediately upon discovering a load management device which is inoperative or disconnected. 
(3)  Shall notify the city manager of all new central air conditioning installations which are to be made at locations served with electrical power by the city, such notification to be prior to the installation so that the city manager can advise the property owner of the merits and benefits of installing a load management device. 
(b)  Failure to abide by the terms of this section may result in the suspension of a license granted under this article and shall also be considered a violation of this Code punishable as provided in section 1-12 upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 237, 12-6-83) 
Secs. 18-110—18-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PEDDLERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Disabled veterans and blind persons engaging in peddling, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; Transient Merchants Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 18-131. - Definition. 
For purposes of this article, the term "peddler" shall be defined as any person or entity which sells goods, wares or merchandise from a location which is not owned or rented by such person or entity or from a vehicle or structure which is not permanently affixed to real estate. 
(Ord. No. 264, § I, 6-17-86) 
Sec. 18-132. - Restrictions. 
No peddler may sell or display his goods, wares or merchandise on any street or sidewalk within the municipal boundaries of the city. Peddlers may sell and display their goods, wares or merchandise only upon private property with the permission of the property owner upon compliance with the other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 264, § II, 6-17-86) 
Sec. 18-133. - Licensing requirements. 
All peddlers shall be granted a business license by the city upon the payment of a license fee of $300.00 together with the applicant's providing written proof satisfactory to the city clerk that such applicant has permission from a private property owner to display and sell his goods, wares or merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 264, § III, 6-17-86) 
Sec. 18-134. - Exceptions. 
None of the provisions of this article shall extend to persons or entities selling agricultural products grown in the county. 
(Ord. No. 264, § IV, 6-17-86) 
Secs. 18-135—18-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 18-156. - Definition. 
A "yard sale" is defined as the sale or trading of used clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise on a lot utilized primarily for residential purposes. The term "yard sale" shall include garage sales, carport sales and similar types of sales or events. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 1, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-157. - Location. 
Yard sales may be held on a lot or parcel of land upon which there is situated a house, apartment or other structure which is utilized primarily for residential purposes. Yard sales are prohibited upon vacant lots and upon lots upon which there is situated a structure that is utilized primarily for any use other than residential purposes. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 2, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-158. - Permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a yard sale in the city without a permit. Any person who occupies a house, apartment or other structure in the city as his primary residence shall, upon request, be issued a permit by the city clerk or his designated representative to conduct a yard sale at the location of such house, apartment or residential structure. There shall be no fee charged for such permit. The permit shall contain the date of the yard sale, the duration of the permit, the address of the yard sale and the name or names of the permittees. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 3, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-159. - Additional permitted persons. 
The person or persons issued a permit under section 18-158 may designate additional permittees who are not occupants of the structure on the permitted premises as their primary residence. Such persons so designated shall be added as additional permittees on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 4, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-160. - Posting of permit. 
The holder or holders of a yard sale permit shall cause the permit to be conspicuously posted on the permitted premises at all times during which the yard sale is being conducted. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 5, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-161. - Restriction on goods sold. 
Only the sale or trading of used clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise that are actually owned by the permittee or permittees shall be allowed at the permitted yard sale location. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 6, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-162. - Number permitted. 
(a)  Per year. No person shall be permitted to conduct or participate in more than four yard sales per year. 
(b)  Per location. No particular location shall be permitted for more than four yard sales per year. 
(c)  Number of days. Any given yard sale shall not continue for a period exceeding two consecutive days. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 7, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-163. - Time, days of sale. 
No yard sale shall be conducted on Sunday, and shall be allowed only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 8, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-164. - Charitable and religious organizations. 
No charitable or religious organization shall conduct a yard sale without a permit. Organizations existing for charitable or religious purposes, and only those which have a regularly functioning organizational structure and regularly functioning board of directors, shall be issued a permit to conduct a yard sale only upon private property, and not upon the city streets or sidewalks. Such organizations shall not be restricted to residential property, but shall conduct such yard sale upon its own property, or upon private property with the written permission of the owner or lessee of such private property. Yard sales by charitable or religious organizations shall otherwise be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 9, 2-5-91) 
Sec. 18-165. - Penalty. 
Any person violating this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-12 upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 308, § 10, 2-5-91) 
Secs. 18-166—18-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BILLIARD ROOMS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 

Sec. 18-186. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The provisions of the 1976 Code set forth in section 10-4003 relating to pool halls is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 18-187—18-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 18-201. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult entertainment establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(b)  Findings. Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Minneapolis, Minnesota; Detroit, Michigan; Boston, Massachusetts; City of Marietta, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia; City of College Park, Georgia; Richmond County, Georgia; and City of Carrollton, Georgia; which experiences, we believe are relevant to the issues faced by the city, the mayor and city council take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the findings of the mayor and city council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood; increased expenditures for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order; increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior herein above described; and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude or partially nude conduct in establishments affects the public welfare; and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments that allow and/or encourage nudity. Based on these findings, this article is adopted to regulate certain types of businesses and to establish where such activity may or may not be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 1, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-202. - Definitions. 
As used herein, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Adult entertainment establishments shall include, without limitation, the following types of establishments, which shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or 20 percent or more of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult business means either: 
a.  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
b.  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(5)  Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(6)  Adult motion picture arcade any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(7)  Adult video store an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(8)  Bath house or adult massage parlor means a business or establishment in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, 
(9)  Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainment, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(10)  Encounter center or rap establishment any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
(11)  Escort bureau or introduction services any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
(12)  Lingerie modeling studio means a business or establishment whose primary business activity consists of live performers exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, 
(Ord. No. 410, § 2, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-203. - Definitions, general. 
Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same rituals and ceremonies; place where persons regularly assemble for worship; congregation; organization for religious purposes. 
Good moral character means a person is of good moral character according to this article if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor, for the purposes of this chapter, means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Person is defined as an individual, association, club, society, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity. 
Premises is defined as the building for which or upon which a license is issued hereunder and "premise" and "building" are further defined as a structure or edifice enclosing a space within its exterior walls, and covered with a roof or outside top covering of a building or connected or attached or joined with or by a wall, roof, walkway or breezeway. Any structure or structures of any nature that share a wall, roof, walkway or breezeway shall be considered a single premises and building for the purposes of this chapter. No building may be subdivided for the purpose of creating more than one premises for the purposes of this chapter. In addition, the word "premises" shall include the land and real estate as well as its appurtenances, including the entire parcel together with the boundaries thereof, upon which the licensed premises sits as well as the area of land surrounding said premises. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruction, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 3, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-204. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March 1 st of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer, a person under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight Monday through Saturday. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open on December 25th of each year or on Sunday. 
(g)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer, wine or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths foot candles per square foot. 
(o)  Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(p)  All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this chapter shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(q)  All adult entertainment establishments shall permit representatives of the police department or any other city official acting in their official capacity to inspect the premises as necessary to insure the business is complying with all provisions of this chapter. 
(r)  If any portion, or subparagraph, of this section of this article or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 4, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-205. - Certain activities prohibited. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or expose with less than a full opaque covering, any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area, or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(b)  No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall engage in, or be allowed to engage in, any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. §16-6-8. 
(d)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24, no adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on or off the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, loiter for the purpose of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this chapter shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 5, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-206. - License required-automatic forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city any adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter, without a license so to do. No adult entertainment establishment license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three (3) consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and/or sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 6, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-207. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid adult entertainment establishment license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this chapter, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 7, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-208. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 8, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-209. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 9, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-210. - Location (district requirements). 
No adult entertainment establishment or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, college campus, governmental building, library, civic center, children's day care facility, public park or neighborhood playground is located; 
(3)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other adult entertainment establishment is located; 
(4)  Within any zoning category other than the following categories: 
a.  Light Industrial District (I-1). 
b.  Heavy Industrial District (I-2). 
(6)  On a lot which contains less than 100 feet of road frontage. 
(7)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is located. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from the nearest part of the premises of the establishment, as defined herein, to the closest property lines of the parcel of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 10, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-211. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 21 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises of an adult entertainment establishment for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person works on a licensed premises, he/she shall file a notice with the chief of police of his/her intended employment on forms supplied by the police department that require the information set forth in provision (a) of this section. The city police deportment shall have 15 days to investigate the information required of the prospective employee. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the police department requires including fingerprinting by the department and consent to an NCIC and/or GCIC records check. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the chief of police shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the chief of police for a hearing. The decision of the chief of police after hearing may be appealed to the city council which will use the appeals procedure contained in this chapter. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of said license. Should any licensed employee of an adult entertainment establishment leave employment with said establishment for 60 or more days, that employee's license shall lapse automatically without any further action required. All adult entertainment establishments are required to notify the chief of police within five days of the termination, either voluntarily or otherwise, of any licensed employee of said adult entertainment establishments, giving the former employee's name, social security number, and date of termination. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, all independent contractors, except those who are licensed in a trade or profession which is not involved in serving or entertaining customers at adult entertainment establishments, shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 11, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-212. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk or her designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a non-refundable fee of $2,500.00 shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and regulation required by this chapter. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such regulatory fee has been paid. 
(b)  The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 12, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-213. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name, and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant(s); 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant(s), if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last 30 days; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and if a corporation, all shareholders holding five percent or more of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, county, state or territory under license has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment establishment or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of superior court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to a corporation shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and/or lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, directors, or any stockholders of five percent or more of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners, or any of the officers or stockholders controlling five percent or more of the outstanding shares of the corporation have been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and current annual report filed with the Georgia Secretary of State; 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the adult entertainment establishment license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A certified plat by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated in order to verify compliance with section 18-210 of this chapter. This provision may be waived if compliance can be readily determined. 
(21)  Such further information as may be required to review the applicant. 
(22)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 13, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-214. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, or a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the city clerk and produce proof that a non-refundable application fee has been paid; that the application containing the aforementioned and described information has been presented to the city clerk; and that all information contained therein is true and correct. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 14, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-215. - Application; investigation. 
The city clerk shall refer the application to the chief of police for investigation. The police department shall have up to 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation and after an investigative report by the chief of police is furnished to the city clerk, the city clerk shall place the application on the next city council agenda at least five days but not later than 15 days after receipt of the report. The mayor and city council may grant the license at that meeting if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant complies with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder controlling five percent or more of the corporation stock, or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitation for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which an adult entertainment establishment license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises is in compliance with those location restrictions as set out in section 18-210 of this chapter. 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state, or the United States; 
(Ord. No. 410, § 15, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-216. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment license provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes or special assessments duly imposed; 
(2)  Any person who is not of a good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding five percent or more of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership, association, or other entity, any of whose officers, partners, or members are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 16, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-217. - Licenses—Refusal; appeal. 
If the mayor and city council following investigation of the applicant, deem that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements set forth in this chapter, they shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within ten days of such notice, the city clerk shall notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied an adult entertainment establishment license may appeal such denial to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the receipt of notice from the city clerk of such denial. A hearing before the mayor and city council shall be scheduled within 45 days of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 17, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-218. - Same—Renewal. 
An adult entertainment establishment license may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the renewal application contains the same information required in the original application and that applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this chapter as they exist at the time the renewal application is filed. Applicants have no vested right to the renewal of said license. The renewal fee of $500.00 for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be based on an amount needed to defray the costs of regulating adult entertainment establishments and enforcement of this chapter. Renewal applications shall be due by November 1st of the calendar year prior to the year for which such license is requested. The adult entertainment establishment license shall be for a calendar year period or for a remainder of a calendar year if issued after January 1st of any calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 18, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-219. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale; transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner(s). An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 19, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-220. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location application and fee of $500.00 has been deposited with the city clerk and approval has been obtained from the mayor and city council. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this chapter have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the adult entertainment establishment license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 20, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-221. - Appeal—Procedure. 
The licensee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination by the city clerk, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal the action requested of the council, and the name and address of the applicant. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five days nor more than 30 days after receipt of the appeal for city council action. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 21, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-222. - Appeals—Council determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on city council's agenda, the city council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. 
The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 22, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-223. - City council hearing. 
Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefore, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 23, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-224. - Powers of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this chapter, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses an he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 24, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-225. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
The mayor and city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in bearings conducted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 25, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-226. - Hearing officer—Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date a hearing before the hearing officer is terminated, submit a written report to the mayor and city council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. 
(b)  A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city manager and chief of police, 
(c)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 26, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-227. - Hearing officer report—Action by city council. 
City council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If city council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this chapter; 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 27, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-228. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 per violation. In addition to such fine, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. Every day that such violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation punishable as stated above. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 28, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-229. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 29, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-230. - Revocation and appeal. 
The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license previously granted herein. In the event the chief of police seeks to suspend or to revoke an adult entertainment establishment license, he shall give written notification to the applicant of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the licensee at least five days prior to the notice of hearing. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(1)  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license in the event of any one or more of the following: 
a.  An applicant gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
b.  An applicant has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
c.  An applicant has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises, 
d.  An applicant has violated any provision of this adult entertainment chapter; 
e.  An applicant has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the state or the city regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter, and 
f.  An applicant fails to pay any fee, occupation or business license or tax, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this chapter or any other taxing ordinance or resolution of the city. 
(2)  In the event the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any adult entertainment establishment license hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the discretion of the chief of police. Provided, however, that the applicant shall be authorized to continue its business operations until that date of the appeal hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (3) of this section. No applicant may apply for an adult entertainment establishment license during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing conducted by the chief of police, the chief shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension or revocation, and the duration of either. 
(3)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the chief of police, the applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days from the date of the decision of the chief of police. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled by the city before the mayor and city council within 45 days after the date of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After hearing by the mayor and city council, city council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including upholding of the action of the chief of police or the imposition of such action as the mayor and city council may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. Appeals from the decision of the mayor and city council shall be in the form of a writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county filed within 30 days of the final action of the mayor and city council. In the event the applicant does not file an appeal from any decision of the chief of police, as provided herein, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 30, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-231. - Business or occupation tax. 
The adult entertainment establishment occupation tax shall be the amount stipulated in the business occupation tax provisions of the this Code. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 31, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-232. - Alcoholic beverages—Prohibitions. 
No person, association, partnership or corporation after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, beer, or wine, or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee licensed under this article. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 32, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-233. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 33, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-234. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premise shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 34, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-235. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his/her finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service of him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 35, 9-17-02) 
Sec. 18-236. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 410, § 36, 9-17-02) 
Secs. 18-237—18-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - ELECTRIC MEMBERSHIP CORPORATION FRANCHISE 

Sec. 18-250. - Grant of franchise to Planters EMC. 
The mayor and council of the City of Sylvania hereby ordains by the authority of same that the authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to Planters EMC, which is an electric membership corporation defined in O.C.G.A. Title 46, Chapter 3, Article 2, its successors, lessees and assigns (the "company"), subject to the terms and conditions set forth hereinafter for a period of 50 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city (the "government") within the present and future limits of the government as from time to time the company may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation, and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for light, heat, power and other purposes for which electric current may be or become useful or practicable for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as the company may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of the company, to ensure safe and efficient service. 
(Ord. No. 441, 3-6-07) 
Sec. 18-251. - Use of streets, alleys, etc., conditioned on payment of franchise fees. 
From and after the adoption of this article, the future use by Planters EMC of the streets, alleys, public places and other property of the government for the operation of the EMC's electric distribution systems and the grant of the requisite street franchise rights is expressly conditioned upon payment of franchise fees pursuant to this article, and continued use and occupancy of such government's property for said purpose without payment of such franchise fees shall be unlawful, and the government shall be entitled to enforce compliance with this article by appropriate proceeding at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 441, 3-6-07) 
Sec. 18-252. - Terms and conditions. 
The rights, permission and consents herein contained are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The company shall pay to the government: 
a.  On or before the first day of April, 2008, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to all of the company's customers served within the corporate limits of the government during the period beginning on the first day of April, 2007, through and including December 31, 2007, and 
b.  On or before the first day of April, 2009, and the same day of each year thereafter during the term of the franchise herein granted a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to all of the company's customers served within the corporate limits of the government during the preceding calendar year; 
provided, however, that in the event the government shall grant to any other electric utility the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those herein contained, including the payment provisions hereof. 
(2)  The company shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless the government from all damages to persons or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires or other apparatus, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom for which the city would otherwise be liable. 
(3)  The company shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires and other apparatus submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power by the city. 
(4)  The grant of the rights, permission and consents by the government to the company contained in this article are specifically conditioned upon the payment of all sums due the government in accordance with the rate, conditions and payment dates set forth in subsection (1), and failure by the company to timely pay the franchise fees required by said subsection (1) shall constitute a forfeiture of all rights granted by this chapter. From and after April 1, 2007, the company's continued use and occupancy of the streets, alleys and public places of the government for the aforesaid purposes shall evidence the company's acceptance of the franchise granted hereby and shall render the company liable for payment of all fees required by subsection (1). In the event of a forfeiture for failure to comply with such requirements, the company shall nevertheless remain liable for all sums accrued until such time as the streets are vacated due to such forfeiture. 
(Ord. No. 441, 3-6-07) 
Secs. 18-253—18-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FLEA MARKETS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 431, §§ 1—11, adopted September 20, 2005, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article XI, §§ 18-261—18-271 is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 18-261. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this article to: 
(1)  Serve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public through the regulation of flea markets; 
(2)  To establish a uniform set of rules and regulations which are fair and equitable; 
(3)  To provide economic development opportunities for small entrepreneurs in the city; 
(4)  To provide a variety of goods and services for sale; 
(5)  Promote stable vendors who will enrich the city's ambience and be assets to public security; 
(6)  Ensure that persons vending on private property have the permission of the property owner prior to providing goods and services to the public; 
(7)  Ensure that persons vending on private property do not impede on public vending spaces. 
(Ord. No. 431, § 1, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 18-262. - Definition of flea market. 
Flea market means any event at which two or more vendors offer merchandise for sale, and at which a fee is charged to vendors for the privilege of offering or displaying merchandise for sale or exchange, or at which a fee is charged to prospective buyers for admission to the area where merchandise is offered or displayed for sale or exchange. 
The term "flea market" shall not include and shall not apply to yard sales which are regulated at article VII. 
(Ord. No. 431, § 2, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 18-263. - C-2 zones only. 
Flea markets shall be permitted in C-2 zones only. 
(Ord. No. 431, § 3, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 18-264. - Conducted under covered area. 
All vending tables, booths and displays shall be operated within a covered or enclosed area, which area shall contain at a minimum a cement or concrete floor, and a shingle or metal roof having a minimum roof pitch of two × 12, which structure shall be subject to the design regulations set forth at appendix B, article 14. 
(Ord. No. 431, § 4, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 18-265. - Assistant vendors. 
No vendor shall have more than two assistant vendors. 
(Ord. No. 431, § 5, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 18-266. - Forty-eight consecutive hours. 
No vending tables, booths, displays or other vending apparatus shall be placed on the licensed premises for more than 48 consecutive hours. 
(Ord. No. 431, § 6, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 18-267. - Occupation tax certificate—Owner/operator. 
The flea market owner/operator (as applicable) shall at all times that the flea market is in operation prominently display a valid occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. No. 431, § 7, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 18-268. - Occupation tax certificate—Vendor. 
Each vendor shall at all times that such vendor is vending on the licensed premises prominently display a valid occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. No. 431, § 8, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 18-269. - Regulatory license fee. 
The flea market owner/operator (as applicable) shall, in addition to the occupation tax, pay an annual regulatory license fee in the amount of $75.00. 
(Ord. No. 431, § 9, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 18-270. - Restroom facilities. 
Each flea market shall have available to vendors and patrons permanent adequate restroom facilities at the licensed premises, which facilities shall comply with the applicable standard codes set forth at section 14-1. 
(Ord. No. 431, § 10, 9-20-05) 
Sec. 18-271. - Special use exception. 
Flea markets shall be subject to the special use exceptions set forth in appendix B, section 8-3013-1. With respect to the offstreet parking regulations contained in said article, flea markets shall have three spaces for each vendor permitted to sell or display merchandise on the licensed premises at any given time. 
(Ord. No. 431, § 11, 9-20-05) 
Chapter 22 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Franchises, § 5.108. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; telecommunications towers and antennae, ch. 68. 
State Law reference— Avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2; municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION FRANCHISE 

Sec. 22-26. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the "City of Sylvania cable franchise ordinance." Within this document it shall also be referred to as "this franchise." 
(Ord. No. 284, § 2, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-27. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
Cable service territory means the area within the city limits. 
Channel means a frequency band which is capable of carrying either one video signal, a number of audio, digital or other nonvideo signals, or some combination of such signals. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Grantee means TeleScripps Cable Company and its successors, transferees or assignees. 
Gross revenues means subscriber monthly fees derived by grantee from the supplying of cable television service to subscribers within the cable service area, excluding taxes, fees, or other assessments collected for governmental authorities, and bad debt expense. 
Owner means a person with a legal or equitable interest in ownership of real property. 
Person means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, individual or organization, governmental organization, or any natural person. 
Public property means any real property owned by the city other than a street. 
Street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, alley, court, sidewalk, boulevard, parkway, drive or any easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by city, or dedicated for use by the city, use by the general public, or use compatible with cable system operations. 
Subscriber means any person or entity who subscribes to a service provided by grantee by means of the system. 
System means a system of antennas, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities, used for distributing video programming to home subscribers, and/or producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing, or distributing audio, video, digital or other forms of electrical signals to subscribers. 
System outage means one or more subscribers that are not receiving signals that meet the technical standards set forth in part 76 subpart k of the FCC rules. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 3, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-28. - Statement of intent and purpose; authority. 
(a)  Grantee has been operating a cable communications system pursuant to the city community antenna television franchise ordinance. The city intends, by the adoption of this franchise, to authorize the continued operation of a system commencing January 1, 1988, in accordance with the terms of this franchise. Such a development can contribute significantly to the communication needs and interests of the city and many individuals, associations and institutions. 
(b)  Insofar as the state had delegated to city the authority to grant a franchise for cable system operation within the city's territorial boundaries, the city hereby exercises its authority to grant a nonexclusive franchise permitting the operation of a cable system within the city. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 1, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-29. - Grant of authority. 
(a)  Grant of franchise. For the purpose of constructing, operating and maintaining a system in the cable service territory, grantee may erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along the streets and public property such lines, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, pedestals, attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and appropriate to the operation of the system. 
(b)  Franchise term. The initial term of this franchise shall commence upon January 1, 1988, and shall expire 12 years from that date, unless renewed as herein provided. 
(c)  Conditions of franchise. The rights afforded to grantee by subsections (a) and (b) of this section are granted subject to the conditions hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 4, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-30. - Design and service provisions. 
(a)  System design. Grantee's system has been constructed to include a residential network with a capacity for 35 channels. 
(b)  Technical requirements. Grantee shall maintain a system that meets at least the technical standards applied by the FCC. Procedures for testing the technical capacity of the system shall conform with the technical and testing standards applied to cable systems by the FCC. 
(c)  Level of services. Grantee shall provide a basic service consisting of at least 22 channels of video programming or other programming services. Grantee's current basic program services are set forth in Exhibit A at the end of this article, but grantee retains the right to add, delete, replace and/or rearrange programming during the franchise term, as long as it maintains the broad categories of video programming and other services reflected in Exhibit A at the end of this article. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 5, 12-15-87; Ord. No. 330, § 4, 11-2-93) 
Sec. 22-31. - Construction. 
(a)  Service area. All residential areas within the cable service territory will be provided with access to service from the system, provided that all such permission as may be required from the owner of the property is reasonably available, and that service to multiple dwelling units need be provided only on terms acceptable to grantee. In new housing districts, areas with occupancy densities of more than 35 homes per mile which are contiguous to the system will be provided with access to service to the extent service is economically feasible and technically possible. In areas with less than 35 homes per mile, service shall be offered in conformance with grantee's service extension policies. 
(b)  Construction requirements. Grantor shall make use of existing city-owned poles and other facilities available to grantee in accordance with the utility pole attachment ordinance as set forth in section 74-74 et seq. Any fee arising from such utility pole attachment ordinance shall be paid semiannually, shall be due within 90 days after the close of the preceding six-month period, and shall be calculated based upon the existing utility pole attachment ordinance with the city until the expiration or amendment of that ordinance. For the remaining term of the franchise the pole attachment fee shall be increased to no more than $4.00 per pole, and the utility pole attachment ordinance, as amended or renewed, shall specify this established rate. Grantee may erect its own poles and install its own conduit, with approval of the city, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. All poles and conduit installed within the cable service territory shall be made available for attachment or use by grantee, at just and reasonable rates applied to public utilities under the formula presently established in 47 U.S.C. § 224. In case of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, the developer or property owner shall give grantee reasonable notice of not less than 30 days prior to such construction or development, and of the particular date on which open trenching will be available for grantee's installation of conduit, pedestals and/or vaults, and laterals to be provided at grantee's expense. Grantee shall also provide specifications as needed for trenching. Cost of trenching and easements required to bring service to the development shall be borne by the developer or property owner. The city shall actively assist grantee to the fullest extent necessary in obtaining reasonable joint pole or conduit use agreements from the owners of existing poles or conduits. 
(c)  Construction codes and permits. Grantee shall obtain any required permits from city before commencing construction involving the opening or disturbance of any street or public property. The city shall cooperate with the grantee and use its best efforts in granting any permits required. Grantee shall arrange its lines, cables and other appurtenances, on any street or public property, in such a manner as to cause no unreasonable interference with the usual and customary use of the street or public property of any person. 
(d)  Repair of streets and public property. Any and all streets or public property which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation or maintenance of the system shall be promptly repaired by grantee, at its expense and to the condition prior to the disturbance or damage. 
(e)  Trimming of trees. Grantee may cut or trim trees and vegetation interfering with National Electrical Safety Code and other clearance requirements. 
(f)  Movement of facilities. If it is necessary temporarily to move or remove any of grantee's wires, cables, poles or other facilities placed pursuant to this franchise, in order lawfully to move a large object, vehicle, building or other structure over the streets of the city, upon 15 days' prior written notice by the city to grantee, grantee shall move at the expense of the person requesting the temporary removal such of his facilities as may be required to facilitate such movements. Grantee shall make reasonable efforts to effect such temporary renewal prior to the expiration of 15 days. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 6, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-32. - Operation and maintenance. 
(a)  Records and reports. 
(1)  On request of the city, copies of all public filings made with federal, state and local agencies with respect to the system will be made available to the city. After reasonable (72 hours') advance notice, the city shall have access during business hours, 9:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday to such grantee plans, contracts, engineering and other records related to the grantee's performance of its franchise obligations. A semiannual summary report showing gross revenues received by the grantee during the preceding six-month period and such other information as the city may require in support thereof shall be forwarded to the city by the grantee on or before the due date of the franchise fee provided for above. 
(2)  After reasonable (72 hours') advance notice, the city shall have the right to inspect the nonconfidential records of grantee relating to service within the cable service territory; provided that, in order to protect the privacy of subscribers, inspection of complaint records shall not include records of individual complaints unless the city agrees in advance to maintain in confidence personally identifiable information pertaining to individual subscribers. 
(b)  Maintenance and complaints. 
(1)  Grantee shall maintain a local office or agent which shall be open during all usual business hours, and shall have a publicly listed, tollfree telephone number, so as to receive subscriber complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments. 
(2)  Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause. 
(c)  Safety. 
(1)  Grantee shall at all times take reasonable precautions for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage or injury to the public, to employees of grantee, and to public or private property. 
(2)  All lines, equipment, and facilities within the cable service territory shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition and in good order and repair. 
(d)  Subscriber practices. 
(1)  The company shall investigate and resolve all subscriber complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters expeditiously and in accordance with the following procedure: 
a.  The company shall, during normal working hours, have qualified personnel available to investigate and resolve subscriber complaints. 
b.  Upon notification of a service complaint, the company shall dispatch a qualified employee to investigate the complaint and adjust, repair or replace company equipment as necessary to resolve the complaint. The company shall not be responsible for malfunctions in any subscriber's radio or television receiver. 
c.  Complaints shall be investigated and resolved within two working days of notification, except that system outages or systemwide problems must be investigated and resolved within 24 hours, and the company shall maintain a service log in which entries of each complaint, the date received, the nature of the complaint, and the means by which it was resolved shall be kept. 
d.  The company shall maintain a local business office or agent for performing services and meeting all requirements provided here. 
(2)  If any subscriber fails to pay a properly due monthly subscriber fee, or any other properly due fee or charge, grantee may disconnect the subscriber's service outlet, provided, however, that such disconnection shall not be effectuated until after ten days after the due date of the delinquent fee or charge, or upon delivery to subscriber of written notice of the intent to disconnect. After the first disconnection, upon payment in full of the delinquent fee or charge and the payment of a reconnection charge, grantee shall reinstate the subscriber's cable service. 
(3)  Grantee shall not deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate against subscribers on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex or age. Grantee shall adhere to the equal employment opportunity requirements of the FCC. 
(4)  The grantee may conduct promotional campaigns in which rates are discounted or waived. 
(5)  The grantee may make special contracts for nonprofit charitable, educational, governmental and religious organizations. 
(6)  Grantee may offer bulk rate discounts for multiple unit dwellings, hotels, motels and similar institutions. 
(7)  Grantee shall comply with applicable federal law regarding the protection of the privacy of subscribers, including the collection, sale and release of information relating to subscribers. 
(8)  Grantee shall have authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be necessary or appropriate to enable grantee to operate under this franchise. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 7, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-33. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  Franchise fee amount. Grantee shall pay to the city an annual franchise fee in the amount of five percent of its gross revenues. Franchise fees may be passed through to subscribers as a line item on subscriber invoices, and otherwise. In addition, grantee shall pay to the city an annual license tax of $500.00. 
(b)  Payment period. Payments due the city under this section shall be made semiannually and shall be due within 30 days after the close of the preceding six-month period. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 8, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-34. - Insurance; indemnity. 
(a)  Indemnity. Grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city at all times during the term of this franchise from and against all claims for injury or damages to persons or property, both real and personal, caused by the construction, erection, operation, and maintenance of the system. 
(b)  Insurance. The grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise a policy of liability insurance covering the grantee, in amounts no less than the following, and with such deductibles as are ordinary and reasonable in keeping with industry standards. Comprehensive general liability: combined single limit of not less than $100,000.00 per person in any one claim; $300,000.00 as to any one accident or occurrence; and not less than $100,000.00 for property damage as to any one accident or occurrence. The company shall also maintain in full force and effect throughout the duration of this franchise sufficient workmen's compensation insurance coverage to adequately and fully protect its agents and employees as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 9, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-35. - Remedies. 
(a)  Notice of violation. The city shall provide grantee with a detailed written notice of any franchise violation upon which it proposes to take action, and a 90-day period within which grantee may demonstrate that a violation does not exist or to cure an alleged violation; or, if the violation cannot be corrected in 90 days, to submit a plan satisfactory to the city to correct the violation. 
(b)  Default. If grantee fails to disprove or correct the violation within 90 days or, in the case of a violation which cannot be corrected in 90 days and grantee has timely submitted a satisfactory plan, if grantee fails to implement the plan, the city may declare the grantee in default, which declaration must be in writing. If the city declares grantee in default, the city shall have the right to institute legal proceedings to collect damages from the date of declaration of default, or to exercise any other rights and remedies afforded to the city in law or equity; provided, however, that the city may institute revocation proceedings against grantee only after declaration of default, pursuant to subsection (d) of this section and only on the grounds set forth therein. 
(c)  Hearing available to grantee. Within 15 days after receipt of a written declaration of default from the city, grantee may request, in writing, a hearing before the city or its agent, in a full public proceeding affording due process. Such hearing shall be held within 30 days of the receipt of the request therefor and a decision rendered within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. Any decision shall be in writing and shall be based upon written findings of fact. 
(d)  Revocation. The city may revoke the franchise only after declaration of default and only for defaults by grantee arising from the following circumstances: 
(1)  Material misrepresentation by grantee to the city in information required to be provided under the franchise. 
(2)  Grantee becomes insolvent or is adjudged a bankrupt. 
(3)  Grantee willfully violates any material provision of this franchise. Without in any way limiting the generality of the foregoing, grantee shall be deemed to have willfully violated a material provision of this franchise upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events: 
a.  Grantee ceases to provide the broad categories of video programming services represented by the services set forth as follows: 
1.  Local broadcast signals including major networks (e.g., WSAV, WJBF, WJCL, WTDC, WRDW, WAGT). 
2.  Public affairs programming (e.g., CNN, Weather Channel, Headline News, C-SPAN). 
3.  Sports (e.g., ESPN). 
4.  Premium movies and entertainment (e.g., HBO, Nashville, Cinemax). 
5.  Children's programming (e.g., Disney, Nickelodeon). 
6.  Distant broadcast signals (e.g., WTBS). 
b.  Grantee fails to provide video signals that comply with the FCC technical standards in part 76 subpart K of the FCC rules. This provision applies regardless of the number of subscribers to the system. 
c.  Grantee fails to investigate and resolve subscriber complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and similar matters within two working days of notification, except that system outages or systemwide problems must be investigated and resolved within 24 hours of notification. However, such violations shall be deemed willful only upon grantee's failure to investigate and resolve the problems referenced above within the applicable timeframes on three instances within any 30-day period, or on 30 percent of grantee's service calls within any 30-day period, whichever is greater. Failure to resolve complaints regarding quality of service equipment malfunctions, and similar matters associated with equipment not owned by grantee, and such complaints caused by improper use or operation of grantee's equipment by subscribers, or by a subscriber's failure to reasonably cooperate, shall not be deemed a violation under this section. Grantee shall maintain a service log in which entries of each complaint, the date received, the nature of the complaint, and the means by which it was resolved, shall be kept. 
(e)  Procedures governing revocation. 
(1)  The city shall give written notice to the grantee of its intent to revoke the franchise and the lawful grounds therefor. Grantee shall have 90 days from such notice to object, in writing, and to state its reasons for such objection. If the city has not received a response satisfactory to it, it may then proceed to place its request for termination of the franchise at a city council meeting. The city shall cause to be served upon the grantee, at least ten days prior to the time and place of such meeting, a written notice of this intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the meeting, notice of which shall be published by the city at least once, ten days before such meeting in one newspaper of general circulation within the city. 
(2)  At the designated meeting, the city council shall give the grantee an opportunity to state its position on the matter, after which it shall determine whether or not the franchise shall be revoked. Grantee may appeal such determination to the circuit court of the county, which shall have the power to review the decision of the city council de novo and to modify or reverse such decision, as justice may require. Such appeal to the circuit court must be taken within 30 days of the issuance of the determination of the city council. Appeals from the decision of the circuit court shall be in accordance with state law and rules of procedure. 
(3)  The city council may, at its sole discretion, take any other lawful action which it deems appropriate to enforce the city's rights under the franchise in lieu of revocation of the franchise. 
(f)  Unauthorized operations. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or to carry on the business of distributing to any persons in the cable service territory any television signals or radio signals by means of a system unless a franchise therefor has first been obtained, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(g)  Conditions of access. In addition to the provisions of section 22-29, no person who owns or controls any residential multiple dwelling unit, trailer park, condominium or apartment complex, or subdivision shall interfere with the right of any tenant or lawful resident thereof to receive service from the grantee nor demand or accept payment of any fee, charge or thing of value from grantee or any tenant or resident in exchange for giving such tenant or resident access to service from the grantee; provided, however, that an owner may receive reasonable reimbursement for direct adverse economic impact of such access, if any, based upon evidence of the diminution of investment-backed expectations, the impairment of the premises' usefulness, the amount of space occupied by the facilities of the system, the prior use, if any, of the space, the continued physical availability of space on the premises for installation of alternative modes of television program reception or delivery, the difference in fair market value of the premises resulting from the installation of system facilities and other reasonable, nonspeculative factors excluding the hold-up value resulting from a landlord's monopoly control of such access. The aforesaid economic impact shall be rebuttably presumed to be a one-time charge of $1.00 per dwelling unit. Any controversy or dispute over the reasonableness of reimbursement shall be submitted for resolution by arbitration in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 10, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-36. - Variance and renewal. 
(a)  Variance. Applications for a variance to this franchise, to accommodate a significant change in circumstances, to prevent unreasonable hardship to grantee, or to permit technical variations which will satisfy the purpose of this franchise, may be made by the grantee to the city. The city shall review the application within 14 calendar days, or earliest meeting of the board, and shall issue a report of the findings of the city and shall act on a request within 30 days. If grantee cannot reach agreement with the city on the variance within such time, it may resort to the procedure of section 22-35(e) for resolution of the dispute. 
(b)  Franchise renewal. 
(1)  This franchise may be renewed for an additional ten years if: 
a.  The grantee has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law; 
b.  The quality of the grantee's service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing practices, but without regard to the mix, quality, or level of cable services or other services provided over the system has been reasonable in light of community needs; 
c.  The grantee has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment set forth in the grantee's proposal; and 
d.  The grantee's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. The city may not declare grantee's proposal unreasonable and deny renewal, nor may community needs be established, on the basis of facilities, equipment or services which another party has indicated it is willing to provide. 
(2)  In any renewal proceeding, the grantee shall be afforded adequate notice and the grantee and the city, or its designee, shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to introduce evidence to require the production of evidence, and to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any such proceeding. 
(3)  A proceeding under this subsection (b) shall be completed within 12 months of its commencement, within which time the city shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal for renewal based upon the record of such proceeding, and transmit a copy of such decision to the grantee. Such decision shall state the reasons therefor. 
(4)  Any denial of a proposal for renewal shall be based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to the factors described in subsection (b)(1), pursuant to the record of the proceeding under subsection (b)(1). The city may not base a denial of renewal on a failure to substantially comply with the material terms of the franchise under subsection (b)(1) or on events considered under subsection (b)(1) unless the city has provided grantee notice and the opportunity to cure, or in any case in which city has waived its right to object, or has effectively acquiesced. 
(5)  Grantee expressly reserves its rights of appeal under federal and state law. In addition to such rights, this franchise shall remain in effect at all times during which a renewal proceeding or appeal remains pending. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b)(1) through (5) of this section, grantee may submit a proposal for the renewal of franchise, and the city may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, grant or deny such proposal at any time (including after proceedings pursuant to this section have commenced). The denial of a renewal pursuant to this subsection (b) shall not affect action on a renewal proposal that is submitted in accordance with subsections (b)(1) through (5). 
(7)  The city may not, upon the expiration of this franchise, or otherwise, acquire an ownership interest in the system, or require a sale of the system to any other person, unless the city or such other person acquires the ownership interest at not less than fair market value for the system as a going concern. 
(8)  Grantee shall pay to the city a $2,500.00 application fee upon the renewal of grantee's franchise. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 11, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-37. - Severability. 
If any law, ordinance, regulation or court decision shall render any provision of this franchise invalid, the remaining provisions of the franchise shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 12.01, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-38. - Force majeure. 
Prevention or delay of any performance under this franchise due to circumstances beyond the control of grantee or city, unforeseen circumstances, or acts of God, shall not be deemed noncompliance with or a violation of this franchise. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 12.02, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-39. - Nonexclusive agreement. 
This franchise is nonexclusive. The city reserves the right to award additional franchises; provided, however, that the city shall not authorize or permit a cable television system to operate within the city on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome to such operator than those applied to grantee pursuant to this franchise; and provided, that if city authorizes or permits another cable television system to operate within the city, it shall do so on condition that such cable television system indemnify and hold harmless the grantee from and against all costs and expenses incurred in strengthening poles, replacing poles, rearranging attachments, placing underground facilities, and all other costs including those of grantee, city and utilities, incident to inspections, makeready, and construction of an additional cable television system in the franchise area; and provided, further, that grantee shall be designated a third party beneficiary of such conditions as are incorporated into the authorization(s) granted to another cable television system. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 12.03, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-40. - Article constitutes entire agreement; amendments, supplements, etc. 
This franchise and all attachments hereto represent the entire understanding and agreement between the parties hereto with respect to the subject matter hereof; supersedes all prior oral negotiations between the parties; and can be amended, supplemented, modified or changed only by an agreement in writing which makes specific reference to this franchise or the appropriate attachment and which is signed by the party against whom enforcement of any such amendment, supplement, modification or change is sought. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 12.04, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-41. - Laws governing. 
This franchise shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the state and applicable federal law. 
(Ord. No. 284, § 12.05, 12-15-87) 
Sec. 22-42. - Compliance with FCC rate regulations. 
(a)  The city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise. 
(b)  In connection with such regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties by holding an informal public hearing after providing notice of such hearing in the legal organ of Screven County, Georgia, at least five days before any such hearing. 
(c)  The city manager, or his designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
(Ord. No. 330, §§ 1—3, 11-2-93) 
EXHIBIT A 

 
* PREMIUM PAY CHANNELS 
Chapter 26 - CEMETERIES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; permit for disturbing burial place in land development, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; preservation and protection of abandoned or unmaintained cemeteries, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6.1. 

Sec. 26-1. - Damaging shrubs; disturbing animal life. 
No person shall gather flowers, either wild or cultivated; or break trees, shrubs or plants; or disturb birds or other animal life in the cemetery. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3001) 
Sec. 26-2. - Signs or notices. 
No signs or notices or advertisements of any kind shall be allowed in the cemetery unless placed by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3002) 
Sec. 26-3. - Disclaimer for loss or damage. 
(a)  The city shall not be liable and distinctly disclaims all responsibility, for the loss or damage of property or rights of lot owners arising from causes beyond its control, and especially from damage caused by the elements, an act of God, common enemy, thieves, vandals, strikers, malicious mischiefmakers, explosions, unavoidable accidents, invasions, insurrections, riots or order of any military or civil authority, whether the damage is direct or collateral. 
(b)  While the city will exercise all possible care to protect raised lettering, carving or ornaments on any memorial or other structure on any lot, it disclaims any responsibility and shall not be liable for any damage or injury thereto. 
(Code 1976, §§ 4-3003, 4-3025) 
Sec. 26-4. - Grading; landscape work; improvements. 
(a)  All grading, landscape work and improvements of any kind, and care of lots, shall be done, and all trees and shrubs moved and herbage of any kind shall be planted, trimmed, cut or removed, only by the city. 
(b)  Permanent planting of grasses, shrubs, flowers, etc., are made by the city and further plantings may be permitted only at the discretion of the mayor and council. 
(c)  The whole cemetery is to be landscaped, and to keep it uniform it is necessary that all plantings shall be under the control of the city including the following additional care: 
(1)  Removal of rubbish when necessary. 
(2)  Raking and cutting of grasses. 
(3)  Trimming of trees and shrubbery. 
(4)  Other care that the city may deem necessary. 
(d)  The ownership of rights of interment in lots does not convey any right to do planting, etc., without the express approval of the proper officials of the city. 
(e)  The city retains control and supervision of all lots that are sold in these sections. 
(f)  The city retains the right to enter upon any lot and prohibit, modify or remove any structure, object, improvement or adornment on this lot, which may have been placed thereon, and which may be considered objectionable or injurious to the lot, adjoining lots or the cemetery in general. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3031) 
Sec. 26-5. - Removal of dead cut flowers and potted plants. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to remove all cut flowers and potted plants that may be dead or otherwise objectionable. 
(b)  The city will hold such flowers or potted plants or the containers for two weeks after their removal, using ordinary care and diligence for their protection and safety, but assumes no further liability in connection therewith. 
(c)  Owners must call for such flowers or potted plants within this specified time. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3032) 
Sec. 26-6. - Reservation of rights by city. 
(a)  The right to enlarge, reduce, replan or change the boundaries or grading of the cemetery, or of the section or sections, from time to time, including the right to modify and change the locations of or remove or regrade the roads, drives and walks, or any part thereof, is hereby expressly reserved. 
(b)  The right to lay, maintain, operate or alter, or change pipelines and gutters for sprinkling systems, drainage, etc., is also expressly reserved as well as is the right to use the land for cemetery purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3033) 
Sec. 26-7. - Sale of lots. 
(a)  Only two cemetery lots will be sold to any one person. 
(b)  In the event of the sale of either lot before it is used, it must be first offered to the city at a price not exceeding the original purchase price plus two percent per annum as interest on the money so invested. 
(c)  If the city refuses the lot, it may be sold to an individual on the same basis as above, and at no greater price. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3004) 
Sec. 26-8. - Location of lots on plat. 
The location of any lots referred to in this chapter in the restricted section of the cemetery may be found by reference to a plat on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3005) 
Sec. 26-9. - Request for grave opening—In writing; required information. 
Prior to a grave being opened within the city the lot owner or licensed undertaker shall make a request in writing to the city clerk authorizing the grave to be opened, which request in writing shall give the name, age, sex, date of deceased and location of the grave. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3011; Ord. No. 293, § 2, 8-15-89) 
Sec. 26-10. - Same—Grant of request. 
The city clerk shall grant any request to open a grave provided that all rules, regulations, laws, statutes and ordinances of the state, the county and the city have been complied with. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3011; Ord. No. 293, § 3, 8-15-89) 
Sec. 26-11. - Vaults. 
All persons burying deceased persons within the city shall utilize a concrete or steel vault of sufficient length and sufficient width to completely encompass the casket or other container in which the deceased person is placed for burial. 
(Ord. No. 293, § 4, 8-15-89) 
Sec. 26-12. - Depth of grave. 
All persons burying deceased persons within the city shall ensure that the grave is dug to a sufficient depth so that the uppermost portion of the vault is at least one foot below the surface of the ground. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3023; Ord. No. 293, § 5, 8-15-89) 
Sec. 26-13. - Family memorials. 
(a)  Only one central or family memorial shall be allowed on a family cemetery lot. 
(b)  The memorial shall be placed on the rear of the lot facing the drive, with a two-foot clearance between the base of the memorial and the back property line of the lot. 
(c)  The height of the memorial shall not exceed five feet from the ground. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3021) 
Sec. 26-14. - Horizontal markers. 
If a horizontal marker is used on a grave, only material consisting of stone, marble or bronze may be used, and the top shall be placed flush with the finished grade of the surrounding ground. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3022) 
Sec. 26-15. - Prohibited enclosures and walks. 
(a)  No coping, curbing, fencing, hedging, grave mounds, borders or enclosures of any kind shall be allowed around any cemetery lot. 
(b)  No walks of bricks, cinders, tile, stone, marble or terracotta, sand, cement, gravel or wood shall be allowed on any lot. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to remove enclosures and walks if so erected, planted or placed. 
(Code 1976, § 4-3024) 
Sec. 26-16. - Penalty. 
All violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in section 1-12 upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 293, § 6, 8-15-89) 
Chapter 30 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; offenses, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Nuisances, § 10.101 et seq. 
State Law reference— Abatement of nuisances generally, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 395, adopted April 4, 2000, repealed division 1, §§ 30-26—30-30, and enacted new provisions as set out herein. The former division 1 pertained to weed and vegetation growth—notice to cut or remove, same—cutting or removal by city, prohibited businesses, abatement, abandoning refrigerators and iceboxes, and derived from Code 1976, §§ 10-2001, 10-2002, 10-2007, 10-3001, and 10-3003. 

Sec. 30-26. - Conditions constituting nuisance. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances when any one of them endangers the health, welfare or good order of the community: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation, or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises, which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewerage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limiting the foregoing, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trees, and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent such activities; 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(11)  All rubbish, litter, or debris, including but not limited to combustible and noncombustible waste materials, garbage, wood, coal, coke, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery, and the residue from burning such items that may endanger the health, welfare, good order, or beauty of the community; 
(12)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof on private property, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
(13)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Ord. No. 395, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 30-27. - Complaint of nuisance. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the police department, which shall investigate and may place the complaint on the municipal court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The municipal court, after at least five days' notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon, and upon finding that a nuisance does exist shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of, or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the judge shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)  Animal control officers, building and license inspectors, health inspectors, public works inspectors, and the fire prevention bureau of the fire department of the city may also receive complaints, investigate the same and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
(Ord. No. 395, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 30-28. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the judge, that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police, in such case, shall keep a record of the expenses and cost of abating such nuisance and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues and/or city taxes. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 395, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 30-29. - Mayor may abate nuisance per se. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. No. 395, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 30-30. - Noisome odors prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any owner or individual in control of any property within the boundaries of the city to: 
(1)  Allow the accumulation of animal body wastes; 
(2)  Boil offal, bone, fat, tallow; 
(3)  Manufacture glue, varnish or oil; 
(4)  Make lamp black, turpentine or tar; 
(5)  Distill alcoholic spirits; 
(6)  Render or dry out dead animals; or 
(7)  Conduct any other activity, business or trade not specifically enumerated in this Code whereby noisome stenches and odors arise, or noxious gases are generated or circulated within the city. 
(Ord. No. 395, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 30-31. - Maintaining nuisance unlawful. 
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain a nuisance. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. Violators of this article shall be punished in the manner provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 395, 4-4-00) 
DIVISION 2. - WEEDS AND DEBRIS 

Sec. 30-32. - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this section shall have the following meanings: 
Building means any structure that encloses a space used for sheltering any occupancy. 
Debris, for purposes of this division, shall include residue from the burning of wood, coal, or other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, rubber, leather, fallen, broken or destroyed trees or tree limbs or other materials or objects not a part of the land constituting a health or safety hazard. 
Lot, for purposes of this division, shall mean one (1) of several contiguous parcels of land making up a block, each of which are measured and set apart for individual or private use or occupancy. 
Unoccupied, for purposes of this division, shall mean any lot of land upon which no residential or commercial building currently exists. 
Weeds shall be defined as all objectionable growth, including weeds and grasses which serve as a breeding place for mosquitoes and other unhealthy or undesirable insects, or as a refuge for snakes, rats or other rodents, or that create a fire or traffic hazard or provide a hiding place for persons, and is 18 inches or more in height. Provided, however, that flowers, shrubbery, trees and landscaping shall not be included in this definition. 
(Ord. No. 395, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 30-33. - Weed, debris; prohibition; exception. 
It shall be unlawful for the occupant of any occupied lot of land or premises in the city, or the owner of any unoccupied lot of land or premises in the city, or any agent or representative of such owner or occupant, to permit or maintain on such lot the growth thereon of objectionable weeds or the accumulation of debris as defined in this division, which distracts from the community aesthetics, and endangers the public health, safety or welfare. Provided, however, that these provisions shall not apply to that part of any lot of land located more than 100 feet from any building on an occupied lot. Provided further, that the provisions of this section and remedies hereinafter provided therefore are cumulative to and in addition to the provisions set forth in sections 50-20 and 50-21. 
(Ord. No. 395, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 30-34. - Notice of violations. 
(a)  When any objectionable weeds or an accumulation of debris are being permitted or maintained on any lot of land or premises in the city in violation of section 30-33 of this division, it shall be the duty of the public works director, or his designee, to notify in writing the occupant of such lot, or the owner thereof, if it is unoccupied, or their agents or representatives, stating that in the opinion of the official, the conditions existing upon the property constitute a nuisance, and setting forth the actions to be taken to eliminate the objectionable conditions, and requesting that the conditions be eliminated within ten days. The notice shall further state that unless the objectionable conditions are voluntarily removed within the specified time, it will be the duty of the official to cause a summons to issue requiring the party notified to appear in the municipal court to have there determined whether the conditions existing constitute a nuisance and should be abated. 
(b)  Where the owner of unoccupied land violates the provisions hereof and the owner is a nonresident of the city, with no agent or representative in the city, and such owner cannot be served with notice or summons so as to subject him to the jurisdiction of the municipal court, the notifying official shall notify the owner by certified or registered mail, directing that the objectionable weeds or accumulation of debris on the lot be cut and removed within a specified time period so as to comply with the provisions of this Code. The notice shall further state that if the objectionable growth or accumulation is not eliminated within the specified time period, the official shall cause a summons to be issued requiring the owner to appear in the municipal court to have there determined whether the existing conditions constitute a nuisance and should be abated. Such notice or summons shall be sent certified or registered mail. 
(c)  When the owner of an unoccupied lot cannot be located by the city official after due diligence, the official shall cause such notice or summons to be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a news publication of general distribution in the city, setting forth the nature of the complaint, the date of the municipal court trial, and the place of said trial, and shall further be in the form prescribed in section 30-35 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 395, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 30-35. - Complaint, trial, order, failure to comply, assessment, collection. 
(a)  When it becomes necessary to summons an owner or occupant of lands subject to the provisions of this division, said summons shall be in the form of a written complaint setting forth, particularly, the nature and location of the nuisance and the name of the person complained against and requiring him to show cause why the nuisance complained of should not be abated. At the trial of each such case in the municipal court, the court shall hear evidence as to the facts, and pass such order as is just. If the court determines that the conditions constitute a nuisance, the order shall specify the time within which the nuisance must be abated. The failure of the owner or occupant to comply with the order to abate the nuisance shall constitute an offense and shall subject the person to prosecution and penalties as provided for in section 1-12 of this Code, as follows: 
(1)  Fines, not to exceed $500.00; 
(2)  Work on the streets or public works, not to exceed 60 days; 
(3)  Imprisonment, not to exceed six months; or 
(4)  Any or all of these penalties in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(b)  If the owner of occupant fails to comply with the provisions of the order, the public works director shall cause the nuisance to be abated and the objectionable conditions to be removed from the property and shall assess the costs associated with said removal and charge all costs thereof to the owner or the person in possession. Said costs shall constitute a lien against the property, and any city official may cause an execution to issue, and said execution may be levied, and the property sold in the manner now provided for the levy and collection of executions issued by the city as provided in Charter section 2.411, and the proceedings and provisions for filing of an affidavit of illegality by the defendant in execution, as well as the proceedings for filing of a claim to the property levied upon by a third person, shall in all respects be similar to the proceedings and provisions of law applicable to the levy of executions as provided in Charter section 2.411. Alternatively, said lien may be levied upon, execution issued, and property sold in the same manner provided for tax executions for municipalities as set forth in the Official Code of Georgia, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 395, 4-4-00) 
Secs. 30-36—30-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 434, art. I, adopted September 7, 2006, amended division 3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, division 3 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 275, §§ I—XI, adopted April 7, 1987. 
State Law reference— Power of municipalities to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 

Sec. 30-41. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2, as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, chapter 2; and any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2, after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means a act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. title 16, chapter 13, article 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act". 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Sylvania. 
Municipality means the City of Sylvania, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record, 
Interested party means: 
(1)  The "owner;" 
(2)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(3)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(4)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; and 
(5)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the municipality or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court; provided, however, "interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected. 
Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures, or use of private property within the city. 
Public officer means the city manager, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this article, and any officer or employee of the city to whom he delegates such authority. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 434, art. I, 9-7-06) 
Sec. 30-42. - Duty of owners of real property and structures thereon. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or private property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such laws and ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or use property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 434, art. I, 9-7-06) 
Sec. 30-43. - Complaint in rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. Such officer shall be guided in his investigation by documenting conditions, which include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation or disrepair by failure to conform to applicable codes and ordinances; 
(4)  Structural defects which render the structure unsafe for human habitation or occupancy; and 
(5)  Uncleanliness. 
(b)  If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall file a complaint in rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in Screven County at the time of filing the complaint in the municipal court. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, chapter 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, within the time period set forth in the order, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(d)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(e)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(f)  The lien provided for in subsection (e) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in Screven County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (a). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall, within 90 days of the completion of repairs, demolition or closure, forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A., title 48, chapter 4, article 5; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply; provided, further, that redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. The tax commissioner may initiate enforcement of liens imposed under this section at any time following receipt of the final determination of costs from the public officer. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(h)  The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the municipality whose ordinance is being enforced. The tax commissioner may retain an amount equal to the cost of administering collection of the lien. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(i)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(j)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. 434, art. I, 9-7-06) 
Sec. 30-44. - Powers of city manager or his designee. 
In carrying out his duties pursuant to this article, the city manager or his designee to whom his authority is assigned shall, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him by the Charter and other ordinances of the city, be empowered to: 
(1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this article. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists. 
(2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants, and attorneys. 
(3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 434, art. I, 9-7-06) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 434, art. I, adopted September 7, 2006, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (a)—(d). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (1)—(4). 
Sec. 30-45. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. 
(a)  Complaints shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each interested party if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by article to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the county or municipality whose ordinance is being enforced; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 48, chapter 4, article 5; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any interested party is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event the interested party is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such interested party has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any interested party is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any interested party cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this Code section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c), and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on every interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 434, art. I, 9-7-06) 
Secs. 30-46—30-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SALVAGE YARDS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Junk or metal dealers records, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-350 et seq.; purchase and resale of used motor vehicles and used parts, O.C.G.A. § 40-4-40 et seq.; junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 43-22-1; Used Motor Vehicle Dismantlers, Rebuilders and Salvage Dealers Registration Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-48-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-61. - Salvage yards. 
(a)  Responsibility for administration. This section shall be administered by the chief of police. 
(b)  Prohibition. No person shall place, abandon, leave, keep or store, or suffer or permit the placement, abandonment, leaving, keeping or storage of nonfunctioning motor vehicles, appliances, machinery, equipment or parts thereof, out-of-doors upon any public or private land within the city. 
(c)  Notice of violation. Whenever it shall appear to the chief of police that this section is being violated he shall, in writing, notify the owner or tenant in possession of the land on which the violation exists to abate this violation by removing the material or materials to a conforming location, or into an enclosed garage, barn or other building within ten days of the notice. 
(d)  Appeal. A person receiving notice of violation of this section may within 30 days appeal the decision to the mayor and council stating such reasons as to his lack of compliance with the section and its administration. 
(e)  Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 upon conviction. Each day this violation exists within 14 days after receipt of notice of violation shall be considered a separate offense of violation of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2003) 
Secs. 30-62—30-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REGISTRATION OF VACANT REAL PROPERTY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 484, adopted December 2, 2014, repealed the former division 5, §§ 30-71—30-73, and enacted a new division 5 as set out herein. The former division 5 pertained to vacant buildings and derived from Ord. No. 450, adopted February 3, 2009. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 

Sec. 30-71. - Definitions. 
The following terms used or referred to in this Code shall have the respective meanings: 
Agent shall mean an individual with a place of business in this state at which he or she is authorized to accept inquiries, notices and service of process on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner. 
Building inspector shall mean the duly appointed building inspector of the City of Sylvania. 
Foreclosed real property shall mean improved or unimproved real property held pursuant to a judicial or non-judicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, deed to secure debt, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor. 
Owner shall mean any person or persons having any individual, joint or common title or interest in real property defined by the laws of the State of Georgia as a legal or equitable estate or interest. 
Registration shall mean the filing of a registration statement with the building inspector. 
Registration statement shall mean the form(s) required to be filed pursuant to this division. 
Registry shall mean the official record, electronic or otherwise, of registration of structures required by this division. 
Residential rental property shall mean a dwelling lawfully occupied as a residence pursuant to a lease instrument by one or more tenants. A dwelling which is vacant, as defined herein, as opposed to occupied, shall be subject to registration notwithstanding the owner's intent to lease such dwelling on a future date. 
Street address shall mean the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. 
Vacant real property shall mean real property that is either: (1) intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least 60 days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past 60 days; or (2) is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. Such term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. 
(Ord. No. 484, 12-2-14) 
Sec. 30-72. - Registration. 
(a)  Duty to register. It shall be the affirmative duty of each owner of real property to file a complete registration statement with the building inspector upon such property becoming vacant real property within the meaning of this ordinance. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the filing of a registration statement of vacant real property shall not be required by this division within 90 days of such real property's transfer; 
(1)  Pursuant to a deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure; 
(2)  To the first subsequent transferee after the vacant real property has been acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-17-160 or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
After 90 days from either transfer, it shall be the affirmative duty of each owner of vacant real property to file a complete registration statement with the office of code enforcement. 
(c)  Exemption for foreclosed real property. Notwithstanding section 70-72(a) and (b), when any vacant real property is acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-4-160 or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure and; 
(1)  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure contains the information specified in paragraphs (1) through (5) of section 70-73(a); 
(2)  The deed is filed with the clerk of superior court within 60 days of the transfer; and 
(3)  Proof of the following is provided to the building inspector: 
a.  A filing date stamp or a receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
b.  The entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure, the transferee shall not be required to register such foreclosed real property pursuant to section 70-72 of this division or the payment of any administrative fees pursuant to section 70-74 of this division. 
(d)  Penalties for failure to register or to update. Any owner that fails to register or to update the information specified in section 70-73 shall be in violation of this division and shall be fined in the amount of $1,000.00 per vacant real property. The Sylvania Municipal Court may reduce the fine to $100.00 per vacant real property if he or she finds that registration or update, as the case may be, occurred within five business days of service of summons. 
(Ord. No. 484, 12-2-14) 
Sec. 30-73. - Registration statement. 
(a)  Registration statement. Each registrant shall be required to file with the building inspector only the following information, utilizing the form promulgated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
(1)  The real property owner'(s) name, the street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number and e-mail address; 
(2)  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number and e-mail address; 
(3)  The real property's street address and tax parcel number; 
(4)  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(b)  Updated registration statement. The owner shall notify the building inspector, within 30 days, of any change in the information provided in the registration statement and regardless of whether the information provided was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure, by filing an updated registration statement. There shall be no fee for the filing of an updated registration statement. 
(Ord. No. 484, 12-2-14) 
Sec. 30-74. - Registration fee. 
At the time of the filing of the registration statement, the owner shall pay a registration fee in the amount of $100.00 for each vacant real property. No registration statement shall be deemed filed unless the fee has been paid. For a parcel of land containing two or more buildings under common ownership, only one registration statement and one fee shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 484, 12-2-14) 
Sec. 30-75. - Electronic registration. 
The building inspector is authorized (but not required) to administer the provisions of this article pursuant to an electronic and/or web-based registry system for the registration of structures subject to this division. If such electronic and/or web-based registry system is not established by the building inspector, the required filings shall be on paper. If such electronic and/or web-based registry system is established, such filings may be accomplished utilizing either that method or the paper filing method. 
(Ord. No. 484, 12-2-14) 
Sec. 30-76. - Removal from registry. 
A vacant real property owner, or the agent of such owner, may apply to remove such vacant real property from the registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes vacant real property. Application for removal from the registry shall be accompanied by corroborating documentation that the real property no longer constitutes vacant real property. Corroborating documentation need not, and shall not, include the names or other personal information of any tenant(s). The building inspector shall grant or deny such application within 30 days and in the case of denial shall provide notice to the property owner. If the building inspector does not grant or deny the application for removal from the registry within 30 days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 484, 12-2-14) 
Sec. 30-77. - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building inspector may appeal from such decision to the City of Sylvania Municipal Court, by filing with the clerk of said court a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after decision of the building inspector is rendered. 
(Ord. No. 484, 12-2-14) 
Secs. 30-78—30-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 30-81. - Certain acts deemed unlawful noise. 
The following acts are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of the provisions of this article; this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place, except as a danger warning, the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of this signaling device and the sounding of this device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity, the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of this signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, musical instruments, phonographs, etc. Using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which this machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of this set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this subsection. 
(3)  Sound trucks. Sound trucks or other devices or mediums for amplifying sound operated or permitted to be operated within the city for advertising purposes or to attract the attention of the public, where the sound therefrom is transmitted from, to, in or over any public thoroughfare, park or other public place. This subsection shall not prohibit the use of sound amplification for dissemination of religious or political messages, or information concerning civic, recreational and other matters of general public interest; provided prior permission has been obtained from the chief of police, who is hereby authorized, directed and empowered to make and enforce reasonable conditions as to the time, place, volume of sound, etc. 
(4)  Dropping or throwing objects. The unnecessary dropping or throwing of objects on or against the ground, pavement, concrete walk or other object so as to create loud or unnecessary clanging, grating, rattling or other noise. 
(5)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any person in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any person in the vicinity. 
(6)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(7)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of city officials. 
(8)  Exhausts. Discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(9)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(10)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. Creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle, or opening and destruction of bales, crates and containers. 
(11)  Construction or repairing of buildings. Erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days, or less, while the emergency continues. If the building inspector shall determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any part in interest, he may grant permission for this work to be done between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(12)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. Creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to a school, institution of learning, church or court while in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of this institution or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients therein; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed in these streets indicating the proximity of a school, hospital, church or court. 
(13)  Hawkers, peddlers, etc. Shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(14)  Noises to attract attention. Use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creating of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(15)  Transportation of metal rails, etc. Transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of these streets or other public place. 
(16)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc. Operation, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other machine or equipment, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(17)  Blowers, power fans, engines. Operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the blower or fan is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden this noise. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2004) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10. 
Sec. 30-82. - Prohibited. 
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2005) 
Sec. 30-83. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not be construed to prohibit music upon streets or sidewalks by brass bands or other bands, nor to prohibit religious organizations from beating drums in the course of their religious services. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2006) 
Secs. 30-84—30-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 457, adopted February 16, 2010, repealed the former article IV, §§ 30-106—30-115, and enacted a new article IV as set out herein. The former article IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 421, adopted January 20, 2004. 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-106. - Title. 
This article will be known as "City of Sylvania Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 457, § I, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 30-107. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with and no less stringent than, those practice contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in it natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Ogeechee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 30-109(c) of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 30-108(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part segment is constructed and stabilized print to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area on land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic an inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Ogeechee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 457, § II, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 30-108. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. 12-4-72, "the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
5.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production a livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
6.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of section 30-109(c) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices. 
7.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
8.  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
9.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
10.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
11.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 457, § III, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 30-109. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance codified in this article and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act." As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act" for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections 30-109(c)(15) and (16), in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left it sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any Local Issuing Authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 457, § IV 2-16-10) 
Sec. 30-110. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Local Issuing Authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Sylvania without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 30-109(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-17(9) or O.C.G.A. 12-7-17(10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 30-109(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. the local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 30-109(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 30-109(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the erosion and sedimentation act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 457, § V, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 30-111. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city manager, or his designee, will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to repair certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county of municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 457, § VI, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 30-112. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturber activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 30-110(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 457, § VII, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 30-113. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 457, § VII, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 30-114. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Screven County. 
(Ord. No. 457, § IX, 2-16-10) 
Sec. 30-115. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 1 st day of March, 2010. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act of the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 457, § I, 2-16-10) 
Secs. 30-116—30-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 462, adopted May 4, 2010, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, §§ 30-131—30-134, 30-141—30-148, 30-161—30-163, 30-176—30-180, 30-191, 30-201, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 424, adopted September 7, 2004 

DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 30-131. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council of the City of Sylvania, Georgia, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 1(§ A), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-132. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Sylvania, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 1(§ B), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-133. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 1(§ C), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-134. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 1(§ D), 5-4-10) 
Secs. 30-135—30-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 30-141. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Sylvania, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 2(§ A), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-142. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated July 22, 2010 with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated July 22, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Screven County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. None. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Sylvania City Hall, 104 South Main Street, Sylvania, Georgia, 30467. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 2(§ B), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-143. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 2(§ C), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-144. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 2(§ D), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-145. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 2(§ E), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-146. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 2(§ F), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-147. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Sylvania or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 2(§ G), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-148. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Sylvania from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 2(§ H), 5-4-10) 
Secs. 30-149—30-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 30-161. - Designation of article administrator. 
The city manager or his designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 3(§ A), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-162. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the city manager, or his designee, on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsection 30-177(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The city manager, or his designee, shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 3(§ B), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-163. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the city manager, or his designee, shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 30-142, then the city manager, or his designee, shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 30-162(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsection 30-162(2). 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the city manager, or his designee, shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 30-162(1)c and subsection 30-177(2) or 30-179(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city manager, or his designee, shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city manager, or his designee, and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 3(§ C), 5-4-10) 
Secs. 30-164—30-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 30-176. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be un unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, (including ductwork) all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 4(§ A), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-177. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 30-176(4). 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 130-163(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See subsection 30-176(6) above.) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 30-177(3)a.—c. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 30-142, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection 30-177(4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 4(§ B), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-178. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 30-142, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 30-142, then the city manager, or his designee, shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (subsections (2) and (3)) shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 30-176(4). 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The city manager, or his designee, shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 4(§ C), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-179. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 30-142, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with section 30-142. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 4(§ D), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-180. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 30-142 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 30-176(4). 
The city manager, or his designee, shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 30-162(1)c and 30-162(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 4(§ E), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-181. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 4(§ F), 5-4-10) 
Sec. 30-182. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 4(§ G), 5-4-10) 
Secs. 30-183—30-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 30-191. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The zoning board of adjustment as established by the city shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city manager, or his designee, in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of adjustment may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Screven County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the zoning board of adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The city manager, or his designee, shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the zoning board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 5, 5-4-10) 
Secs. 30-192—30-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 30-201. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "New Construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the city manager's, or his designee's, interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 30-142. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1—A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1—A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1—V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commended before September 27, 1985 [the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before April 9, 1976 [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structured for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 27, 1985 [the effective date of the initial FIRM], and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after April 9, 1976 [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after April 9, 1976 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) for a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 462, Art. 6, 5-4-10) 
Secs. 30-202—30-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR WATERING[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 467, adopted December 21, 2010, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 30-150—30-154. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 30-211—30-214. 

Sec. 30-211. - Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 467, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 30-212. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)  The city manager, or his designee, shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The city manager, or his designee, may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 467, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 30-213. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the ordinance from which this article is derived are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 467, 12-21-10) 
Sec. 30-214. - Effective date. 
The ordinance from which this article is derived shall be effective upon adoption. 
(Ord. No. 467, 12-21-10) 
Secs. 30-215—30-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 30-220. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Jurisdictional wetlands is an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetlands determination means a delineation of jurisdictional boundaries by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the city as indicated on the Wetlands Map. Provided, however, that the Wetlands Map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands with the city and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
Wetlands map means the current U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for Sylvania, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 470, 4-19-11) 
Sec. 30-221. - Permitting determination. 
The city manager, or his designee, shall compare proposals for land disturbance or development with the generalized wetlands map and decide whether local permitting should proceed or be deferred pending U. S. Army Corps of Engineers determination. 
Upon review of project proposals or plans submitted, one of the following two actions should result: 
(1)  A local permit is issued without requiring jurisdictional wetlands determination by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers. This action should be taken when the activity being proposed meets either of the following tests: 
a.  It is not the type of activity that would cause alteration of wetlands; or 
b.  The proposed location of the activity is not near or within a protected wetland boundary as shown on the generalized wetlands map adopted by the city. 
(2)  The local permit is deferred pending a jurisdictional wetland determination by the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers. This action should be taken when the activity being proposed fails both of the above tests (i.e., it is a type of activity that would cause alteration of wetlands and the proposed location of the activity is near or within a wetland boundary). In this case, the local permit is issued only after a letter of permission or a Section 404 permit, is obtained from the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(Ord. No. 470, 4-19-11) 
Secs. 30-222—30-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TREE ORDINANCE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 473, adopted September 20, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 30-130—30-141. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 30-230—30-241. 

Sec. 30-230. - Tree removal; applicability and exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or destroy any protected tree without first obtaining a tree removal permit. 
(b)  This article does not apply to a protected tree located on a developed single-family residential lot or two-family lot contained within a plat of record on which is located a residential structure that has been released for occupancy. 
(c)  This article does not apply to any tree that has been or may be removed due to the installation; operation or maintenance of new or existing city sponsored public works facilities or to trees located within existing city streets, rights-of-way or easements. City sponsored public work facilities include, but are not limited to, roadway, drainage, water, sanitary sewer, electric, transportation, pedestrian, and park facilities but does not include that within a proposed subdivision that has been or will be dedicated for streets, rights-of-way, or other public easements. 
(d)  During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, storm, flood or other natural disaster, the requirements of this chapter may be waived as deemed necessary by the emergency management coordinator or other city designee. 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 30-231. - Minimum canopy requirements. 
A minimum tree canopy of 40 percent shall be required as follows: 
(1)  On all residential lots or parcels of land in the city to which the city's subdivision ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time, shall apply, which subdivision ordinance was saved from repeal in appendix A of this Code, and is codified at sections 8-2001 through 8-2084 of the 1976 Code of Ordinances of the City of Sylvania. 1 [] 
(2)  On all non-residential lots in the city for which a building permit is issued or required subsequent to the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or to which the city's subdivision ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time, shall apply, which subdivision ordinance was saved from repeal in appendix A of this Code, and is codified as sections 8-2001 through 8-2084 of the 1976 Code of Ordinances of the City of Sylvania. 
The canopy requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development or disturbance of the applicable site. The canopy may be achieved by preserving existing trees, by planting new trees according to the minimum standards in this article or by a combination of the two. Minimum tree canopy shall be calculated and established pursuant to the formula and analysis set forth in appendix C to this article. Any existing tree of not less than six inches DBH left in good growing condition on the property is eligible to be counted toward the minimum required canopy and has to be protected. The property owner shall be subject to the minimum tree canopy requirement set forth in this section. The property owner shall base the canopy calculation on the gross site area. 
Trees replanted to achieve canopy requirements are to be selected species from the City of Sylvania Tree Species Selection List set forth in appendix C (which will list values of canopy coverage in square feet for various groups of trees and minimum area for planting), on file with the city. In addition, replanting shall be at the ratio of not less than one overstory tree for every three understory trees. Canopy credit may be met by planting all overstory trees, but not by planting only understory trees. No more than 40 percent of any one genus may be included in any replanting plan. All replacement trees will be maintained properly to ensure their survivability. 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
 A subdivision is defined in Section 8-2022 of the 1976 Code as follows: Subdivision. A subdivision shall be construed to be a division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of conveyance, transfer, improvement, sale, legacy or building development, and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes re-subdivision, and where appropriate to the context relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or areas subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards set forth in this chapter; the division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved. 

Sec. 30-232. - Procedure for trees approved for removal. 
(a)  Canopy recovery for development plans. 
(1)  Development plans shall include a canopy recovery plan for replacement of trees and vegetation approved for removal. A canopy recovery plan shall include the following: 
a.  Areas to be cleared and areas preserved. 
b.  The number of trees required for replacement, to achieve 40 percent canopy. 
(2)  In order to promote diversity, no more than 15 percent of the replacement trees shall be of the same species. 
(3)  Where the city manager or his/her designee and tree board determines that a site cannot sustainably support the required replacement, due to the size and shape and/or structures and/or other viable site constraints, a fee shall be paid to the City of Sylvania Tree Bank. This fee shall be the actual and verified cost of the required tree replacement and shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy; and 
(4)  If a property owner has preserved extensive overstory trees and clusters of native trees and vegetation, in such a manner as to provide extensive shading within the built environment, value shall be 100 percent of the drip line area of groupings. An exhibit depicting the aforementioned shall be submitted that calculates the canopy spread based on DBH and species of a tree. (See illustration) 

Illustration of Extensive Shading 
A. Average Lot Size =1/6acre 
B. Limits of shading covers a one-third minimum area on each lot 
C. Includes Understory Vegetation 
(b)  Alternative compliance to canopy density requirement. 
(1)  One of the intentions of this article is to ensure that a minimum canopy density of trees is maintained on all applicable sites, as defined in this article. If this intent cannot be met because a site will not bear the required density of trees, two methods of compliance may be acceptable: 
a.  Planting at a location remote from the project site; or 
b.  Contributing to the City of Sylvania Tree Bank. 
(2)  The following standards have been established for administering these alternative compliance methods. The city manager or his/her designee must review and approve all requests for alternative compliance. In no instance shall more than 80 percent of the required site canopy be met through alternative compliance. As many trees as can reasonably be expected to survive must be planted on the site in question. 
(3)  No development approval (as defined by this article), land disturbance permit, or building permit shall be issued until the city manager or his/her designee has approved the request and received the necessary documentation and/or funds for the alternative compliance method. 
(4)  If trees are to be planted at another location, a tree replacement plan, meeting all applicable standards, must be reviewed and approved. The following note must be shown on the approved plan: "A tree replacement plan addendum for this project shall be submitted to the city manager or his/her designee for the City of Sylvania in conjunction with the construction plans for the proposed activity. This plan shall include the species, size and location of trees to be planted off-site to meet the tree density deficit shown. Final acceptance of this project is subject to approval of this plan, as well as verification of the installation of the trees." 
(5)  As another method of alternative compliance, the City of Sylvania will accept donations to the City of Sylvania Tree Bank. These donations will be used for the sole purpose of planting trees on public property within the City of Sylvania. For calculating contributions to the City of Sylvania Tree Bank, see appendix B of this article. 
(6)  The City of Sylvania Tree Bank will be administered by the city manager or his/her designee. An annual report shall be submitted to the Sylvania City Council showing amounts collected, amounts spent, and the type and location of trees planted. 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 30-233. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words or terms shall be defined as follows. All words in these standards have their customary dictionary definition except as specifically defined herein. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. Technical terms used are defined as follows: 
American National Standards Institute (ANSI A-300) is the industry consensus standards for tree care, planting, and removal. 
Applicant means an owner, occupant, or a representative of an owner or occupant of a lot, parcel or tract of land to which this article applies. 
Arborist means a person or firm, who has been trained in the business of diagnosing, treating, pruning and removing trees, including landscape architects, and persons with a formal knowledge of trees, such as cooperative extension service agents. 
Canopy coverage means the area consisting of a tree's branches in all directions from its trunk, the outer edge that is the dripline. 
Canopy tree means a tree that will grow to a mature height of at least 40 feet with a spread of at least 30 feet. 
City arborist means arborist selected by the city as a consultant on decisions/issues concerning trees within the City of Sylvania. 
City manager or his/her designee means the city manager of the City of Sylvania, or such person or persons that he/she may designate in connection with all or any portion of this article. 
Clear-cutting means the indiscriminate removal of protected trees from a site or tract with a DBH of six inches or greater. 
Critical root zone (CRZ) means the area of soil around and beneath a tree that supports that tree's root system, any disturbance of which directly affects the tree's chance of survival. Includes all the area within a radius equal to one and one-half feet for every one-inch diameter of the tree trunk (as measured at diameter at breast height). 
Dead or beyond recovery means more than 50 percent of the tree is dead, is a hazardous tree as defined herein, or in a state of irrecoverable decline. 
Development means a planning or construction project involving substantial property improvement and, usually, a change of land-use character within the site; the act of using land for building or extractive purposes. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH) means the diameter or width of the main stem of a tree in inches as measured four and one-half feet above the natural grade at the base of a tree. Whenever a branch, limb, defect or abnormal swelling of the trunk occurs at this height, the diameter at breast height shall be measured at the nearest point above or below four and one-half feet at which a normal diameter occurs. 
Directional pruning or target pruning , means and involves removing only those limbs that will come in contact with energized conductors. This reduces the number of times the tree must be pruned and directs growth away from the power lines, thus allowing the tree to achieve its natural height and shape. 
Dripline radius means a radius equal to the horizontal distance from the trunk of the tree to the end of the longest branch. 
Exceptional tree means any tree determined by the tree board, as provided for in this article, to be of notable historic interest, high aesthetic value, or of unique character because of species, type, age, or size. 
Greenspace means any area retained as permeable unpaved ground and dedicated to supporting vegetation. 
Hazard tree means any tree or tree part that poses a risk of danger or injury upon failure or fracture for damage or injury. 
Invasive species means non-native or exotic species that tend to grow rapidly and out-compete and displace native species in specific habitats; e.g. Tallow Tree. 
Large tree means a tree that is expected to attain a height of 50 feet or greater at maturity under ideal growing conditions. 
Maintenance means routine, periodic, or occasional activities directed at maintaining or improving a tree's health and condition. These activities include but are not limited to fertilization, irrigation, mulching, pest control, and pruning. 
Medium tree means a tree that is expected to attain a height of greater than 25 feet and less than 50 feet at maturity under ideal growing conditions. 
Minimum canopy requirement means the minimum percentage (40 percent) of tree canopy required to be preserved are planted on any tract of land being developed. 
Overstory trees means trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
Park trees means either evergreen or deciduous trees, shrubs or vines on land designated as public parkland owned by the city, or land to which the public has free access as a park. 
Private tree means a tree that is located on lands for which the city does not have responsibility for tree management. 
Preserved tree means an existing tree on a site that is to be preserved and protected during construction. 
Protected tree means any healthy, growing self-supporting woody perennial plant that has a trunk size of six-inch caliper or greater when measured at a point four and one-half feet above ground level that is of a species which normally attains a height of at least 30 feet at maturity. 
Protective fencing means a physical and visual barrier installed around the critical root zone of a tree to prevent damage to the tree and its root system. At a minimum this would include three- to four-foot tall orange safety fencing. 
Public nuisance means any tree, plant, or shrub which has an infectious disease or insect problem; is dead or dying; is obstructing streetlights, traffic signs, or the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; poses a threat to the public health, safety, or welfare by imminent collapse onto public property. 
Public tree means any tree growing on public property, including streets, rights-of-way, and parks with at least two-thirds of its trunk on public property. 
Shade trees means any self-supporting woody plant of a species that is well-shaped, well-branched and well-foliated, which normally grows to an overall height of at least 35 feet and normally develops an average mature crown spread greater than 30 feet within the city. 
Sight triangle means an area on either side of street intersections, street corners or vehicular access points which allows for sufficient sight distance to allow drivers approaching simultaneously to see each other in time to prevent a traffic accident. The size of the sight triangle is governed by space, time and traffic volume of the subject intersection. The director of utilities or his/her designee, shall have authority to establish sight distance requirements. 
Site plan means a plan provided that reflects existing and proposed conditions on a site that is intended for construction. This may include but is not limited to topography, structures and/or additions, grading, drainage, erosion control measures, trees to be saved or planted to comply with the requirements of this article, best management practices, parking requirements, streets and other type improvements. 
Small maturing tree means a tree that is expected to attain a height of 25 feet or less at maturity under ideal growing conditions. 
Spread means the crown diameter measured by taking the average of the widest branch spread and the branch spread perpendicular to it. 
Topping. Tree topping is the removal of large branches to a stub, or smaller lateral not large enough to assume a terminal role. Tree topping is not an approved tree pruning practice for city street trees or protected trees, and is considered tree removal under this article. 
Tree board means a legally constituted body of five individuals, appointed by the mayor, and adopted by the city council, whose responsibility is to advise the mayor and city council in all tree-related matters. 
Tree canopy means the square footage of the aggregate of the canopy of all trees contained on a property. 
Tree establishment plan means a map and supporting documentation which describes, for a particular site, the species and locations of trees to be planted in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
Tree fund means the City of Sylvania Tree Protection Escrow Fund, established to receive funds paid in lieu of required canopy, or for compensation for damage or removal of city owned trees. 
Tree management plan means a to-scale map or site plan prepared in accordance with this article, showing among other items, a detailed plan designed to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of two years after construction. 
Tree protection zone (TPZ) means the area essential to a tree's health and survival, including both above ground and below ground space, surrounding a preserved or planted tree which is protected within the guidelines of this article. 
Tree species selection list means the recommended species of trees for planting within the city maintained and updated periodically by the tree board. Said list will also include species that are determined by the tree board to be discouraged for reasons to be determined by the tree board including but not limited to trees that are detrimental to the native environment or in conflict with this article. The species lists are attached hereto as appendices "C" and "D," of this article. 
Tree survey means a tree survey shall include two components: (a) A land survey, completed by a registered land surveyor, as part of a site plan application. (b) A site plan on which all trees intended to be preserved to meet the density requirements of this article shall be identified by species and size by a licensed forester, landscape architect or certified arborist. All drawings shall be stamped and sealed. 
Tree warranty means a guarantee of tree vitality for two years from the time of planting. 
Understory tree means a tree that grows beneath the overstory, and will generally reach a mature height of less than 40 feet. 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 30-234. - City tree board. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created and established a city tree board to protect, conserve, establish, and manage trees on public property within the city. The city tree board shall consist of five members, three of which must be citizens and residents of the city. The two remaining members may reside outside the city, but within the county. All members are to be nominated by the mayor and approved by city council. It is desirable that two of the members be professionals, including a landscape architect, consulting arborist, a horticulturist or forester, and an educator in the field of forestry or horticulture. One member shall be a representative of Keep Screven Beautiful (KSB). It is desirable that the members include broad representation from community groups, neighborhood associations, environmental groups, builders, developers, and other civic organizations. The representative from the city zoning and planning commission may attend meetings of the board to render information and advice to the board members; however, they shall have no vote in the processes thereof. 
(b)  Term of office. The term of the five persons to be appointed by the mayor and approved by city council shall be three years except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first board shall be for only one year, and the term of two members of the first board shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term. 
(c)  Compensation. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. The city, upon receipt of appropriate receipts and documentation, shall reimburse reasonable expenses incurred by members and approved by the board. 
(d)  Operation. During the first month after being appointed, and at the first meeting of each year, the tree board shall elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary-treasurer from among its appointed members and keep minutes of its meetings. 
(1)  The tree board shall meet at least once during each quarter of the year during January, April, July and October. Additional meetings may be held as requested by the chairman. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(2)  During November of each year, the tree board shall submit a report on its activities during the past year to the city council. 
(e)  Duties and responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the board to, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Study, investigate, counsel, develop and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal, or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, cemeteries, along streets, and in other public areas. The plan will be presented annually to the city council and, upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive tree plan for the city. 
(2)  Advise the city on all tree related issues. 
(3)  Seek and apply for grant funding from public and privates sources for conducting urban forestry projects. 
(4)  Review the tree ordinance every two years to keep it current on industry changes and provide recommendations for changes to the mayor and city council. 
(5)  Provide tree care educational programs and information on benefits of trees and best management practices to city staff and citizens. 
(6)  Promote and support the city's efforts to become a Tree City USA designated community. 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 30-235. - Review by appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision, ruling or action of the tree board or the city manager, or his/her designee under authority of this article, shall have the right to appeal to the city council for review, provided that such person file a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk of Sylvania within ten days of the date of such decision, ruling or action. A hearing before the city council shall be held within 30 days from the filing of the written notice of appeal. The city council shall have the power to uphold, modify or reverse the decision, ruling or action. Provided, however, the city council shall not have the power to modify or reverse any decision, ruling or action if such modification or reversal would result in a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 30-236. - Administrator. 
The city manager or his/her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 30-237. - Standards of tree care management. 
(a)  Public tree care—General maintenance. 
(1)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, shrubs and vines within the lines of streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary, to ensure public safety and preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(2)  The city shall have the right to remove, or cause or order to be removed, any tree, or part thereof, which is in an unsafe condition, or which, by reason of its nature, is injurious to sewers, electrical power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest, whether on public or private property. 
(3)  The city is authorized to perform whatever acts are necessary to insure that all plant material originating on city-owned property, or having any portion within the boundaries of city-owned property conforms with the following: the comprehensive, long-range program for the optimization of the plant resources of the City of Sylvania. Reference materials that may prove helpful are as follows: 
a.  ANSI Z60.1 American National Standard for Nursery Stock ANSI Z133.1 American National Standard for Arboricultural Operations—Pruning, Repairing, Maintaining, and Removing Trees, and Cutting Brush—Safety Requirements. 
b.  ANSI A300 Part 1—American National Standard for Tree Care Operations—Trees, Brush, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance—Standard Practices (Pruning) 2008. 
c.  ANSI A300 Part 2—American National Standard for Tree Care Operations. Trees, Brush, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance—Standard Practices (Fertilization) 2004. 
d.  ANSI A300 Part 3—American National Standard for Tree Care Operations—Trees, Brush, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance—Standard Practices (Support Systems and Cabling, Bracing, and Guying) 2006. 
e.  ANSI A300 Part 4—American National Standard for Tree Care Operations—Trees, Brush, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance—Standard Practices (Lightning Protection Systems) 2008. 
f.  ANSI A300 Part 5—American National Standard for Tree Care Operations. Trees, Brush, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance—Standard Practices (Management of Trees and Shrubs During Site Planning) 2005. 
g.  ANSI A300 Part 6—American National Standard for Tree Care Operations. Trees, Brush, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance—Standard Practices (Transplanting) 2005. 
h.  ANSI A300 Part 7—American National Standard for Tree Care Operations. Trees, Brush, and Other Woody Plant Maintenance—Standard Practices (Integrated Vegetation Management (IVM and Electric Utility Rights-of-Ways) 2006. 
(4)  It is appropriate that trees being trimmed for clearance from utility lines be trimmed in such a manner, using current industry standards, as to provide clearance from lines for a designated period of time or cycle, not to exceed three years. In all cases where conditions permit, it is appropriate for directional pruning or side trimming methods to be used to obtain necessary clearance. Topping is not appropriate. 
(5)  Topping. 
a.  It is not appropriate, as a normal practice, for any person, firm or city department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. For the purposes of this section, the term "topping" means the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. 
b.  Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires where other pruning practices are impractical, are exempt from this section. 
c.  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to top any tree on private land, within the corporate limits of the City of Sylvania. 
(6)  Thinning and pruning of a mature tree that exceeds more than 25 percent of the leaf surface, on both the lateral branch and the overall foliage that is pruned within a growing season is not appropriate. 
(7)  Stump removal. The stumps of all removed trees should be ground to a depth of at least eight inches below the ground level so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. The soil cavity shall be filled with clean topsoil and the area leveled and seeded. If the area where the tree is removed is to be paved, the stump shall be removed to a suitable depth to allow adequate paving. No tree shall be planted in the location of a tree stump unless no other space is available. 
(b)  Tree pruning standards. Pruning technique: The pruning of trees shall be conducted in accordance with Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice of the International Society of Arboriculture as published in the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations (ANSI 300—Part 1) and herein referenced in this article. 
(c)  Tree planting standards. 
(1)  All tree planting shall be conducted in accordance with the most recent Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice of the International Society of Arboriculture as published in the American National Standard for Tree Care Operations (ANSI 300—Parts 5 and 6) and herein referenced in this article. 
(2)  All planted trees shall have a minimum tree establishment zone based upon its mature size (Table No. 1). No one species shall make up over 15 percent of the total number of trees planted. 
Table No. 1: 

 
(3)  Minimum caliper. The minimum caliper (measured at six inches above the ground) for planted trees is two inches. Multi-stemmed trees must have three to five stems and be six to eight feet tall. 
(4)  To minimize traffic hazards at street intersections and avoid conflicts with city infrastructure all tree plantings shall follow listed guidelines in Table No. 2: 
_____
Table No. 2: 

 
_____ 
(5)  Distance from curb and sidewalk: 
a.  The distance public trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes in the City of Sylvania recommended list of street trees and no trees may be planted closer to the curb or sidewalk than the following: 
1.  Small trees two feet (minimum of a four foot wide tree lawn). 
2.  Medium trees three feet (minimum of a six foot wide tree lawn). 
3.  Large trees four feet (minimum of an eight foot wide tree lawn) except in special plantings designed or approved by the city tree board and city manager or his/her designee. 
(6)  Certain trees shall be prohibited from being planted within the city limits see appendix D. The tree board may add trees to the list as necessary. Existing trees will be grandfathered. 
(d)  Private trees. 
(1)  Abatement. The failure of private land owners to comply with planting, spacing, minimum distance, utilities, trimming, and tree removal provisions of this article and spacing requirements prescribed by the city shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(2)  Nuisance trees. The failure of private land owners to remove trees that constitute a public nuisance within a reasonable time shall constitute a violation of this article. For purposes of this article, a reasonable time to remove such trees shall be ten days after the sending of written notice by the city manager, or his/her designee, to the person or persons listed by the Screven County Tax Commissioner for receiving tax notices for such property at the address to which tax notices are sent. 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 30-238. - Interference. 
No person shall prevent, delay, or interfere with the designated city manager or his/her designee in the execution or enforcement of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 30-239. - Emergency situation. 
In the event of severe storms or other emergency situations resulting in an extraordinary situation the city manager or his/her designee may waive any or all parts of this chapter, as he or she deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 30-240. - Violations, penalties and enforcement. 
Violations of the provisions of this article by any individual, firm, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or agent, shall be a violation, punishable in accordance with section 1-12. Each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed or continued shall constitute a separate offense. The City of Sylvania may also seek injunctive relief, issue "stop work" orders or may institute any other appropriate action in courts of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
Sec. 30-241. - Severability. 
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this article. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then that decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
APPENDIX A - CANOPY ANALYSIS 
A basic condition of the City of Sylvania Tree Protection Ordinance is that all applicable sites have a potential minimum canopy of 40 percent by area. The canopy requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development. The canopy may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved or actual canopy of preserved trees or groupings, planting new trees, or some combination of the two. For canopy analysis, the following formula shall apply: 
CR=SA x .5 
Where: 
CR = canopy area requirement 
SA = site area 
Procedure for calculating the required tree replacement: 
Step 1: Area of total site from boundary survey. 
Step 2: Divide area (in square feet) by two. 
Step 3: Subtract preserved tree area from Step 2. 
Step 4: Select enough overstory and understory trees to equal area in Step 3. (Note: Not more than three understory trees for each overstory tree. Not more than 15 percent of one species and not more than 40 percent of one genus.) 
Note: All replacement trees must be two-inch caliper or greater. Replacement trees must have minimum area for growth. Appendix C (include minimum tree planting area in the tree list). 
Square footage value placed on a two-inch caliber tree for calculating replacement trees: 
(1)  Overstory trees values: 
a.  Large growth trees = 1,200 square feet/tree planted. 
b.  Medium growth trees = 550 square feet/tree planted. 
(2)  Understory trees value: 
a.  Small growth trees = 250 square feet/tree planted. 
Example 1: Following site to be developed: 
Step 1: Ten acre site = 435,600 square feet. 
Step 2: 40 percent canopy cover figure. 
435600 x .4 = 174,240 square feet to meet 40 percent canopy cover 
Step 3: Preserved trees left on site = 108,900 square feet (2.5 acres). 
174,240 minus 108,900 = 65,340 square feet of replacement trees. 
Step 4: Replacement trees required to meet 40 percent CR (canopy area requirement). 
CR = canopy area requirement 
→ 65,340 square feet of area to be planted in trees. 

 
The 66,000 square feet of planted trees has met 40 percent canopy area requirement. 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
APPENDIX B - CITY OF SYLVANIA TREE BANK FORMULA FOR DETERMINING CONTRIBUTIONS 
Contribution calculations are based on two-inch caliper replacement trees with a value updated semi-annually, and on file with the city, representing the average size and cost of materials, labor and guarantee for trees planted in the City of Sylvania area. 
Example: Based on unit value of tree replacement of $500.00 (amount subject to change). 
To determine the appropriate CR contribution, first calculate the Implantable Square Footage (ISF) of tree space, which cannot be planted on the site. 
Divide the ISF by 1,200 square feet (the square feet value of a two-inch caliper overstory replacement tree) and multiply by $500.00. 
Example 2: From Example 1 the total square feet of 40 percent CR required is 65,340 square feet. 
Due to space limitation and other site problems, the site only has 40,000 square feet of plantable area (PA) for replacement trees. 
To determine the CR trees not plantable on site use the following formula: 
USF = CR - PA 
In this example: 
CR (65,340 square feet) — PA (40,000 square feet) = 25,340 square feet of ISF 
CR = ISF + 1,200 square feet 
CR = 25,340 + 1,200 square feet = 21.11 square feet replacement trees 
This means that a total of 21 trees are to be planted at a remote site as a form of alternative compliance or the developer may elect to contribute to The City of Sylvania Tree Bank the value of 21 trees. 
Determine the acceptable contribution amount as follows: 
21 x $500.00 = $10,500.00 total contribution to tree bank 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
APPENDIX C - CITY OF SYLVANIA, GEORGIA TREE SPECIES LISTING 
Large Canopy Trees for Overstory: (Count for 1,200 square feet of area for planting — minimum two-inch caliber) 
Large Trees >50' Suitable for areas with more than 400 square feet of total planting area; in a planting strip at least 16' x 25' or 20' x 20' 

 
Key: 

 
Medium Canopy Trees: (Count for 550 square feet of area for planting - minimum 2" caliber) 
Medium Trees 30'—50' Suitable for spaces with 100 to 200 square feet of total planting space; in a planting strip at least 4—7 feet wide; or place at least 4' from pavement or wall. 

 
Key: 

 
Small Canopy Trees—Understory: (Count for 250 square feet of area for planting — minimum 2" caliber) 
Small Trees 〈 25' Useful under utility lines; areas with 〈 100 square feet of total planting area; a planting strip with a width of at least 4'. 

 
Key: 

 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
APPENDIX D - CITY OF SYLVANIA, GEORGIA—TREES NOT RECOMMENDED FOR PLANTING 
The following species are not recommended because they are poor or marginal performers. 

 
Permit #_____________ 
Municipal Tree Ordinance Permit Application for Installation, Maintenance and Removal of Plant Material on City Property 
Please print or type. Fill in all applicable spaces. Attach additional sheets if necessary. 
Property Owner Name: _____ 
Address: _____ 
City: _____ State: ____________ Zip: ____________ Phone: ____________ 
Contractor Name (if different than above): _____ 
Address: _____ 
City: _____ State: ____________ Zip: ____________ Phone: ____________ 
PERMISSION IS REQUESTED TO: 
_____ Install plant material on City-owned property or right-of-way. 
_____ Perform maintenance on plant material on City-owned property or right-of-way. 
_____ Remove plant material from City-owned property or right-of-way. 
Describe specific plant material to be installed, maintained or removed: _____ _____ 
Specific location of plant material to be installed maintained or removed: _____ _____ 
Detail all procedures and equipment to be used: _____ _____ _____ _____ 
Any person violating any of the following conditions or willfully failing to comply with the requirements of this permit shall be subject to fines as outlined in the Municipal Tree Ordinance and subject to revocation of this permit. 
A.  All applicable construction permits must be approved prior to initiation of any work. 
B.  Diggers Hotline must be notified before any excavation begins. The excavator is responsible for insuring all utility companies having services in the excavation area are notified and they mark their respective underground utility lines. 
C.  The City must be notified at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the initiation of any work. 
D.  A protective lane for traffic shall be provided at all times. 
E.  All excavated areas must be properly backfilled and graded. 
F.  All work performed must conform to the guidelines in the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice Manual. 
Work Start Date: _____ Estimated Completion Date: _____ 
I hereby certify that the proposed work is authorized by the owner of record and that I have been authorized by the owner to make this application as his/her agent, and I agree to conform to all applicable laws of this jurisdiction. I have read and understand all the terms and conditions of this permit. 
Name (Please Print): _____ 
Signature: _____ Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Conditions of Approval: _____ _____ _____ _____ 
Permit Expires: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Approved By: _____ Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Permit #____________ 
Municipal Tree Ordinance Permit Application for Tree Removal on Tracts of Land for Excavation Affecting Plant Material, and for Landscape Installation and Removal in Conjunction with Development 
Please print or type. Fill in all applicable spaces. Attach additional sheets if necessary. 
Development Name: _____ 
Address: _____ 
Property Owner Name: _____ 
Address: _____ 
City: _____ State: ____________ Zip: ____________ Phone: ____________ 
Contractor Name (if different than above): _____ 
Address: _____ 
City: _____ State: ____________ Zip: ____________ Phone: ____________ 
PERMISSION IS REQUESTED TO: 
_____ Clear or remove more than 40% Tree Canopy on land for development. 
_____ Excavate on City-owned property or public right-of-way within the drip line of City-owned plant material. 
_____ Excavate on City-owned property or public right-of-way within fifteen (15) feet of privately owned plant material. 
_____ Excavate on private property within the drip line of City-owned plant material. 
_____ Removal of plant material from City-owned property or public right-of-way. 
_____ Installation of plant material from City-owned property or public right-of-way. 
Describe specific plant material to be installed, affected, maintained or removed: _____ _____ _____ 
Specific location of plant material: _____ _____ _____ 
Detail all procedures and equipment to be used: _____ _____ _____ 
Reason additional clearing is necessary: _____ _____ _____ 
Any person violating any of the following conditions or willfully failing to comply with the requirements of this permit shall be subject to fines as outlined in the Municipal Tree Ordinance and subject to revocation of this permit. 
A.  All applicable construction permits must be approved prior to initiation of any work. 
B.  Diggers Hotline must be notified before any excavation begins. The excavator is responsible for insuring all utility companies having services in the excavation area are notified and they mark their respective underground utility lines. 
C.  The City must be notified at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the initiation of any work. 
D.  A protective lane for traffic shall be provided at all times. 
E.  All excavated areas must be properly backfilled and graded. 
F.  All work performed must conform to the guidelines in the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice Manual. 
Work Start Date: _____ Estimated Completion Date: _____ 
I hereby certify that the proposed work is authorized by the owner of record and that I have been authorized by the owner to make this application as his/her agent, and I agree to conform to all applicable laws of this jurisdiction. I have read and understand all the terms and conditions of this permit. 
Name (Please Print): _____ 
Signature: _____ Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Conditions of Approval: _____ _____ _____ _____ _____ 
Permit Expires: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Approved By: _____ Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
(Ord. No. 473, 9-20-11) 
Chapter 34 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fire department, § 3.102; fire limits, § 8.103. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; telecommunications towers and antennae, ch. 68; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(1); statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-2 et seq.; authority to enact ordinances or fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-2 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; electronic security systems installed and serviced by counties or municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Fire limits established. 
The fire limits of the city shall be the city limits. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1016) 
Sec. 34-2. - Authority of chief. 
The chief of the fire department is hereby authorized to discipline and suspend members of the fire department. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2001) 
Sec. 34-3. - Fire hydrants—Obstructing. 
(a)  No person shall obstruct with building material, equipment or in any manner whatsoever any fire hydrant which would obstruct approaches thereto by any member of the fire department. 
(b)  No person shall put any posts or installation of any nature whatsoever nearer than 18 inches to any fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission from the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2002) 
Sec. 34-4. - Same—Responsibility for inspections and repair. 
(a)  The chief of the fire department shall be responsible for any inspection and examination of all fire hydrants in the city. The inspection and examination shall be made at least every six months, and the chief shall file a report concerning the condition of the fire hydrants with the city manager. 
(b)  If any fire hydrant is in need of immediate repair, he shall immediately notify the city manager, who shall take immediate action to have the fire hydrant repaired. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2003) 
Sec. 34-5. - Same—Unlawful acts. 
No person shall remove the cover from any fire hydrant within this city, connect fire hose thereto, or turn on or use water therefrom, except for the purpose of fighting a fire, without express authority of the city manager. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2004) 
Sec. 34-6. - Appeals. 
Whenever the city manager shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the city manager to mayor and council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2026) 
Sec. 34-7. - Manufacture of explosives. 
The manufacture of explosives is prohibited in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2031) 
Sec. 34-8. - Trucks used for transporting inflammable materials; parking. 
(a)  All trucks used for transporting butane and propane gas, gasoline, kerosene and other similar inflammable material shall not be parked within any area extending for one-half mile from the courthouse except for the delivery of these products to consumers and dealers. 
(b)  Trucks used for transporting these materials shall not be parked in any congested or residential area within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2041) 
Sec. 34-9. - Burning permit. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful to burn any lawn, trash, leaves, pine straw or rubbish of any kind without first obtaining a written permit signed by the fire chief of the city, or another member of the city fire department designated by the fire chief to issue written permits. 
(b)  Terms of permit. The written permit to burn shall contain the following requirements: 
(1)  Permit required: No person shall burn any lawn, trash, leaves, pine straw or rubbish of any kind without written permit signed by the fire chief of the city, or another member of the city fire department designated by the fire chief to issue written permits. 
(2)  Any fire shall be constantly attended by an able-bodied person at least 18 years of age until extinguished. Such person shall have a garden hose connected to a water supply, or other fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use. 
(3)  The fire chief or other member of the city fire department designated by the fire chief may prohibit any or all outdoor fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous. 
(4)  Any member of the city fire department may extinguish or cause to be extinguished any fire, including the fire for which this permit is issued, if, in his opinion, the fire is endangering life or property, or is becoming a nuisance to other persons. 
(c)  Other requirements. 
(1)  The person applying for the permit shall designate the kinds of materials to be burned, and only those materials shall be burned. Under no circumstances shall explosive, noxious or toxic materials be burned. 
(2)  The person applying for the permit shall designate the location of the burning, and no burning shall be permitted outside of the location so designated. 
(3)  The person applying for the permit shall provide a phone number where such person can be reached or contacted before and during the burning. 
(4)  The permit shall be valid only for the date for which it is issued. 
(5)  The permit shall be signed by the applicant and the fire chief or another member of the city fire department designated by the fire chief. 
(d)  Penalty. Any violation of any provisions of this section or of the permit to burn issued hereunder shall be punishable for the first offense by a fine not exceeding $50.00, and for subsequent offenses, by a fine not exceeding $500.00 and imprisonment not exceeding six months. 
(Ord. No. 336, §§ 3—6, 7-19-94) 
Secs. 34-10—34-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKE DETECTORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Smoke detectors required in new dwellings and dwelling units; exceptions, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40. 

Sec. 34-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
New dwelling means all new single occupancy and multiple occupancy residential dwellings (including mobile homes) which are constructed, erected or installed subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives. The term "new dwelling" as applied to multiple occupancy residential dwellings shall mean each separate apartment or other subpart of the building which is intended for occupancy by one family or group. 
Smoke detector means a device used for the purpose of detecting heat or smoke, and which is approved by the Underwriters Laboratory, Inc., or other comparable testing firm. 
(Ord. No. 252, § I, 6-18-85) 
Sec. 34-37. - Installation required for new dwellings. 
All new dwellings shall have a smoke detector installed on each story of the dwelling for each 1,500 square feet of floor space on each story. 
(Ord. No. 252, § II, 6-18-85) 
Sec. 34-38. - Time of installation. 
Smoke detectors as required by section 34-37 hereof shall be installed and operational prior to the occupancy of a new dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 252, § III, 6-18-85) 
Sec. 34-39. - Maintenance. 
It shall be the responsibility of the occupant of each new dwelling to install and maintain operational all smoke detectors required in a new dwelling at all times. 
(Ord. No. 252, § IV, 6-18-85) 
Sec. 34-40. - Enforcement. 
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 252, § V, 6-18-85) 
Secs. 34-41—34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE LANES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 

Sec. 34-61. - Requirements. 
All buildings, other than single family residences, which are set back more than 150 feet from a public road, or which exceed 30 feet in height and are set back over 50 feet from the right-of-way of a public road shall have designated fire lanes with appropriate markings. Any other buildings within the city may have designated fire lanes with appropriate markings. The fire lane so designated shall be at least 12 feet in width, beginning at least ten feet, but not more than 20 feet, from the main building (excluding covered or uncovered sidewalk area), and extending outward from such point 12 feet. The length of the fire lane shall be at least 30 feet, and on buildings which are 230 feet in length or greater, fire lanes shall be spaced no greater than 170 feet apart, and shall be located to give access to the entire building for fire apparatus. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 1, 1-18-94) 
Sec. 34-62. - Markings. 
Fire lanes shall be marked with bright yellow, orange or red paint with either diagonal lines running the entire length and width of such lane or the words "fire lane" running the entire length and width of such fire lane. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 2, 1-18-94) 
Sec. 34-63. - Maintenance. 
In the event that any fire lane as designated in section 34-61 above is situated on private property (i.e., property that has not been dedicated to or which is not otherwise owned by the city, county, or the state), it shall be the responsibility of the owner of the premises to provide and maintain the fire lane with clear appropriate markings as set forth in section 34-62 above. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 3, 1-18-94) 
Sec. 34-64. - Variances. 
(a)  In the event this article works a hardship upon any person or entity, such person or entity may make written application to the fire chief for a variance. The fire chief shall then present the application for variance to the zoning board of adjustment, which board shall have the authority and power to grant a variance to this article provided that the board determines that the building or buildings in question have been provided, or shall be provided within a specified time as set by the board, adequate access to fire apparatus. The board shall give strong consideration to the recommendation of the fire chief. 
(b)  A hearing before the zoning board of adjustment shall be held within 30 days of the filing of the application with the fire chief. All hearings before the board shall be informal, and rules of evidence shall not apply. The decision of the board shall be in writing, and shall be rendered within ten days of the hearing. The applicant shall be notified of the hearing date, and shall have the right to be present. Any appeal from the decision of the board shall be by certiorari to the county superior court. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 4, 1-18-94) 
Sec. 34-65. - Violations. 
(a)  Parking in fire lane. It is hereby unlawful to park or leave unattended any car, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle in any portion of a fire lane, or to otherwise obstruct a fire lane with any object. Anyone violating this subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $25.00; notice of a violation and collection of fine shall be in the same manner as that for the parking violations. 
(b)  Failure to maintain. Any owner of private property upon which there is situated a fire lane who fails to properly maintain such fire lane with clear and appropriate markings as set forth in sections 34-62 and 34-63 above, shall be in violation of this article. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 332, § 5, 1-18-94) 
Secs. 34-66—34-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LIFE SAFETY CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 417, §§ I—IV, adopted August 5, 2003, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article IV, §§ 34-76—34-79 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 14. 

Sec. 34-76. - Adoption of Life Safety Code. 
The 2000 edition of the Code For Safety To Life From Fire In Buildings and Structures (a/k/a The Life Safety Code), as the same shall be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference, exempting one and two family residential dwellings except when any such dwelling is used either in conjunction with or solely for the following uses: 
(1)  Child day care; 
(2)  The provision of health care services; or 
(3)  Assisted care for the elderly or disabled. 
(Ord. No. 417, § I, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 34-77. - Enforcement. 
The Life Safety Code shall be enforced by the fire chief for the city or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 417, § II, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 34-78. - Adoption by reference of Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to existing buildings. 
The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to existing buildings set forth at O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-200 et seq. is hereby incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 417, § III, 8-5-03) 
Sec. 34-79. - Building and code enforcement authorities relieved from liability. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to constitute a waiver of the sovereign immunity of the city or any officer or employee thereof in carrying out the provisions of this article. Further, no action shall be maintained against the city or any duly authorized elected or appointed officer or duly authorized employee thereof, for damages sustained as a result of any fire or hazard covered by this article by reason of inspection or other action taken or not taken pursuant to this article. Nothing in article shall be construed to relieve any property owner or lessee or person in charge thereof from any legal duty, obligation, or liability incident to the ownership, maintenance, or use of such property. 
(Ord. No. 417, § IV, 8-5-03) 
Chapter 38 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; offenses, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(4); rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6; promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Public restrooms at laundromats. 
(a)  All businesses commonly known as laundromats shall furnish access to a sanitary toilet facility for use by the patrons of such laundromat at all hours that the business is open. 
(b)  Laundromats as referred to herein shall be defined as a business offering clothes washing or drying machines for use by the public generally for a fee. 
(Code 1976, § 10-4004) 
Secs. 38-2—38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVATE WELLS AND WATER SYSTEMS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14. 
State Law reference— Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120. 

Sec. 38-26. - Prohibited generally. 
The city's public water system provides a safe and healthy source of potable water for its citizens. It is in the best interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city that the city's public water system be used by all inhabitants for purposes of potable water, to the greatest extent possible. There exists within the city, however, three private wells being used as a source of potable water, which private wells have been utilized by the present owners and predecessors in title for many years without any apparent adverse health or safety problems. In balancing the property rights of the owners of these three private wells against any adverse health and safety considerations of such owners and other inhabitants of the city, it is the belief of the mayor and council that these three private wells should be grandfathered for purposes of this article, provided that such owners prevent any cross-connection with and contamination of the city's public water system. Otherwise, private wells utilized as a source of potable water shall be prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. No. 289, art. I, 5-17-88) 
Sec. 38-27. - Permit to drill well for purposes other than potable water. 
The city's public water system provides potable water. Private wells may not be established for potable water purposes, but may be established for other specific purposes. The following guidelines shall govern the application for an approval of a permit to drill a private well: 
(1)  A building permit to drill a private well shall be applied for, and such permit shall issue upon applicant's meeting all applicable city building, electrical and plumbing codes, and upon approval by the building inspector and payment of a fee of $1.50 per $1,000.00 of project cost, with a $2.00 minimum fee. 
(2)  A private well shall meet all location requirements of the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(3)  Well construction shall comply with state department of human resources recommendations. 
(4)  No interconnection between any private water supply and the city system shall be allowed. 
(5)  The water system fed by the private well shall not be connected to the city's system at any time. The principal user of the property shall continue to use the city's water system as its only source of potable water. The property owner is directly responsible for the prevention of any crossover-connection. 
(Ord. No. 289, art. II, 5-17-88) 
Sec. 38-28. - Discharge into city sewerage system. 
Water or wastewater from a private well system may not be discharged into the city's sanitary sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 289, art. III, 5-17-88) 
Sec. 38-29. - Grandfathering of certain private wells. 
(a)  Private wells which are being used as a source of potable water at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives may continue to be utilized as a source of potable water provided that the owners thereof comply with the remaining provisions of this article. Such wells are located at the following property addresses: 
(1)  510 North Main Street, Sylvania, Georgia 30467. 
(2)  501 North Main Street, Sylvania, Georgia 30467. 
(3)  311 Cork Pond Road, Sylvania, Georgia 30467. 
(b)  The owners of the private wells set forth in subsection (a) hereof shall ensure that there is no interconnection between the private water supply and the city's public water system, and the means of preventing such interconnection shall be first approved by the city building inspector, and shall be subject to inspection under section 38-30. 
(c)  The owners of private wells set forth in subsection (a) hereof may discharge water or wastewater from the private well system into the city's sanitary sewerage system provided that such owners pay the maximum sewer charge each month to the city. 
(d)  The owners of private wells set forth in subsection (a) hereof shall not levy any charge upon any person or entity for the use of any such well. 
(Ord. No. 289, art. IV, 5-17-88) 
Sec. 38-30. - Inspection. 
Each private well system shall be made available for immediate inspection by the city at any time and without prior notice. An annual inspection shall be made by the city building official. 
(Ord. No. 289, art. V, 5-17-88; Ord. No. 391, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 38-31. - Penalty. 
Any person violating this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 upon conviction. 
(Ord. No. 289, art. VI, 5-17-88) 
Secs. 38-32—38-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BODY ART STUDIOS AND ARTISTS 

Sec. 38-50. - Authority. 
The legal authority for this rule is O.C.G.A. § 16-5-71 and chapter 31-40 (O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-71, 31-40-1, 31-40-2, 31-40-3, 31-40-4, 31-40-5, 31-40-6, 31-40-7, 31-40-8, 31-40-9, and chapter 31-5). 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules and regulations is to establish reasonable standards for individuals performing tattoo and body piercing procedures and for the facilities from which the procedures are provided. Such standards should insure the health and safety of all individuals performing and receiving these services. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-52. - Exemptions. 
These regulations do not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, chapter 34, or a technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-53. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined by specific sections as used in these rules and regulations the term: 
Antibacterial solution means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly. 
Body art studio means a permanent building or structure on a permanent foundation, holding a valid city or county business license and permit from the county board of health, wherein a tattoo/body piercing artist performs tattooing or body piercing. This shall not include tattoo removal. 
Body piercing means the creation of an opening in an individual's body other than the individual's ear, to insert jewelry or other decoration. 
Body piercing artist means any person who performs body piercing. 
County means the local county board of health or its duly authorized representatives, and is sometimes referred to herein as the local board of health, the county board of health, the local county board of health, or the local health department. 
Currently licensed health care professional means and includes physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
Department means the state department of human resources. 
Governing body means the partnership, the corporation, the association, or the person or group of persons who maintain and control the tattoo/body piercing studio and who are legally responsible for the operation of the studio. 
OSHA means Occupational Safety and Health Association. 
Permit means the authorization granted by the county to the governing body to operate a tattoo/body piercing studio. 
Plan of correction means a plan for correcting deficiencies in meeting rules and regulations of the department of human resources and/or the local county board of health. 
Sanitary means clean and free of agents of infection or disease. 
Sanitized means effective antibacterial treatment by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacteria count including pathogens to a safe level on equipment. 
Sterilization means holding an instrument in an autoclave for required length of time at 15 to 30 pounds pressure at a temperature of 249.8 degrees Fahrenheit or 121 degrees Celsius. 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin. 
Tattoo artist means any person who performs tattooing. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-54. - Governing body. 
(a)  The governing body shall be responsible for compliance with the requirements in O.C.G.A. chapter 31-40, with applicable administrative rules and regulations of the local county board of health, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes, rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. 
(b)  The governing body shall certify in its application the name(s) and exact duties of employees/artists who have been designated as being responsible for carrying out the rules and policies adopted by the governing body. The following information shall be included: social security number, job, gender, home address, home/work phone numbers, ID photos of all operators/technicians. 
(c)  Prior to being granted a permit, each body art studio shall develop a written statement of policies and procedures outlining the responsibilities of management. 
(d)  No one under the age of 18 shall be tattooed. The tattooing of a minor is prohibited in the State of Georgia. No one under the age of 18 shall be pierced without the presence and written permission of their legal guardian. No one under the age of 14 shall be pierced. 
(e)  Tattoo/body piercing artists shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing tattoo/body piercing procedures. 
(f)  Operators shall refuse services to any person, who in the opinion of the operator, is under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(g)  No animals, except for guide dogs accompanying disabled persons, shall be allowed in the tattoo/body piercing studio. 
(h)  Piercing of a minor. For any piercing of a minor, a parent or legal guardian must be present to sign a consent form for each piercing procedure. It is a violation of the rules and regulations for anyone performing body piercing on an individual under age 18 without the consent of the individual's parent or guardian. Consent must specify the part of the body to be pierced. Required consent is the written and physical presence of the individual's parent or guardian and the provision of evidence stating their parental or guardian status. Proof-positive, state-issued photo identification is required from the legal guardian, and a bona fide form of identification from the minor. In the event the parent has a different last name and/or address from the child, court documentation is needed to prove the relationship, i.e., divorce papers, or a remarriage certificate. Copies of all identification for legal guardian will need to be retained in client's file. Under no circumstances is it acceptable or appropriate for an artist to perform piercing on the nipples or genitals of an individual under 18 years of age. Violation of the 'piercing of minor' procedures may result in the revocation of artist's permit, revocation of studio permit, and/or further enforcement action deemed appropriate by the health authority. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-55. - Minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)  The body art studio shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained as to provide adequately for the health and safety of its customers. 
(b)  The studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the tattoo/body piercing adequate privacy from observers. The work area shall be separate from the waiting area. 
(c)  Body art studios must have adequate ventilation. 
(d)  Walls and ceilings must be painted or covered in a manner which would allow for easy and effective cleaning. Paint or covering must be light in color. 
(e)  Floors of the work area must not be carpeted. Surfaces shall be of a nonabsorbent material that would allow for effective cleaning by conventional methods. 
(f)  A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility shall be made accessible to customers; however, it shall be separate from the work area. 
(g)  The work area shall be equipped with at least one sink and basin providing hot and cold running water for the use of the artists for washing their hands and preparing customers for tattooing/piercing. This area shall be provided with soap, an antibacterial solution, single use towels or air blower, and individual hand brushes for each artist. 
(h)  The facility shall be equipped with at least one utility sink, providing hot and cold running water for use in cleaning reusable receptacles and the facility. 
(i)  The work area shall be provided with adequate lighting. 
(j)  The work area shall not be used as a corridor for access to other rooms. 
(k)  The body art studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the procedure adequate privacy from observers; thus the procedure room shall be separated by a fixed and solid door, wall, or partition extending from floor to ceiling from any other area including the waiting area. 
(l)  The body art studio shall not be allowed to occur in automobiles, mobile, transitory or other non-fixed facilities. Such non-fixed facilities include, but are not limited to, mobile homes, tents, recreational vehicles, and trailers. 
(m)  Body art studios shall not be allowed in facilities used for human habitation, any food service establishment, hair salon, nail salon, retail sales area, hotel room or similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-56. - Furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishings of the body art studio shall be maintained in good condition, intact, and functional. Furnishings should be made of or covered in a material that is easily cleanable and nonabsorbent. The studio shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, single use articles, carbon, and stencils shall be provided for each tattoo artist and shall be maintained in a sanitary manner which protects them from contamination. 
(c)  Work tables and chairs shall be provided for each tattoo/body piercing artist. 
(1)  Surfaces of all work tables and chairs shall be constructed of material which is smooth, nonabsorbent, corrosive resistant, and easily sanitized. 
(2)  Work tables and chairs shall be sanitized with a bactericidal solution after each application. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-57. - Supplies. 
(a)  Bulk single use articles shall be commercially packaged and handled to protect them from contamination. These articles shall be stored in an area separate from the toilet facilities. 
(b)  All materials applied to the human skin shall be from single use containers and shall be disposed of after each use. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-58. - Dyes and pigments. 
(a)  All dyes and pigments used in tattooing shall be from professional suppliers specifically providing dyes and/or pigments for the tattooing of human skin. 
(b)  In preparing dyes or pigments to be used by a tattoo artist, only nontoxic sterile materials shall be used. Single-use or individual portions of dyes or pigments in clean, sterilized individual containers or single-use containers shall be used for each patron. 
(c)  After tattooing, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use or individual containers shall be discarded along with the container. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-59. - Regarding piercers jewelry. 
(a)  Client and piercer should have appropriate size and quality jewelry chosen before the procedure begins. 
(b)  Jewelry used in piercing shall consist of an approved material suitable for permanent surgical implant, such as, high quality surgical stainless steel (316LVM series), niobium, titanium, platinum or a dense low porosity plastic material such as Tygon or PTFE. Copies of the jewelry manufacturer's documentation, which verify compliance with standards, must be available for inspection on request of the local health department. Solid 14 karat, or high, white or yellow nickel-free gold may be used. Purity verification must also be available for inspection on request of the director. Appropriate jewelry has no nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces. 
(c)  Ear studs or other jewelry designed for earlobe piercing are not appropriate jewelry for other body parts and must not be used by piercers. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-60. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Prior to the start of the tattoo/body piercing procedure the artist should inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, and abrasions. If a cut, sore, or abrasion is detected, a bandage should be applied for added protection before gloving. Trim fingernails to insure that gloves are not punctured. 
(b)  All jewelry such as watches, rings, etc. should be removed prior to the start of the tattoo procedure. 
(c)  Before working on each client, the fingernails and hands of the tattoo/body piercing artist shall be thoroughly washed and scrubbed with warm water, and antibacterial soap, using an individual hand brush that is clean and in good repair. The hands should then be dried by either an air blower or by single use towels prior to beginning work on each client or when interrupted in the process. 
(d)  Single use disposable latex or approved non-latex examination gloves shall be worn during the tattooing process. Gloves shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the application of the tattoo, the gloves become torn or punctured, or whenever their ability to function is compromised. 
(e)  Each artist shall wear a clean outer garment, apron or smock. These items shall be changed after each client. 
(f)  Tattoo/body piercing artists who are experiencing symptoms of diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, or skin infections shall refrain from tattooing/body piercing activities. 
(g)  Adequate numbers of sterilized needles and tubes must be on hand for each artist for the entire day and night operation. 
(h)  Only single-use disposable razors shall be used to shave the area to be tattooed. 
(i)  Smoking and consumption of food or drink is prohibited in body art studio. 
(j)  Universal precautions are to be followed per OSHA standards and guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-61. - Sterilization. 
(a)  An operational sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided in each body art studio. 
(b)  Non-disposable instruments shall be kept in a separate puncture resistant container until brush scrubbed in hot water and soap, and then sterilized by autoclaving. 
(c)  The following procedures should be followed during the sterilization process: 
(1)  Prior to being placed in the autoclave all equipment shall be bagged, labeled, dated and sealed. 
(2)  Each autoclave bag may hold no more than one tube with needle and bar. 
(3)  Autoclave shall be operated according to manufacturer's instructions and shall be made available for inspection. 
(4)  Spore indicators shall be used a minimum of at least once a month and the results must be kept at location for a minimum of three years. 
(d)  If using pre-sterilized equipment, documentation must be on file from equipment manufacturer that describes the method of sterilization meeting the manufacturer's recommendations for storage and maintenance of sterility. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-62. - Tattoo preparation. 
(a)  Before placing the tattoo design on the client's skin, the artist shall treat the skin area with an antibacterial solution. 
(b)  If an acetate stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be thoroughly cleaned and rinsed in a germicidal solution for at least 20 minutes and then dried with sterile gauze or dried in the air on a sanitized surface after each use. 
(c)  If a paper stencil is used by a tattoo artist for transferring the design to the skin, it shall be single-use and disposable. 
(d)  If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single-use article only. 
(e)  By O.C.G.A. § 16-12-5 no tattooing within one inch of the eye socket except by a physician or a technician under the direct supervision of a physician. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-63. - Requirements for body piercers. 
Body piercers shall: 
(1)  Set up equipment in front of client. 
(2)  Open sealed autoclave bags containing sterile equipment in front of client, and discard the autoclave bag. 
(3)  Disinfect all jewelry contaminated with only airborne pathogens (not previously worn or contaminated) with a non-hazardous hard surface disinfectant approved by the EPA. All jewelry contaminated or potentially contaminated with blood-borne pathogens (previously worn by another person) should be autoclaved, stored in sterile indicator bags, sealed and dated. 
(4)  Pre-sterilize all needles used in piercing, use only on one person, at one sitting, for a single piercing, and immediately dispose of in a medical sharps container. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-64. - After tattoo/body piercing application. 
(a)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antibacterial solution. 
(b)  After the area has dried, apply a layer of antibacterial ointment from a single use dispenser or applicator. 
(c)  A bandage or cover shall then be applied to the tattoo using sealed telfa (non-sticking) pads. 
(d)  Verbal and written instructions, approved by the county health department for the care of the body art procedure site shall be provided to each client by the operator upon completion of the procedure. The written instructions shall advise the client to consult a physician at the first sign of infection and contain the name, address and phone number of the establishment. These documents shall be signed and dated by both parties, with a copy given to the client and the operator retaining the original with all other required records. The facility shall also post in public view the name, address and phone number of the county health department and the procedure for filing a complaint. The notice for filing a complaint shall be included in the establishment application packet. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-65. - Disinfection of workplace. 
Each body art studio must be kept clean and sanitary. The owner must develop and implement a cleaning schedule that includes appropriate methods of decontamination and tasks or procedures to be performed. This written schedule must be based on the location within the studio, the type of surfaces to be cleaned, type of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the studio. 
The following procedures should be adhered to: 
(1)  Clean and sanitize all equipment and work surfaces with an appropriate disinfectant after completion of tattoo/body piercing procedures and at the end of work shift when surfaces have become contaminated since the last cleaning. 
(2)  Remove and replace protective coverings such as plastic wrap and aluminum foil after each tattoo procedure. 
(3)  Inspect and decontaminate, on a daily basis or more frequently if necessary, reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have a likelihood for becoming contaminated. When contamination is visible, clean and decontaminate receptacles immediately, or as soon as feasible. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-66. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)  Needles, razors, or other sharp instruments used during tattoo/body piercing procedures, shall be placed in puncture resistant, closed containers immediately after use. 
(b)  Needles shall not be purposely bent or broken, or otherwise manipulated by hand. 
(c)  Containers of sharp waste shall be sent to a bio-hazardous waste facility where they are either incinerated or otherwise rendered non-hazardous in compliance with 29 CFR Part 1920.1030, occupational exposure to blood-borne pathogens. Record of disposal must be kept on site. 
(d)  Contaminated waste which may release liquid blood or body fluids when compressed or may release dried blood or body fluids when handled must be placed in an approved "red" bag, which is marked with the International Biohazard Symbol. It must then be disposed of in compliance with 29 Code of Federal Regulations Part 1910.1030, known as "Occupational Exposure To Blood-Borne Pathogens". Written documentation of how bio-waste is disposed of is required. 
(e)  Waste containers shall be kept closed when not in use. 
(f)  Disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(g)  At least one covered waste receptacle shall be provided in each operator area and each toilet room. Receptacles in the operator area shall be emptied daily and solid waste shall be removed from the premises at least weekly. All refuse containers shall be lidded, cleanable and kept clean. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-67. - Personnel. 
(a)  Persons performing the tattoo/body piercing operation shall obtain current certification in first aid and proof of attendance at a blood borne pathogen training program (or equivalent), given or approved by the county health department. Training/courses provided by professional body art organizations/associations or by equipment manufacturers may also be submitted for consideration. 
(b)  If the artist is currently in business at the time of application for permit the above certification must be obtained within 60 days from the date the permit is issued. 
(c)  Persons performing the tattoo/body piercing operation shall obtain current certification in CPR, and present proof of such training at the time of application. 
(d)  Proof shall be provided upon request that all tattoo artists and body piercing artists have either completed or were offered and declined in writing, the hepatitis B vaccination series; that antibody testing has revealed that the employee is immune to hepatitis B; or that the vaccine is contraindicated for medical reasons. Contraindication requires a dated and signed physician's statement specifying the name of the employee and that the vaccine cannot be given. 
(e)  No person shall perform or be involved with the tattoo/body piercing operation or procedure if such person has a skin rash, boils, infected wounds, open sores, weeping dermatological lesions, or acute respiratory infection. 
(f)  The owner or governing body must maintain a file on all employees who perform tattoo/body piercing procedures, which will be available for inspection and includes the following: 
(1)  Proof of immunization and immunity for Hepatitis A and Hepatitis B. Proof of negative HIV and RPR (syphilis) status. Yearly testing for immunity to hepatitis A and hepatitis B, HIV and RPR (syphilis) serology testing. 
(2)  Evidence of first aid certification and completed training in disease prevention/blood borne pathogens. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-68. - Client files. 
(a)  For each client, proper records of identification, tattoos/piercings administered, informed consent, and care instructions shall be kept and retained for a minimum of two years. 
(b)  Records of each client shall be prepared prior to the procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name and signature, address, phone number, type of positive picture ID, proof of age, date tattooed, design, its location and name of the artist. 
(c)  A statement of informed consent by the individual receiving the tattoo must be maintained on file. 
(d)  A statement by the client attesting that he/she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs shall be on file. 
(e)  A copy of procedures signed by the client advising them of proper subsequent care of the tattoo shall be maintained on file. 
(f)  A copy of instructions signed by the client informing them on the risks involved and possible complications that might result from the tattoo/body piercing procedure must be maintained on file. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-69. - Application for permit. 
(a)  The governing body of each body art studio shall submit to the county health department an application for a permit to operate under the rules and regulations. No studio shall be operated and no tattooing/body piercing performed without such a permit which is current under these rules and regulations. 
(b)  The application for permit shall be made on forms provided by the county board of health. 
(c)  Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a floor sketch of the body art studio showing windows, doors, room measurements, chairs, tables and equipment placement for clients and/or staff. 
(d)  A listing of the names of all staff including the owner who will be working in the studio shall be included with the application for a permit. This listing shall include the full name of each staff person. 
(e)  The ownership of the studio shall be fully disclosed in its application for a permit. 
(f)  Zoning and other local requirements regarding proper location and establishment of body art studios shall be addressed by the applicant with the responsible local officials. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-70. - Operator/artist permit. 
(a)  No person shall practice body art procedures without first obtaining an operator/artist permit from the county health department. 
(b)  The operator/artist permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall automatically expire in one year and must be renewed annually unless revoked sooner by the department. 
(c)  Application for the operator/artist permits shall include: 
(1)  Name; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Sex; 
(4)  Residence address; 
(5)  Mailing address; 
(6)  Phone number; 
(7)  Place(s) of employment as an operator/artist; 
(8)  Training and/or experience; 
(9)  Proof of attendance at a blood-borne pathogen training program and first aid course given or approved by the county board of health; 
(10)  Copy of driver's license or other pictured ID for purposes of identification; 
(11)  Copy of current cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) certificate or other evidence of completion of CPR training; 
(12)  The application fee charged by the county board of health; 
(13)  Proof regarding Hepatitis B as required by section 38-67(d); 
(14)  A physician's statement that all tattoo artists and body piercing artists are free from the following communicable diseases: 
a.  Hepatitis A and B; 
b.  Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS); 
c.  Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV); 
d.  Syphilis. 
(15)  Proof of contract or agreement with bio-hazardous waste facility for disposal as required by section 38-66(c). 
(d)  All operator/artist permits shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous area where they may be readily observed by clients. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-71. - Permit. 
(a)  The governing body of each body art studio shall obtain a valid permit from the county board of health prior to beginning operation. To be eligible for a permit the studio must be in compliance with these rules and regulations. 
(b)  The permit shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
(c)  Permits are not transferable from one studio to another. 
(d)  A permit shall no longer be valid and shall be returned to the county board of health when the studio ceases to operate, has moved to another location, the ownership changes, or the permit is suspended or revoked. 
(e)  A studio which fails to comply with these rules and regulations shall be subject to the sanctions available to the county board of health pursuant to O.C.G.A. chapter 31-5 including, but not limited to, denial or revocation of its permit by the county board of health. 
(f)  No occupation tax certificate shall be issued by the city unless and until a permit required by this section is issued by the county board of health. Revocation of such permit by the county board of health shall be grounds for revocation of any occupation tax certificate issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-72. - Inspections. 
(a)  The studio and its records shall be available for review and examination by properly identified representatives of the county board of health and/or City of Sylvania police or city officials. 
(b)  A copy of the inspection report shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises and also shall be available for public inspection at the county health department where the studio is located. 
(c)  Body art studios shall be subject to inspection by the county health department and/or City of Sylvania police or city officials at all reasonable times, including regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-73. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement of these rules and regulations shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. chapter 31-5. 
(b)  No person shall engage in tattooing/body piercing except in a licensed studio. All tattoo artists must have an operator permit. No tattoo studio shall be operated without a permit. Failure or refusal to file an application for a permit shall constitute a violation of O.C.G.A. chapter 31-40. 
(c)  The county board of health may refuse to grant a permit for the operation of any body art studio that does not fulfill the minimum requirements of these rules and regulations and may revoke a permit which has been issued and invoke other sanctions if a studio violates any of these rules and regulations. Before any order is entered refusing a permit applied for or revoking a permit, the applicant or permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before the county board as provided in O.C.G.A. chapter 31-5, article 1. The notice of refusal or revocation shall contain directions on how a hearing may be requested. 
(d)  The county board of health is empowered to institute appropriate proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining violation of any applicable provision of O.C.G.A. title 31, or of the rules and regulations. 
(e)  The city may contract with Screven County and/or the Screven County board of health to carry out the terms and provisions of this article. 
(f)  Violations of this article shall also subject the violator to the general penalty provisions set forth in section 1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sylvania as now enacted or subsequently amended. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-74. - Effective date. 
The ordinance from which this article is derived shall become effective upon adoption. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Sec. 38-75. - Severability. 
In the event any part or parts of this article are declared to be unconstitutional or unlawful by any court of competent jurisdiction, the offending portion or portions shall be deemed stricken herefrom, and the remaining part or parts of this article shall remain enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 474, 3-6-12) 
Chapter 42 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; electrical contractor's licenses, § 18-106; cable communications, ch. 22; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 66; telecommunications towers and antennae, ch. 68; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 74; subdivision regulations, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. 7, sec. 1, par. 3; The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas; conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-36; removal of transportable housing from lands subject to writ of possession, O.C.G.A. § 44-7-59; ad valorem taxation of mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq. 

Sec. 42-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Sections 8-1017 through 8-1019 of the 1976 Code relating to trailers and mobile homes are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Chapter 46 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Listed below are section number designations from the 1976 Code which have been omitted from this codification as duplications of state law: 

 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; offenses, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Establishment and jurisdiction of municipal courts, Ga. Const. art. 6, sec. 1, par. 1; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1—46-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BONDS 

Sec. 46-26. - Appearance bonds. 
The municipal court of the city shall have the power and authority to accept cash bonds in an amount not to exceed the maximum fine that may be imposed by law for the offense or offenses charged, or a property bond in an amount not to exceed double the amount of the maximum fine that may be imposed for the charge or charges. Additionally, the municipal court shall have the authority to release persons on their own recognizance only, and the full power and authority to issue an order for the arrest of persons charged with crimes who fail to appear for arraignment, trial, or other hearing before the court at the appointed time. Appearance bonds may be set and accepted by the municipal judge of the city or his designee, or by the chief of police of the city, or his designee. Additionally, the municipal judge shall have all powers conferred upon municipal court judges by state law as presently existing or hereinafter enacted. 
(Ord. No. 392, § II, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 46-27. - When forfeiture occurs. 
(a)  A bond forfeiture occurs at the end of the court day upon the failure of appearance of a principal of any bond or recognizance given for the appearance of that person. 
(b)  An appearance bond shall not be forfeited unless the clerk of the court gave the surety at least 72 hours' written notice, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, before the time of the required appearance of the principal. Notice shall not be necessary if the time for appearance is within 72 hours from the time of arrest, provided the time for appearance is stated on the bond, or where the principal is given actual notice in open court. 
(Ord. No. 392, § II, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 46-28. - Execution hearing on failure to appear. 
(a)  The judge shall, at the end of the court day, upon the failure of the principal to appear, forfeit the bond and order an execution hearing not sooner than 120 days but not later than 150 days after such failure to appear. Notice of the execution hearing shall be served within ten days of such failure to appear by certified mail to the surety at the address listed on the bond or by personal service to the surety within ten days of such failure to appear at its home office or to its designated registered agent. Service shall be considered complete upon the mailing of such certified notice. 
(b)  If at the execution hearing it is determined that judgment should be entered, the judge shall so order and a writ of fieri facias shall be filed on the execution docket of the clerk of the superior court of Screven County, Georgia. Said judgment may be also entered on the execution docket in other counties of the State of Georgia, and in states outside the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 392, § II, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 46-29. - Conditions not warranting forfeiture of bond for failure to appear; remission of forfeiture. 
(a)  No judgment shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court by the written statement of a licensed physician that the principal on the bond was prevented from attending by some mental or physical disability. 
(b)  No judgment shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that the principal on the bond was prevented from attending because he or she was detained by reason of arrest, sentence, or confinement in a penal institution or jail in the State of Georgia, or so detained in another jurisdiction, or because he or she was involuntarily confined or detained pursuant to court order in a mental institution in the State of Georgia or in another jurisdiction. An official written notice of the holding institution in which the principal is being detained or confined shall be considered proof of the principal's detention or confinement and such notice may be sent from the holding institution by mail or delivered by hand or by facsimile machine. Upon the presentation of such written notice to the clerk of the city municipal court and to the city chief of police, along with a letter of intent to pay all costs of returning the principal to the jurisdiction of the court, such notice and letter shall serve as the surety's request for a detainer or hold to be placed on the principal. Should there be a failure to place a detainer or hold within 15 days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, and after such presentation of such notice and letter of intent to pay costs, the surety shall then be relieved of the liability for the appearance bond without further order of the court. 
(c)  No judgment shall be rendered on a forfeiture of any appearance bond if it is shown to the satisfaction of the court that prior to the entry of the judgment on the forfeiture the principal on the bond is in the custody of the city chief of police or other responsible law enforcement agency. An official written notice of the holding institution in which the principal is being detained or confined shall be considered proof of the principal's detention or confinement and such notice may be sent from the holding institution by mail or delivered by hand or by facsimile machine. Upon the presentation of such written notice to the clerk of the city municipal court and the city chief of police, along with a letter of intent to pay all costs of returning the principal to the jurisdiction of the court, such notice and letter shall serve as the surety's request for a detainer or hold to be placed against the principal. Should there be a failure to place a detainer or hold within 15 days, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays, and after presentation of such notice and letter of intent to pay costs, the surety shall then be relieved of the liability for the appearance bond without further order of the court. 
(d)  In cases in which subsection (d)(3) of this section is not applicable, on application filed within 120 days from the payment of judgment, the court shall order remission under the following conditions: 
(1)  Provided the bond amount has been paid within 120 days after judgment and the delay has not prevented prosecution of the principal and upon application to the city municipal court, said court shall direct remission of 95 percent of the bond amount remitted to the surety if the surety locates the principal in the custody of the city chief of police, the sheriff in the jurisdiction where the bond was made, or in another jurisdiction causing the return of the principal to the city chief of police, apprehends, surrenders, or produces the principal, if the apprehension or surrender of the principal was substantially procured or caused by the surety, or if the location of the principal by the surety caused the adjudication of the principal in the city municipal court or Screven County State Court. Should the surety, within two years of the principal's failure to appear, locate the principal in the custody of the chief of police of Sylvania, the sheriff in the jurisdiction where the bond was made or in another jurisdiction causing the return of the principal to the chief of police of Sylvania, apprehend, surrender, or produce the principal, if the apprehension or surrender of the principal is substantially procured or caused by the surety, or if the location of the principal by the surety causes the adjudication of the principal in the municipal court of the city or the State Court of Screven County, the surety shall be entitled to a refund of 50 percent of the bond amount. The application for 50 percent remission shall be filed no later than 30 days following the expiration of the two-year period following the date of judgment; 
(2)  Remission shall be granted upon condition of the payment of court costs and of the expenses of returning the principal to the jurisdiction by the surety; or 
(3)  If, within 120 days after judgment, the surety surrenders the principal to the chief of police or responsible law enforcement officer, or said surrender has been denied by the chief of police or responsible law enforcement officer, or surety located the principal in custody in another jurisdiction, the surety shall only be required to pay costs and five percent of the face amount of the bond, which amount includes all surcharges. If it is shown to the satisfaction of the court, by the presentation of competent evidence from the chief of police or the holding institution, that said surrender has been made or denied or that the principal is in custody in another jurisdiction or that said surrender has been made and that five percent of the face amount of the bond and all costs have been tendered to the chief of police, the court shall direct that the judgment be marked satisfied and that the writ of execution, fi. fa., be canceled. 
(Ord. No. 392, § II, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 46-30. - Address of principal and surety on bond or recognizance. 
Every bond or recognizance given to secure the appearance of any person in any criminal proceeding shall have entered thereon the mailing address of the principal and each surety. 
(Ord. No. 392, § II, 2-15-00) 
Sec. 46-31. - Effective date. 
This article shall be effective February 15, 2000. Provided, however, any cash or property bonds previously accepted by any person on behalf of the city may be forfeited under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 392, § II, 2-15-00) 
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General penalty, § 1-12; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; health and sanitation, ch. 38; municipal court, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Limitations on home rule powers of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 50-1. - Intoxicating beverages prohibited at recreation center. 
No person shall consume, or have in his possession for consumption, any intoxicating beverages of any kind, character or description upon the property of the city used for recreational purposes and generally designated as the recreation center. 
(Code 1976, § 4-4001) 
Sec. 50-2. - Electric fences prohibited. 
No electric fence shall be erected or placed within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 243, § 1, 8-21-84) 
Sec. 50-3. - Attempt to commit offense. 
Whoever attempts to commit any offense prohibited by this Code, and in this attempt does any act toward the commission of this offense, but fails in the perpetration thereof, or is intercepted or prevented in the execution thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1001) 
Sec. 50-4. - Begging. 
No person shall beg, solicit or obtain alms or gifts, directly or indirectly, for the use of the solicitor or beggar, within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1002) 
Sec. 50-5. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Any person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if he: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in fear of safety for his life, limb or health. 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Endangers lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct. 
(4)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property. 
(5)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(6)  Jostles or roughly crowds or pushes any person in any public place. 
(7)  Collects in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes. 
(8)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming. 
(9)  Frequents any public place with intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device. 
(10)  Assembles with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or aids or abets therein. 
(11)  Utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets. 
(12)  Frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated. 
(13)  Acts in a dangerous manner toward others. 
(14)  Uses "fighting words" directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil. 
(15)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another. 
(16)  By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(17)  Congregates with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority. 
(18)  Makes any unreasonably loud and unnecessary noise. 
(19)  Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition. 
(20)  Consumes alcoholic beverages on any public street, sidewalk, or any other public property within the corporate limits of the city. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption. 
(21)  Consumes alcoholic beverages in a vehicle or not on any public or private parking lot within the corporate limits of the city, except those maintained at establishments holding a valid on-premises license for the retail sale of malt beverages. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption. 
(22)  Any person convicted of disorderly conduct, as defined in this section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1004) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6. 
Sec. 50-6. - Indecency. 
No person shall be found in a state of nudity, or in dress not appropriate to his sex, or indecently expose his person, or make any indecent gesture. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1005) 
Sec. 50-7. - Loitering in parks. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall loiter in any park within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  Public parks located in residential areas. 
(1)  Loitering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in any public park located in areas within the city zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3 between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(2)  Notice. The city manager shall cause to be posted in each and every public park located in areas within the city zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3, a sign in a conspicuous location within such parks, containing the following language: 
PARK HOURS: 6:00 A.M.—9:00 P.M.  LOITERING IN PARK IS UNLAWFUL  BETWEEN 9:00 P.M. AND 6:00 A.M.  MAXIMUM FINE: $500.00 
(3)  Enforcement. Anyone violating the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $25.00 for the first offense, and not to exceed $500.00 or six months imprisonment, or both, for subsequent offenses. 
(4)  Conflict with other ordinances. To the extent that this subsection is in conflict with subsection 50-7(a) and section 50-19, this subsection shall supersede such other sections. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1006; Ord. No. 358, §§ I—IV, 10-13-97) 
Cross reference— Curfew for minors in parks, § 50-19(a). 
Sec. 50-8. - Loitering in streets, other public places. 
(a)  No person shall loiter upon the streets, sidewalks or other public places within the city without apparent reason and under circumstances which justify suspicion that he may be engaged in or about to engage in a crime. 
(b)  No person shall loiter in or near the city hall. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1007) 
Sec. 50-9. - Profane language. 
No person shall use profane, vulgar, indecent or obscene language in any public place or publicly; or upon the private premises of another, or so near thereto as to be heard by another. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1008) 
Sec. 50-10. - Unlawful assemblies. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to assemble with others for the purpose of doing or committing any unlawful act, whether the same is contrary to the laws of the state or the United States or this Code or an ordinance of the city, or a lawful act designed to provoke a breach of the peace or other civil disorder, to fail and refuse to obey the lawful order or command of any police, constable or other peace officer to disperse, separate and move on from the scene of such unlawful assembly. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1009) 
Sec. 50-11. - Discharge of airgun, slingshots. 
No person shall discharge any airgun or slingshot within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1010) 
Sec. 50-12. - Discharge of firearms, bows and arrows. 
(a)  No person shall discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm or bow and arrow without written permission from the chief of police containing a statement as to duration of such permission and a statement as to the purpose and circumstances for which such permission is granted. Permission may be granted for such purposes which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the disposal of poisonous and otherwise harmful snakes; the disposal of squirrels which are causing health hazards or damage to property; and the disposal of other vermin which are harmful to health or property. Permission shall only be granted to those persons who, in the sole discretion of the chief of police, are responsible adults. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  To any authorized federal, state, county or municipal officer in the legitimate pursuit of his duties nor to one exercising his right of self defense as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-3-21; 
(2)  To archery classes conducted under the supervision of the county board of education or its duly authorized personnel; 
(3)  To any person who, with permission of the owner, is hunting or conducting target practice on a tract of land within the city which has acreage within the city equaling or exceeding 20 acres. This exception is subject to all other state, federal and local laws and ordinances. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1011; Ord. No. 246, 1-22-85; Ord. No. 288, 5-17-88; Ord. No. 435, § I, 9-7-06) 
Sec. 50-13. - Officers to take possession of weapons of arrested persons. 
If any person is lawfully arrested while committing a criminal offense or a breach or disturbance of the public peace and shall have on his person any dangerous weapon, the arresting officer shall take possession of this weapon. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1012) 
Sec. 50-14. - Use of weapons by minors. 
(a)  No minor shall discharge any gun, pistol, air rifle, BB gun, pellet gun, or any other weapons of like nature in the city. 
(b)  Once a minor has been charged with a violation of subsection (a), the subject weapon or weapons shall be confiscated by law enforcement officials pending trial. 
(c)  Any adult who shall intentionally or negligently encourage or acquiesce in the violation of subsection (a) shall be subject in the penalties set out in section 1-12 upon conviction. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1013; Ord. No. 247, 1-22-85) 
Sec. 50-15. - Unauthorized use of trash dumpster. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
Commercial trash dumpster means a receptacle for trash, garbage or other refuse of the variety commonly referred to as a dumpster, for which a specially designed truck is generally used in dumping such receptacle. 
Owner means a person having title to or having a valid lease on a commercial trash dumpster. 
(b)  Unauthorized use of trash dumpster prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit trash, garbage or other refuse, or any other item or items, into a commercial trash dumpster in the city without the express consent of the owner. 
(c)  Any person violating this section shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 283, § 3, 12-1-87) 
Sec. 50-16. - Interference with public monuments prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, sit on, stand on or hang from any statue, monument, tombstone, public fountain or memorial erected in public parks, government-owned cemeteries and other public property within the city. 
(b)  Violations of this section shall be tried in the municipal court and shall be punishable upon conviction, as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 290, 7-5-88) 
Sec. 50-17. - Solicitors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person not a resident of the city to solicit the sale of magazines, pictures, pencils or other miscellaneous items within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-4002) 
Sec. 50-18. - Distribution of printed material prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed within the city any handbill or printed or written material by placing, or causing such handbill or printed or written material to be placed in any yards, driveways, walkways or porches of any structure within the city. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any newspaper, or to any publication containing printed or written material, to which the occupants of the subject premises pay money (United States currency) in return for receiving such material. 
(c)  This section is not intended nor shall it be construed to prohibit distribution of printed or written material utilizing any means of distribution which does not cause such materials to be placed or deposited in any yards, driveways, walkways or porches of any structure within the city which means of distribution shall include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The U.S. mail. 
(2)  Personally handing such material to persons willing to accept the same on streets, sidewalks, parks or at their residences. 
(3)  Utilizing doorknobs or mailbox hanging devices in a manner which reasonably ensures that such material shall not be placed or caused to become placed or deposited upon any yards, driveways or porches of any structure within the city. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall be punishable upon conviction, as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 321, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 323, 7-28-92) 
Sec. 50-19. - Curfew for minors; penalty for parents, guardians, etc., for violations. 
(a)  Curfew after 11:00 p.m. for persons 17 years or younger. It is unlawful for any minor 17 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; however, on Fridays and Saturdays, the effective hours are between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above referenced places during the proscribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion. 
(b)  Responsibility of parents. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any child 17 years of age or younger to permit or by insufficient control to allow such child to be in or upon the public streets or any other places listed in subsection (a) within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except in circumstances set out in subsections (1) through (5) of subsection (a). Upon conviction of violation of this section for the first time, a person shall be given a warning citation. Upon further convictions, a person shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs, or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than 60 days, or work on the public streets or work on the public works of the city for not more than 60 days, or be subject to any one or more of the punishments, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 329, § III, 9-28-93) 
Cross reference— Loitering in parks, § 50-7. 
Sec. 50-20. - Maintenance of yards on residential lots. 
(a)  Grassy areas. It shall be unlawful for the adult occupant or occupants of any residential structure in the city, the property owner or owners of any unoccupied residential structure in the city, or the owner or owners of any vacant lot in an area zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3 in the city that has been substantially cleared of trees and is no longer in a natural wooded state to allow the grass in any portion of the yard area to exceed a height of six inches for a period of longer than three weeks. 
(b)  Beds of flowers, trees or shrubbery. It shall be unlawful for the adult occupant or occupants of any occupied residential structure in the city, or the property owner or owners of any unoccupied residential structure in the city or the owner or owners of any vacant lot in an area zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3 in the city that has been substantially cleared of trees and is no longer in a natural wooded state to allow weeds and other undergrowth to exceed a height of six inches for a period of longer than three weeks in any portion of the yard area containing beds of flowers, trees or shrubbery. 
(c)  Definition of yard. For purposes of this section, "yard" is defined to mean all of the area surrounding a residential structure, located on one lot or on contiguous lots owned by the same owner or owners, or occupied by the same occupant or occupants of the residential structure, but excluding any portion of such lot or lots which are uncleared and have been left in a natural wooded state. "Yard" also includes vacant lots in areas of the city zoned R-1, R-2 and R-3 which have been substantially cleared of trees and are no longer in a natural wooded state. 
(d)  Exception for occupants of multifamily structures. This section shall be applicable to the owners of multifamily residential structures (apartments, duplexes and condominiums) and shall not be applicable to the occupants of such multifamily residential structures. 
(e)  Penalty. Any person or persons violating the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $25.00 for the first offense. Subsequent offenses shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00. After the receipt of a warning or citation from the city police department or other peace officer that this section is being violated, each additional day that this section is violated shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 331, §§ III—VI, 11-16-93) 
Cross reference— Weed and vegetation growth as nuisances, § 30-26; dilapidated buildings as nuisances, § 30-41 et seq.; salvage yards as nuisances, § 30-61. 
Sec. 50-21. - Maintenance of yards on commercial lots. 
(a)  Definitions. [For the purposes of this section the following definitions apply:] 
Occupant shall mean any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm or association, or other legal entity that occupies real estate subject to this section as a tenant, either gratuitously, or for a valid consideration. 
Owner shall mean any natural person, corporation, partnership, firm or association, or other legal entity that has any ownership interest in real estate subject to this section. 
Yard shall mean all of the area on one lot or on contiguous lots owned by the same owner or owners in a commercial zone within the city (C-1 or C-2) or in a professional zone (P) that is not covered by a building or by paving, but excluding any portion of such lot or lots which are uncleared and have been left in a natural wooded state. "Yard" also includes vacant lots in areas of the city zoned C-1, C-2 and P which have been substantially cleared of trees and are no longer in a natural wooded state. 
(b)  Yard standards. 
(1)  Grassy areas. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of real estate zoned C-1, C-2 or P in the city, or the owner or owners of any vacant real estate in an area zoned C-1, C-2 or P in the city that has been substantially cleared of trees and is no longer in a natural wooded state, to allow the grass in any portion of the yard to exceed a height of six inches for a period of longer than three weeks. 
(2)  Beds. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of real estate zoned C-1, C-2 or P in the city, or the owner or owners of any vacant real estate in an area zoned C-1, C-2, or P in the city that has been substantially cleared of trees and is no longer in a natural wooded state, to allow weeds and other undergrowth to exceed a height of six inches for a period of longer than three weeks in any portion of the yard containing beds or flowers, trees or shrubbery. 
(3)  Trash dumpsters. It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of real estate in any zone in the city on which there is situated a commercial solid waste container to allow trash, garbage or other refuse to be placed in such container in such a manner that such trash, garbage or other refuse falls from the confines of such container due to force of wind, gravity, or a combination of both. 
(c)  Penalty. Any owner or occupant violating the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $25.00 for the first offense. Subsequent offenses shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $100.00. After receipt of a warning or citation from the city police department or other peace officer that this section is being violated, each additional day that the section is violated shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 342, §§ III—V, 11-21-95) 
Sec. 50-22. - Probationers in municipal court to provide information. 
Some of the persons who are given probated sentences in the Sylvania Municipal Court abscond during the probationary period. The purpose of this section is to require probationers to provide information regarding their whereabouts and to provide for the tolling of sentences for absconding probationers. 
(1)  Information regarding whereabouts. Where all or any part of a sentence rendered in the municipal court of the city is probated, the probationer shall keep the city police chief, or his designee, informed at all times during the probation period of the probationer's residential address and his whereabouts. 
(2)  Tolling of sentence. In the event the probationer cannot be found at his residential address or at a location provided by the probationer to the chief of police or his designee, upon the filing of an affidavit in the city municipal court to that effect, the sentence given to the probationer shall be tolled during the period beginning with the filing of the affidavit, through the date that the probationer reports to the chief of police or his designee, or the probationer is taken into custody by the city, or the probationer otherwise makes himself available to the city municipal court. 
(3)  Power to revoke probation. The municipal court of the city shall have the power to revoke all or any part of a probated sentence for violation of any term or terms of the conditions of probation imposed by the court. 
(4)  Unpaid fines, etc. Any unpaid fines, restitution, or any other monies owed as a condition of probation shall be due when the probationer first reports to the chief of police or his designee after the filing of an affidavit as provided in subsection (2) above, or upon the probationer being taken into custody by the city, or upon the probationer otherwise making himself available to the municipal court for the city. Provided however, if the entire balance of the probationer's probation is revoked, all conditions of probation, including monies owed, shall be negated by his imprisonment. Provided further, if only a part of the balance of the probation is revoked, the probationer shall still be responsible for the full amount of the unpaid fines, restitution, and other monies upon his return to probation after release from imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 362, §§ I—IV, 11-3-98; Ord. No. 390, 2-15-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 362, §§ I—IV, adopted Nov. 3, 1998, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as § 50-22 was at the editor's discretion. 
Chapter 54 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; subdivision regulations, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Regulation of signs used by retail distilled spirits dealer, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3; prohibited placement of campaign posters, signs and advertisements, O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; regulation of outdoor advertising in vicinity of interstate highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Section 6-2022 of the 1976 Code relating to signs is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Secs. 54-2—54-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN BUSINESS AREA AND HISTORICAL DISTRICT SIGN REGULATIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 429, arts. 1—11, adopted May 3, 2005, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article II is at the discretion of the editor. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 453, § 1, adopted October 20, 2009, renamed article II from central business district and historical district sign regulations to downtown business area and historical district sign regulations. 

DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE AND SCOPE 

Sec. 54-26. - Purpose and scope. 
The mayor and council of the city find that development in the downtown business area and historic district is unique from other areas of the city due to its history, architecture, cultural heritage, and integrity; its substantial contribution to the economic vitality of the city; the compactness of buildings and businesses in said districts; the geometry of public road intersections; and its special mixture of pedestrian and slower speed vehicular traffic. 
The mayor and council find adoption of sign regulations specifically designed for the downtown business area and historic district serves the following purposes: 
(1)  The public health, safety and general welfare of the city is enhanced by ensuring the prohibition and removal of dangerous and unsafe signs. 
(2)  Pedestrian and motorist safety is promoted by reducing and limiting the number and area of signs, which can unduly distract motorists and pedestrians, create traffic hazards, confuse motorists when such signs are similar to traffic signs, and reduce the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public. 
(3)  The economic well-being of the city is enhanced by allowing individual businesses to identify themselves and the goods and services offered in a clear and distinctive manner, by creating a more attractive district, and by preserving and improving the appearance of the historic downtown and surrounding area, thereby assuring that signs are properly integrated with and harmonious to the buildings and sites in the historic downtown. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 1, 5-3-05; Ord. No. 453, § 2, 10-20-09) 
Secs. 54-27—54-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY, AUTHORITY, INTERPRETATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 54-36. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to the following: 
Downtown business area, which is defined as follows: 
(1)  From the beginning of South Main Street in the center of town to Telephone Street; 
(2)  From the beginning of North Main Street in the center of town to the northern property line of the old Nellie Morel Hill home; 
(3)  From the beginning of East Ogeechee Street in the center of town through the eastern property line of the present business building of AgSouth Farm Credit, ACA; 
(4)  All of Maple Street; and 
(5)  From W. T. Sharpe Drive in the center of town to Maple Street. 
The width of the area above named shall be the property lines of that property which abuts on the above designated streets. 
Historic district, which is defined as follows: From the beginning of Singleton Avenue in the center of town to Ridgecrest Drive. 
The width of the area above named shall be the property lines of that property which abuts on the above designated street. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 2 (§ 2.1), 5-3-05; Ord. No. 453, § 3, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 54-37. - Authority. 
The downtown development authority of the city (hereinafter DDA) shall have authority to review and act upon all applications for the erection of signs and other advertising devices within the downtown business area and the historic district, and in addition, shall have such other authority as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 2 (§ 2.2), 5-3-05; Ord. No. 453, § 4, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 54-38. - Interpretation and enforcement. 
The city building inspector shall be responsible for the interpretation of the provisions of this article and for enforcement of this article. A violation of this article is a misdemeanor. Violations shall be enforced in the same manner as violations of city zoning ordinances. See sections 8-3015-5 and 8-3015-6 of appendix B. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 2 (§ 2.3), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-39. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words shall be defined as specified in this section: 
Abandoned sign means any sign applicable to a use which has been discontinued for a period of three months. 
Alterations, as applied to a sign, means change or rearrangement in the structural parts or its design, whether by extending on a side, by increasing in area or height, or in moving from one location or position to another. 
Area of sign means the entire area including any type of perimeter or border which may enclose the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character. The area of the sign having no perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire area within a parallelogram or triangle of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire area of the sign and computing the area of the parallelogram, circle or triangle. 
Banners shall include signs, posters and banners and their common definitions. 
Building face or wall means all window and wall area of building in one place or elevation. 
Business identification sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, service, industry or other activity which is sold, offered, or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located, or to which it is affixed. Also known as a primary sign. 
Building directory sign means a sign which identifies, only the name and/or logo and/or address of a commercial complex, the owner and tenants thereof. 
Canopy means a roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material placed so as to extend outward from a building providing a protective shield for doors, windows, and other openings, supported by the building and supports extended to the ground directly under the canopy or cantilevered from the building. 
Changeable copy sign means a sign which is characterized by changeable copy, whether insert sign is a free-standing or wall sign, or whether said sign projects from and is supported by a building. 
Community or civic event means a public event which is of interest to the community as a whole rather than the promotion of any product, political candidate, religious leader or commercial goods or services. 
Directional sign (guide signs) means signs which serve as directional guides to recognized areas of regional importance and patronage. To clarify and define such areas of regional importance and patronage, two types of areas are intended to be included: 
(1)  Recreational and entertainment centers of recognized regional significance. 
(2)  Historical landmarks. 
Free-standing sign means a sign which is supported by one or more uprights or braces which are fastened to, or embedded in the ground or a foundation in the ground. Free-standing signs refer to on-premise advertising or project identification signs for the purpose of this article. 
Grandfathered sign. Same as Non-conforming signs (legal). 
Height of sign means the vertical distance measured from the ground plane to the top of the sign, including the air space between the ground and the sign. 
Hours of operation sign means a sign which displays hours of operation, including "open" and "closed" signs. 
Low profile sign means an on-premise identification sign having a maximum height of five feet. 
Master identification sign. Same as Building directory sign. 
Non-conforming signs (legal) (also known as grandfathered sign) means any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the purview of this article. 
On-premise or business identification signs means a sign which directs attention to a business, commodity, service, industry or other activity which is sold, offered, or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located, or to which it is affixed. 
Primary sign. See Business identification sign. 
Projecting sign means a sign attached to a building or other structure and extending in whole or in part more than six inches beyond any wall of the building or structure. 
Public property means any property owned by governmental entity or supported by public funds. 
Secondary sign means a sign which cannot exceed eight square feet in area, on which the name and the nature of a business or other establishment operated on the premises are shown. This sign can be either free-standing, attached or window. 
Sign means and includes every advertising message, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, surface or space erected or maintained in view of the observer thereof for identification, advertisement, or promotion of the interest of any person, entity, product, or service. The definition of sign shall also include the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments or other features used to draw the attention of observers. 
Signage plan means a plan designed to show the relationship of signs for any cluster of buildings or any single building housing a number of users or in any arrangement of buildings or shops which constitute a visual entity as a whole. 
Solicitation sign means a sign used to advise solicitors that they are not welcome on the property. 
Special purpose sign means a sign of a temporary nature other than those established by a business; for the purpose of advertising a special event pertaining to drives or events of a civic, philanthropic, educational, or religious organization. 
Special sale sign means temporary signs used to advertise a special sale on the premises. 
Structure means the supports, uprights, bracing, guy rods, cables, and framework of a sign or outdoor display. 
Temporary sign means a sign which is intended for use during a specified limited time. Temporary signs, as defined by this article, shall include real estate signs and construction signs. 
Theater marquee means a permanent structure with changeable letters, which is used to advertise theater events. 
Wall sign means a sign with messages or copy erected parallel to and attached to or painted on the outside wall of a building and extending not more than six inches from the wall. 
Window sign means a sign adjacent to or installed upon a window for the purpose of viewing from outside of the premises. This term does not include merchandise displayed. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 11, 5-3-05) 
Secs. 54-40—54-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES FOR PERMANENT SIGNS 

Sec. 54-46. - Permit required. 
No person shall erect, alter, or relocate any permanent or temporary sign within the downtown business area and historic district, without first obtaining a sign permit from the city building inspector, unless the sign is exempted by division 7. Any person who hangs, posts or installs a sign which requires a permit, and who fails to obtain a permit before installing the sign, shall be considered in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 3 (§ 3.1), 5-3-05; Ord. No. 453, § 5, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 54-47. - Permit approval by DDA. 
Any permit for a permanent or temporary sign within the downtown business area or historic district, shall require approval by the DDA. The city building inspector shall not issue a sign permit unless it has received prior approval of the DDA; provided, however that the city building inspector may issue a sign permit upon the direction of the city council upon a successful appeal as provided in section 54-51. The DDA is authorized to designate its manager and/or a committee of the DDA to perform the function of the entire DDA under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 3 (§ 3.2), 5-3-05; Ord. No. 453, § 6, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 54-48. - Pre-application conference. 
A pre-application conference with the DDA manager is encouraged in order for the applicant to become acquainted with application procedures, design standards, and related city ordinances (including but not limited to, the city's design ordinance). 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 3 (§ 3.3), 5-3-05) 
Sec 54-49. - Applications. 
Applications for sign permits for permanent signs shall be submitted to the city building inspector and must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan drawn to scale which specifies the location of the sign structure, and drawings or photographs which show the scale of the sign in context with the scale of the building if the sign is to be mounted on the building. 
(2)  Colored rendering or scaled drawing including dimensions of all sign faces, descriptions of materials to be used, manner of construction and method of attachment, and color samples. 
(3)  A complete signage plan for any commercial building which houses more than one business. This must be submitted prior to issuance of a permit for any one sign on the building. 
(4)  There shall be no application fee for a sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 3 (§ 3.4), 5-3-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 429, § 3.4, adopted May 3, 2005, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (A)—(D). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (1)—(4). 
Sec. 54-50. - Review procedures. 
Completed sign permit applications shall be submitted to the DDA for review, which review shall occur within 14 days of submission. The application shall either be approved, denied, or returned with requested modifications within 14 days of submission. 
In deciding upon sign applications, the DDA should consider the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether or not the proposed sign and its characteristics are generally consistent with the aesthetic, historic and architectural themes of properties in the district. 
(2)  Whether or not the sign facing, structure, design, color, lettering, lettering style, symbols, substance, scale, arrangement, texture, materials, area, height, illumination, location and clearance meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 3 (§ 3.5), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-51. - Appeals. 
Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the DDA relative to the issuance or denial of a sign permit may appeal such determination to the city council. Intention to take an appeal to the city council shall be filed with the city clerk in writing within 14 business days following the denial of the permit. 
In acting on an appeal, the city council may affirm, reverse, wholly or partly, the decision or determination of the DDA, and to that end shall have all of the powers of the city building inspector and may issue or direct the issuance of a sign permit. 
A reversal of the DDA's decision shall only be done by the city council, in cases where it is determined that the DDA either abused its discretion in reaching its decision, or it erred in the interpretation of the provisions of this article. Written notification of any such action shall be provided to the applicant and the DDA. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 3 (§ 3.6), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-52. - Variances. 
The DDA may authorize in specific cases such variances from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this article shall not be granted by the DDA unless and until: 
(1)  A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property or building in question because of its size, shape, location on lot, or topography; 
b.  The application of this article in such situation would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property or building involved; and 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this article. 
(2)  Notice of public hearing shall be posted on the property for which the variance is sought and shall be published at least 15 days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(3)  The hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(4)  The DDA shall make a decision within 15 days of the hearing, and shall make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the property for signage, and that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purposes of this article. 
(5)  In granting any variance, the DDA may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(6)  Any appeal from the grant or the denial of a variance by any person adversely affected by such decision shall be made in accordance with section 54-51 to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 3 (§ 3.7), 5-3-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 429, art. 3 (§ 3.7), adopted May 3, 2005, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (A)—(F). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (1)—(6). 
Secs. 54-53—54-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SIGN TYPES 

Sec. 54-66. - Types of signs allowed. 
The following types of signs are allowed subject to DDA review and approval based upon the regulations set forth in this article: 
(1)  Free standing signs. 
a.  Height limit. Free standing signs are limited to low profile signs which may not exceed a height of five feet at the highest point anywhere on the sign. 
b.  Design. Free standing monument signs with solid or enclosed bases are permitted where approved. Signs supported by at least two poles without enclosed bases are also permitted provided that the exposed pole's height does not constitute more than 50 percent of the overall height (i.e., the height of the open area beneath a sign cannot exceed 50 percent of the sign's total height). Single pole signs are not considered appropriate in the following areas: Within the downtown business area on North and South Main Streets between Telephone Street and W. T. Sharpe Drive, and on all of Maple Street, except in the case where a single pole is used in conjunction with a horizontal cross-bar to support hanging signs on one side of the pole only subject to the projection and clearance provisions defined in section 54-83. 
c.  Size. Free standing signs shall be limited to a maximum of the greater of nine square feet or two and one-half percent of the total building face or wall on which said sign fronts or is a part. 
d.  Density. Businesses, projects or parcels are limited to one free standing sign except that properties with more than 100 feet of continuous frontage and with more than one entrance may, subject to DDA approval, install a free standing sign at each entrance, provided that the combined square footage of all free standing signs does not exceed 18 square feet (two nine square foot signs). Where there is frontage on more than one street, each frontage is treated independently provided that no two signs may be closer than 100 feet to one another. Signage area may not be transferred from one frontage to another. 
(2)  Window signs. Permanent window signs may be placed in or upon any window, provided that no more than 30 percent of the total transparent area of the window or window(s) combined is obscured. Provided further, said permanent window signs shall meet the following additional size requirements: The total sign area shall be no greater than either nine square feet or two and one-half percent of the total building face or wall of which said sign is a part. 
(3)  Wall signs. Wall signs may be placed upon a building provided that they meet the size, material, content, location and other standards of this article. Wall signs shall be oriented toward pedestrians or vehicles within close proximity. 
(4)  Projecting signs. No single projecting sign may exceed nine square feet in area or may project more than 36 inches from the face of the building to which it is attached (projecting signs run perpendicular to the building). Projecting signs must have at least eight feet of ground clearance, and cannot be higher than the building to which they are attached. Signs may extend over city property only with the written approval of the city building inspector. 
(5)  Hanging signs. A hanging sign may be placed on a building or underneath an approved canopy, awning, or colonnade, as long as it does not project beyond the same (hanging signs run parallel). It must have at least eight feet of ground clearance. No sign size can exceed nine square feet. Signs may extend over city property only with the written approval of the city building inspector. 
(6)  Awnings. Awnings are permitted as signage provided they blend with the architecture of the building and do not obscure details of the building. Awnings should serve as an accent to the building's design but should not be the dominant architectural feature. Awnings are counted as signage if they have lettering or other graphics conveying a commercial message or name of a business or project sold in the building to which the awning is attached. Signage cannot exceed nine square feet or two and one-half percent of the total building face or wall on which said sign fronts or is a part. 
a.  Signage area. Only 20 percent of any one face of an awning may be used for signage regardless of the size of the building facade to which the sign applies, and cannot exceed nine square feet or two and one-half percent of the total building face or wall on which sign fronts or is a part. 
b.  Material. Only canvas will be permitted prospectively from the date of the adoption of this article. Material should be high quality, colorfast and sunfade resistant. Vinyl or plastic materials are not considered appropriate. 
c.  Color. Awning colors are generally limited to a single field color with a single contrasting color for lettering and may be used only if they conform to color requirements as specified in section 54-80. 
d.  Illumination. Illuminated (back-lit) translucent awnings or translucent letters on opaque backgrounds are not appropriate and are not permitted. Canvas awnings illuminated in the traditional manner with incandescent lighting are permitted. 
e.  Clearance and projection. The clearance and projection for awnings shall be reasonable, and will be handled on a case by case basis. 
f.  Location of awnings. Awnings must be located in a traditional manner above doors, and windows. All other locations are prohibited. 
(7)  Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs are permitted subject to the provisions of section 54-81. 
(8)  Neon signs, fiber optics or any similar internally lit signs. Neon used to draw attention to a business or building in any manner, including (but not limited to) neon text, logos or outlining of a building's architectural features, is not considered appropriate in the downtown business area or historic district and is therefore prohibited. 
(9)  Changeable copy signs. Changeable copy signs may only be used in conjunction with theaters, entertainment facilities, non-profit art galleries, or similar exhibit facilities permitted in the downtown business area or historic district. 
(10)  Directory signs (also known as building directory signs). Building directory signs shall be permitted to provide information for multi-tenant projects, each tenant can have a sign up to two square feet on the building directory. Building directory signs may have a maximum of 32 square feet of signage are for the project. The contents of such signs shall be limited to the name of the tenants of the project, address or suite number, and telephone numbers. Signs shall be located in the common area of the project and oriented toward a central pedestrian path or common parking area. No rental information or sales information shall be permitted on the building directory sign. A building directory sign does not constitute a primary or secondary sign. 
(11)  Menu display. Menus for restaurants may be displayed on the inside of windows of a restaurant or inside a wall mounted box. The maximum size shall be three square feet. If a display box is used, it must be constructed to coordinate with the building design, must contain a clear face which would protect the menu from the weather and must not extend over public property. Chalk or erasable boards are exempt from a clear face coverage. A menu display does not constitute a primary or secondary sign. If any information other than the menu is incorporated into the menu display, this would constitute a primary or secondary sign. 
(12)  Special event signs. Signs and banners promoting events sponsored by civic, charitable, educational, or other non-profit organizations may be erected on private property up to four weeks in advance of the event being promoted. These signs shall be removed within five days following the conclusion of the event. Signs or banners located on or over public property easements or right of way are subject to the requirements of this article and require approval by the city building inspector. 
(13)  Temporary signs. Temporary signs are permitted subject to the requirements of division 6. 
(14)  Holiday lighting. Holiday lighting in the form of white/clear only UL approved outdoor "Christmas" type lighting is permitted without DDA review and approval. However, the period of display is limited to the two-month time period of the Friday preceding Thanksgiving Day through and including January 15th of the next succeeding year. Display of holiday lighting at any other time is prohibited. Also prohibited are letters and/or words and/or phrases spelled and exhibited through the use of holiday lighting. This applies exclusively to outdoor lighting and not lighting inside the business premises itself. 
(15)  Block or italic lettering on building facade. Block, italic, or similar lettering on the facade of a building consisting of individual lettering either constructed of or having the appearance of being constructed of metal, stone or wood is allowed. If either constructed of or having the appearance of being constructed of metal, such lettering may consist of polished or unpolished gold, brass, copper, or any other color in compliance with section 54-80. Each individual letter or number shall not exceed 15 inches in height or 15 inches in width. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 4 (§ 4.1), 5-3-05; Ord. No. 453, § 7, 10-20-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 429, § 4.1, adopted May 3, 2005, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (A)—(O). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (1)—(15). 
Secs. 54-67—54-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DESIGN AND LOCATION STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— *All regulated signs must comply with the following design standards.    *Where this article conflicts with subsection 54-66(15), regarding block or italic lettering on building facade, subsection 54-66(15) shall control. 

Sec. 54-76. - Size requirements. 
The total area of all permanent signs including, but not limited to, freestanding signs, window signs, wall signs, projecting signs, and hanging signs, shall not exceed nine square feet or two and one-half percent of the total building face or wall on which said sign fronts or of which said sign is a part per business. There shall be no more than one primary, and one secondary sign per business. A secondary sign is one that is smaller than the primary sign. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 5 (§ 5.1), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-77. - Area of sign. 
The area of a sign shall consist of the entire area of the sign, including any type border which may enclose the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character. The area of the sign having no perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the entire area within a parallelogram, circle, or triangle of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire area of the sign and computing the area of that parallelogram, circle, or triangle. The area of the second side of a two-sided sign shall be included when calculating signage area. Signs can have a maximum of two sides. The total area allowed on all permanent signs is nine feet per side or 18 square feet for a two-sided sign. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 5 (§ 5.2), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-78. - Signage plans. 
Buildings or clusters of buildings having more than one tenant or use, shall provide a signage plan for the entire structure or project to be reviewed and approved by the DDA prior to erection of any sign. 
The signage plan must be designed so that it establishes a common theme or design, uses similar construction methods, has compatible colors, lettering, lettering style, symbols, scale and size of signs and/or identical background. 
Signage plans for office or multi-use buildings must have their primary focus on the identification of the building, and individual tenants may be identified by using small lettering on a window or door or directories. Total signage area within the plan is subject to the maximum size limitation of this article. Signage area cannot be transferred to a single building or facade from other buildings in the project. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 5 (§ 5.3), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-79. - Sign materials. 
Exposed surfaces of signs may be constructed of metal, glass, stone, concrete, brick, canvas or wood or other materials that have the appearance of the foregoing materials. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 5 (§ 5.4), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-80. - Color. 
Signs must be finished in subdued earthtone colors. Earthtones may be defined in this context to include the full spectrum of soil and clay colors. Spectrums of off-whites to deep browns, and light grays to black provide a wide range of acceptable colors. Brighter colors may be used provided they are imbued with brown or black tones. For example: pink imbued with brown would tend toward mauve and would be acceptable. Bright reds imbued with brown or black tones gives a deeper burgundy or maroon color and may also be acceptable. Colors should compliment the color scheme of the building. In no case will "day glo", fluorescent, reflective colored materials that give the appearance of changing color or brilliant luminescent colors be permitted. The DDA is authorized to provide samples of appropriate colors to be available at the DDA office. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 5 (§ 5.5), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-81. - Illumination. 
(a)  Externally illuminated signs. Light fixtures for externally illuminated signs must be simple in form and mounted so they do not obscure building ornamentation. The light fixtures should emphasize the continuity of the building surface and should not clutter the building in an unorganized manner. Spot lights and flood lights shall be directed only at the sign surface. Light shall not be directed off the property. No exposed light sources are allowed, and all light sources must be shaded to contain light rays to the sign. Colored lighting is prohibited. 
(b)  Internally illuminated signs. Internally illuminated signs are not considered appropriate in the downtown business area or historic district and are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 5 (§ 5.6), 5-3-05; Ord. No. 453, § 8, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 54-82. - Location on building. 
Architectural details of a building often suggest a location, size, or shape for a sign. Signage should compliment the architectural details of the building. Signs should help to establish a visual continuity with adjacent store fronts and relate directly to the store entrance. Signs must be oriented toward pedestrians or vehicles in close proximity. Signs shall be designed and located on the building or on the premises in a manner that is compatible with the mass and scale of the building to which the sign applies. Signs must not obscure architectural details of the building; nor cover doors, windows, or other integral elements of the facade. Signs shall not obstruct views of nearby intersections and driveways. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 5 (§ 5.9), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-83. - Projection and clearance. 
No sign may project more than 36 inches from the face of a building or pole. Projecting and hanging signs must maintain at least eight feet of clearance from ground level. Signs may extend over city property only with the written approval of the city building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 5 (§ 5.10), 5-3-05) 
Secs. 54-84—54-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TEMPORARY SIGNAGE 

Sec. 54-96. - Policy. 
It is the policy of the city as outlined in this division to restrict the use of temporary signage. Temporary signage is often poorly constructed, poorly maintained, and located in a manner that obscures traffic signs, views of intersections of public and private streets and driveways and tends to depreciate the scenic beauty and quality of life of the community by creating visual clutter. Temporary signage has a place in the community for specialized purposes, such as announcing properties for sale or lease, construction activities, temporary sales, or making political or ideological statements. Temporary signage is permitted for those and similar purposes subject to the regulations of this division. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 6 (§ 6.1), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-97. - Temporary signs. 
Temporary signs are those signs which are installed with the intent of displaying them continuously for more than 14 calendar days, but which are not related to a permanent land use on the property. Temporary signs for purposes of this article do not include signs announcing real estate properties for sale, lease or rent and campaign signs. Temporary signs are permitted subject to the following regulations on placement and location: 
(1)  Lighting prohibited. No temporary sign may be illuminated in any manner. 
(2)  Color and materials. Temporary signs are subject to the design standards of division 5. 
(3)  Maintenance. Temporary signs shall be maintained as provided in division 10, and it shall be a violation of this article to permit a temporary sign to fall into disrepair. 
(4)  Exceptions. Where there are conditions such as heavy vegetation on the property, or extremely steep terrain that makes the sign placement standards of this section impractical because the sign is not visible from the street, the DDA may grant an exception of the sign setback standards, but not the size or street orientation standards. In no event may temporary signs subject to the setback requirements be placed with the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 6 (§ 6.2), 5-3-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 429, § 6.2, adopted May 3, 2005, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (A)—(D). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (1)—(4). 
Sec. 54-98. - Banners over public property. 
(a)  Approval. All applications to display banners over public property shall be approved as outlined later in this section. 
(b)  Terms and conditions. In order to receive approval to display a sign or banner over public property, the applicant shall meet the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The banner or sign shall only inform the community of an upcoming community event. A community event shall be defined as a public event that is of interest to the community as a whole rather than the promotion of any product, political candidate, religious leader or commercial goods or services. 
(2)  The banner may only be displayed immediately prior to and during a community event which it advertises, and in no case shall the banner be displayed for more than 30 days or more than ten days after the event. 
(3)  Banners shall only be displayed at site(s) approved by the DDA. 
(4)  Reservation of dates for a banner site may be made up to three months prior to the date of display and are valid for a period of five years from the date of approval, provided that said civic or community event is the same date or within ten days of the same date each year and that the banner does not change in design or color. Site(s) are generally reserved on a first-come, first served basis; however, preference may be given for recurring annual events, historically or traditionally tied to a specific date, holiday or season. Additionally, a request to advertise the reoccurrence of the same event or same type of event within any one calendar year (i.e., plays or class registrations) may be honored if no request for the banner site for an unrepeated scheduling is received. 
(5)  No banners are allowed over city thoroughfares. 
a.  Maximum banner dimensions over public property shall not exceed four feet by 30 feet. 
b.  Day-glo, or fluorescent colors shall not be allowed. 
c.  Banners shall be constructed of durable weather resistance fabric. 
d.  Banners must be slit to reduce wind resistance. 
e.  Reserved. 
f.  Each corner of the banner must have a grommet and a lead of one-quarter inch rope from each corner no less than four feet long. 
g.  Banners must have a minimum of seven grommets (including two corner grommets) across the top edge, which allows the banner to be attached to a cable. 
h.  An additional 150 feet of one-quarter inch rope is required to hang each banner, and shall be provided to the city by the applicant or sponsor of the banner. 
(6)  The primary purpose of banners which extend over public property shall be to advertise and inform of upcoming community events. No more than 20 percent of each side of the banner space shall be used for the name or logo of a commercial sponsor. 
(7)  Prices or fees charged for the event shall not be displayed. 
(8)  Banners shall be hung or displayed in a manner that does not interfere with or impede traffic or interfere with or obscure traffic signs or control devices. 
(9)  The owner of a banner shall agree to assume full liability and indemnify the city for any damage to persons or property arising from the display of the banner by the city. 
(10)  If the banner is not picked up from the city by the applicant or sponsor within ten days after it has been taken down, the banner shall become the property of the city and will be disposed of. 
(11)  Banners should be received by the city two weeks prior to the date of scheduled display. 
(12)  The city is not responsible for any damage that may occur to the banner from any cause. 
(c)  A fee shall be payable to the city when the banner is dropped off at the city before its reservation commences to cover manpower costs associated with installation and removal of the banner. Said fee shall be set by resolution by city council. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 6 (§ 6.3), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-99. - Banners on city light standards. 
(a)  Administration. The city manager is authorized to administer the placement of banners on city light standards. 
(b)  Approval. Approval of all applications to display banners on city light standards shall be given by the city only if all conditions in this division are met. 
(c)  Terms and conditions. Banners displayed in the downtown business area or historic district area shall be either those sponsored by, designed for and commissioned by, fabricated for, and installed by the direction of the city, or those sponsored by outside entities (sponsors) that meet the following terms and conditions. 
(1)  The eligible sponsor must be a non-commercial, non-profit entity whose primary purpose is the offering of cultural, educational, or entertainment enrichment to the community. 
(2)  The design of banners must be presented to the DDA for review and approval. Artwork should be of sufficient size and show actual colors and banners material in sufficient detail to adequately represent the proposed final product. Design specifications are specified in subsection (6). 
(3)  The cost of the design and fabrication of the banners is to be borne by the sponsor. Cost of installation and dismantling will be borne by the organization sponsoring the banners. 
(4)  Applications shall be presented to the city in sufficient time to allow the determination of eligibility of the sponsor, design review, fabrication of the banners and verification of the scheduling of their period of display. 
(5)  Sponsors accept that the display period is contingent upon a workable arrangement within the overall schedule of other city banners as well as other commitments to outside sponsors. 
Prior commitments may preclude the desired display period of an otherwise acceptable sponsor's banner. The city acknowledges that a sponsor's interest and ability to participate may be contingent upon a minimum period, which would warrant the expense of fabrication of the banners. The display period will be on the first come basis. 
(6)  All banners on city light standards shall be hung by city personnel and must meet the following specifications. 
a.  Fabrication, design, and colors are to be approved by the DDA. 
b.  The dates for the banners to be installed and dismantled will be arranged by the sponsor and the city. 
c.  Fabric must be of durable material to withstand heavy winds. 
d.  Sponsors will pay for artwork, banner production, installation and dismantling of banners. 
e.  A permit shall be obtained from the city building inspector. 
f.  The issuance of a banner permit is made conditional also upon the execution by the appropriate responsible party on behalf of the permit applicant of an indemnification of the city commensurate with the particular risks created by the banner permit requested. 
g.  If the banner is not picked up form the city by the applicant or sponsor within ten days after it has been taken down, the banner shall become the property of the city and will be disposed of. 
h.  Banners should be received by the city two weeks prior to the date of scheduled display. 
i.  The city is not responsible for any damage that may occur to the banner from any cause. 
(d)  Fee. A fee shall be payable to the city when the application is dropped off before its reservation commences to cover costs associated with installation and removal of the banners. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 6 (§ 6.4), 5-3-05; Ord. No. 453, § 9, 10-20-09) 
Sec. 54-100. - Banners on private property. 
Banners identifying a specific commercial event or sale, and not identifying a particular business shall be subject to the following restrictions: One banner per premise, limited to on-site (i.e., the information on the banner must relate only to the business premises upon which the banner is displayed) banners only, permitted to be displayed for no more than ten consecutive calendar days, per any given 120 calendar day period, and banner shall not exceed 35 square feet in area. Review and approval is required by the DDA prior to the issuance of a permit or for display of said banner. Once approval has been obtained from the DDA the merchant may display the banner throughout the year provided that the proposed dates of display are provided to the DDA and do not exceed the ten-day display limitation listed above. The permit, which shall be valid for one year from the date of issue, shall identify the expiration date of said permit and shall be displayed in a prominent place. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 6 (§ 6.5), 5-3-05) 
Secs. 54-101—54-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - NON-REGULATED SIGNS 

Sec. 54-111. - Signs exempt from permit requirement. 
The following signs are not subject to a permit requirement and review/approval by the DDA if the following standards are met. They shall be regulated by the following size and placement standards, block lettering and coloration in accordance with section 54-80 and shall not be included when calculating permitted sign area for any parcel, use or development. 
(1)  Solicitation signs. One "no solicitors" sign, not to exceed one-half square foot, is allowed per major entrance to any building or apartment complex. 
(2)  Hours of operation sign. One "hours of operation" sign is allowed per entryway. Each sign may not exceed one square foot in area. The sign may not be illuminated. 
(3)  Trespassing and security signs. "No trespassing" and security signs may be posted on doors, windows or other property entrances, or on fences or property lines. They may not exceed one square foot in area, and may not be illuminated. 
(4)  Addressing numbers. Addressing numbers may be no higher than four inches and are not included in signage. 
(5)  Flags, symbols, or insignias. The flag of the United States, the state, or other flags or insignias of nations or governmental entities or agencies may be displayed and not counted as signage. A maximum of three flags per building. Individual flag size cannot exceed three feet by five feet. 
(6)  Special sale signs. Merchants may advertise special sales with temporary signs on the inside of windows provided they do not cover more than 33 percent of the window area, not to exceed 15 square feet. Temporary signs cannot be painted on the window glass nor posted on the outside of the glass. Special sale signs may be displayed two weeks at a time, five times a year. 
(7)  Public necessity signs. Public necessity signs such as restrooms, no parking and street name signs installed by or with permission of the city are exempt from permit requirements. Approval of the city manager or city building inspector is required in order to insure safe placement and prevent unsightly or distracting sign placement. 
(8)  Special events fliers. Fliers or posters advertising special events may be displayed on the inside of windows of businesses, provided the owner of the business approves of the placement. Such posters may be displayed for up to one week prior to an event, and must be removed within 48 hours after the event. Posters or fliers may not be attached to the exterior of any building or to telephone/utility poles, or sign posts, or distributed by placement on parked automobiles or on door steps, etc. 
(9)  Campaign signs. Temporary political signs are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(10)  Going out of business signs. Going out of business signs and similar signs indicating a cessation or termination of business at a particular location shall be limited to 90 days during any two calendar year period. No such signs shall be displayed on city property, nor shall any such signs extend over city property without the written approval of the city building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 7 (§ 7.1), 5-3-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 429, art. 7 (§ 7.1), adopted May 3, 2005, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (A)—(J). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (1)—(10). 
Sec. 54-112. - Improper use of non-regulated signs. 
If the DDA, city manager or city building inspector deems that any business is using non-regulated signage to circumvent any other provision of this article, they shall have the authority to consider such signs as being in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 7 (§ 7.2), 5-3-05) 
Secs. 54-113—54-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - PROHIBITED SIGNS AND SIGNAGE ILLUMINATION 

Sec. 54-126. - Prohibited signs. 
No person shall erect, alter, maintain, or relocate any sign as specified in this section. 
(1)  Signs creating traffic hazards. No sign shall be erected at or near any public street or the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard by obstructing vision or at any location where it would interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign. 
(2)  Hazardous signs. No sign shall be erected or maintained which, due to structural weakness, design defect, or other reason, constitutes a threat to the health, safety and welfare or any person or property. 
(3)  Signs resembling traffic signals or signs. No sign shall be constructed, erected or maintained which purports to be or resembles an official traffic sign or signal except those signs officially authorized by the city or other governmental entities. 
(4)  A-frame signs. No portable sign or structure composed of two sign faces mounted or attached back to back in such a manner as to form a basically triangular vertical cross section through the faces. 
(5)  Flashing signs or lights. No sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation, or an externally mounted intermittent light source. Flashing light sources are prohibited. 
(6)  Electronic message signs. No permanent free-standing roof, wall, or other sign which changes copy electronically using switches and electric lamps. Automatic changing signs, such as public service, time, temperature, and date signage are prohibited. 
(7)  Off-premise signs and billboards. No permanent outdoor advertising sign which advertises goods, products, or services not sold on the premises on which the sign is located. 
(8)  Roof signs. No roof signs are allowed. 
(9)  Animated signs. No rotating or revolving sign, or signs where all or a portion of the sign moves in some manner. 
(10)  Wind signs. No propeller, whirling or similar device which is designed to flutter, rotate or display other movement under the influence of the wind. This shall include "gasoline flags", seasonal flags or any flags not specified under subsection 54-111(5). 
(11)  Bench signs. No outdoor bench or furniture with commercial signage. 
(12)  Mobile or portable signs. No sign not permanently attached to the ground or building, except for public necessity signs and temporary signs as allowed by this article. 
(13)  Vehicle signs. No roof or antenna mounted signs on automobiles, except for student driver signs used for the sole purpose of advertising. Vehicle signs may be allowed on the sides of vehicles used for deliveries or other non-advertisement functions, but they may not be illuminated. 
(14)  Home occupation signs. No business identification sign for a home occupation. 
(15)  Video signs. No animated visual messages which are projected on screen. 
(16)  Illuminated awnings. Illuminated (back-lit), translucent, awnings are not considered appropriate and are prohibited. 
(17)  Inflatable signs or displays. No inflatable object used for signage or promotional purposes. 
(18)  Outdoor displays. Outdoor display of merchandise is considered as advertisement and is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 8 (§ 8.1), 5-3-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 429, art. 8 (§ 8.1), adopted May 3, 2005, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (A)—(R). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (1)—(18). 
Secs. 54-127—54-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - REMOVAL OF UNSAFE NON-CONFORMING ILLEGAL AND ABANDONED SIGNS 

Sec. 54-136. - Abatement or removal of unsafe or dangerous signs. 
A sign which has been determined to be unsafe by the building inspector must be repaired or made safe or removed by the sign owner or property owner within 24 hours after receipt of notice from the city. Failure to make such repairs or remove the sign upon order of the building inspector is considered a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 9 (§ 9.1), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-137. - Procedure for dangerous signs. 
Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the building inspector, the owner thereof, or the person or firm maintaining the sign, shall upon written notice from the building inspector, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within 24 hours, secure the sign in a manner to be approved by building inspector, in conformity with the applicable provisions of the building code of the city. If such order is not complied within 24 hours, the sign shall be removed under instruction of the appropriate official at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 9 (§ 9.2), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-138. - Procedure for removal of unlawful signs. 
In case any sign shall be installed, erected or constructed in violation of any of the terms of this article or other ordinances of the city, the building inspector shall notify by certify mail or written notice served personally, the owner or lessee thereof to alter such sign, secure the necessary permit, make required alterations or remove the sign. If such order is not completed within three working days from the time of notice being received, the sign shall be removed under instruction of the appropriate official at the expense of the owner of lessee thereof. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 9 (§ 9.2.5), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-139. - Destruction of non-conforming signs. 
No sign which is not in conformance with this article shall be repaired or restored after having been damaged to the extent of more than 50 percent of its value immediately prior to the event causing the damage or destruction. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 9 (§ 9.3), 5-3-05) 
Sec. 54-140. - Alteration of non-conforming signs. 
Non-conforming signs lawfully existing as of the adoption of this article may be maintained and repaired, provided that the alteration and repairs are for the purpose of maintaining the sign in its original condition. Alterations to a non-conforming sign are subject to design review and approval by the DDA, but in no case shall a non-conforming sign be conveyed to a new tenant and/or owner. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 9 (§ 9.4), 5-3-05) 
Secs. 54-141—54-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF SIGNS 

Sec. 54-151. - Responsibility of owner. 
It is the affirmative obligation of the owner of every sign erected to maintain that sign and to keep it in a good state of repair at all times. Upon discovery of a sign in need of maintenance, the building inspector shall give written notice to the owner of the sign or the owner of the property on which the sign is located if the owner of the sign itself cannot be determined. This notice shall state the item or items requiring repair or maintenance. The owner shall have 30 days in which to repair the sign before a citation is issued. It shall be unlawful, after the 30 days notice has expired, for any person to display a sign in any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Lettering or other elements of the sign have become detached and have fallen off the sign or become misaligned; 
(2)  Painted surfaces on the sign have begun to peel, flake over a substantial portion of the sign, or have faded or oxidized to an extent that the sign no longer displays the colors approved by the DDA as shown on the approved sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. 10 (§ 10.1), 5-3-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 429, art. 10 (§ 10.1), adopted May 3, 2005, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (A) and (B). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (1) and (2). 
Sec. 54-152. - Inspection. 
The building inspector shall inspect on his own initiative or as directed by the DDA, signs regulated by this article to ascertain whether the signs have been adequately installed and adequately maintained to minimize risks to the public. 
(Ord. No. 429, art. (§ 10.2), 5-3-05) 
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 396, adopted April 4, 2000, repealed the former chapter 58 and enacted new provisions as set out herein. The former chapter 58 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1976, §§ 4-2001—4-2004, 4-2006; Ord. No. 259, § 1, adopted Dec. 30, 1985; Ord. No. 348, §§ I—IX, adopted Nov. 18, 1996; Ord. No. 350, §§ I—III, adopted Dec. 16, 1996; Ord. No. 351, adopted Dec. 16, 1996. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; health and sanitation, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; offenses, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply:] 
All other refuse includes tin cans and such other materials as may not be classified under other heads. 
Ashes means the refuse from fires in houses, schools, stores, etc. They include at times small quantities of glass, crockery, sweepings, dust, brick, metal and other inorganic materials. 
Carts shall mean trash receptacles provided by the city. 
Commercial solid waste shall mean all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting shall mean the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Garbage means the organic waste both animal and vegetable from house, kitchen, restaurants, hotels, hospitals, etc. It is comprised chiefly of waste food and shall not include liquid that may be drained into the sewer. 
Leachate collection system shall mean a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste shall mean any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multi-family residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility shall mean any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill shall mean a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, non-hazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Occupant shall mean persons over the age of 18 years residing in a residence within the city; owners of businesses in the city, including, and without limitation, sole proprietors, shareholders in a corporation, and general partners in a partnership; and onsite managers of businesses within the city. 
Yard trimmings shall mean leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-2. - Fees for collection. 
Garbage collection fees shall be as fixed and established from time to time by the mayor and council, and the schedule of fees shall be on file in the office of the city clerk; provided, that no change in any fee shown on the schedule shall be effective without prior advertisement at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Provided further, every residence, business establishment or service agency within the limits of the city and to which garbage and solid waste collection and disposal services are available, shall pay a fee for the availability of such service, regardless of whether the residence, business or agency use the service, and the fee shall be based upon said fee schedule. All garbage charges to a complex of apartments, houses, mobile homes or business will be billed to the landlord of the property, and the landlord shall be responsible to the city for the payment of assessed charges. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-3. - Garbage required to be promptly removed. 
No garbage that has become decayed or that shall otherwise be a menace to health or cleanliness shall be allowed to remain in any dwelling house, hotel, boardinghouse, cafe, restaurant, lunch stand, fruit stand, meat market, store or other building or on any premises a longer time than shall be reasonably necessary to remove and deposit it in a receptacle or receptacles as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-4. - Collection, transportation of garbage by private persons. 
No person shall collect, handle, haul or transport, on any of the streets, alleys, public ways or places of the city, any garbage without first having procured a permit therefor from the city manager or his representative, and from the State Department of Natural Resources. Any vehicle to be used for the purpose of hauling or transporting garbage shall first be approved by the city manager or his representative and shall be at all times subject to his inspection as to condition and cleanliness. All garbage hauled in these vehicles shall be hauled in closed containers. Persons having a permit for hauling garbage under the provisions of this section shall place daily at each hotel, cafe, cafeteria or restaurant or other place from which this garbage is to be hauled a clean empty can furnished by this person or by the operator of this hotel, cafe, cafeteria or restaurant, for the garbage; and each can shall be removed not later than the following day, Sundays excepted, without changing the contents thereof. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-5. - Removal of garbage, ashes and refuse by city. 
Garbage, ashes and refuse will be collected and removed on the days fixed therefor by the city manager. Public notice shall be given of any change in collection days. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Secs. 58-6—58-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PREPARATION FOR COLLECTION AND COLLECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GARBAGE COLLECTION 

Sec. 58-20. - Cart system. 
Placement and removal of carts. Occupants shall place garbage for curbside pick up in carts provided by the city. On the evening before each day assigned by the city for collection in the occupant's area, the cart will be placed on the curb, in front of the premises from which it is to be collected or on the curb at the side of the premises where the premises are adjacent to more than one street, as close to the curb line or edge of roadway as practicable. The cart should be placed no earlier than 5:00 p.m. for pick up the next day or later than 8:00 a.m. on the day of pick up. The cart will be removed from the curbside point by the occupant no later than 8:00 a.m. on the day after the assigned collection date. At other times, carts will be stored by the occupant where possible in locations not visible from the street or road on which the garbage is collected. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-21. - Cost of carts. 
The city shall initially provide and bear the cost of the first cart for each residence and business. In the event the cart is insufficient to contain the garbage for a residence or business, the occupant shall bear the cost of placement of an additional cart at the residence or business, which cart shall be provided by the city. In the event a cart is lost, stolen or abused, the occupant shall bear the cost of replacement. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-22. - Removal by city. 
In the event the cart is not used for a period of three weeks, the city shall have the right to remove the cart from the residence or business. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-23. - Physical handicaps. 
If there is no occupant of the residence or business who is physically capable of complying with the requirements of section 58-20 above, regarding the placement and removal of carts at curbside, the occupant or occupants of such residence or business shall be exempted from such requirements upon written approval of the city manager. The city manager may require such proof of disability as he, in his sole discretion, deems sufficient, including but not limited to a signed statement from a medical doctor. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-24. - Schedules. 
Assigned collection dates, fees and costs for carts, and fees and costs for collection and disposal service shall be contained on a schedule approved by the city council and kept on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-25. - Damage or destruction of carts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or destroy any cart provided by the city pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-26. - Yard debris. 
No tree trimmings, grass, or other bulky materials shall be placed in carts. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-27. - Sidewalks and streets. 
No householder or business operator, by himself or agent, shall sweep from any house, yard, store or elsewhere any dirt or refuse in or upon the sidewalk or public street, but all refuse shall be placed in carts as herein provided. No person shall place any tree trimmings or other material in any sidewalk area or in the vehicular portion of any street or alley. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-28. - Building materials. 
All refuse resulting from building, repairing, remodeling or any type of construction or demolition should be removed by the contractor, owner of the property, or person having such work done. The city shall not remove refuse of this nature. Examples are lumber, shingles, carpet, tile and brick. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-29. - Trees, shrubbery, branches, yard trimmings, etc. 
All individuals, firms, businesses, partnerships, proprietorships or corporations engaged in the business of yard maintenance, landscaping, nursery operation or in the business of trimming or removing trees, shrubbery, or similar growth, who shall contract with the property owner, the owner's agent or occupant to perform services on the property shall remove from the property all yard trimmings, sawdust, branches, stumps and all portions of the byproducts of the services performed, as well as all rubbish associated therewith including rocks, concrete, dirt and trimmings. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-30. - Removal for compensation. 
It shall be unlawful for any firm, partnership, proprietorship or corporation to trim trees or bushes, do landscaping or yard work for compensation within the city unless the byproduct from those services is immediately removed from the premises and placed or deposited by the contractor in the city designated landfill or hauling station. Compensation shall be interpreted to include receiving as compensation the wood, limbs and other residue from such trimming and cutting. Any form of compensation shall place the burden of disposal directly upon the individual or contractor performing the task. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-31. - Tires. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner or lessee of the property to properly dispose of tires in accordance with state and federal law. The city shall not remove or dispose of tires. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
DIVISION 2. - YARD TRIMMINGS AND OTHER COLLECTION 

Sec. 58-32. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-33. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings and other bulky material shall be placed on the street curb in order that they may be removed without the collector going into the yard or place of business, and any exceptions to this subsection shall be determined at the discretion of the city manager. The city manager shall establish fixed days for the removal of this material and so publish the schedule. Yard trimmings for street pick up should be separated as follows: 
(1)  Leaves, straw, grass clippings. 
(2)  Limbs placed with butts toward street. 
(3)  Shrubbery trimmings and vines. 
(4)  All metals including appliances. 
(5)  Furniture (tables, chairs, sofas, etc.). 
(6)  Paper, plastic, cardboard. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-34. - Large loads. 
There shall be a fee for curbside collection of materials described in section 58-33 where the cumulative total of such materials exceeds the following: (a) 400 lbs. for any combination of metals, including appliances, furniture, paper, plastic, cardboard or tree trunks and stumps over 8 inches in diameter; or (b) 5 cubic yards for any combination of leaves, straw, grass clippings, limbs, and shrubbery trimmings and vines. The fee shall be set forth on a schedule that shall be kept on file at city hall, as amended from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-35. - Household furniture and appliances. 
Upon request, the city shall collect normal household furniture and appliances, including sofas, chairs, beds, refrigerators, washers, dryers, hot water heaters and similar items, but not including furnaces. Persons requesting this service shall notify the office of the director of public works or his or her designee as to the date collection will occur. The city shall have the right to set and collect a fee for this service. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-36. - Prohibited activities. 
The following activities are hereby declared to be unlawful and in violation of this chapter: 
(1)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse and trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property, except with the written consent thereof and then only in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Blockage of drainage. At no time shall trash be placed in a manner as to obstruct drains, utility meters, walkways or streets. It shall be unlawful to use brooms, rakes, blowers or other sweeping, raking or debris removal tools or equipment so as to sweep, rake, blow or otherwise deposit or accumulate trash, garbage, gardening residue, clippings, limbs, ashes, alluvium, sediment or debris of any kind in or on city streets, walkways, drains, pipes or gutters. It shall be unlawful to place, accumulate or otherwise deposit any type of the aforementioned debris or material into a city drain, pipe, gutter or other draining conduit or receptacle. 
(3)  Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this article, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the director of public works shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this article. 
(4)  Junk. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling, except as specified in section 66-24, any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery equipment, building material, junked motor vehicle, tires or other items which are either in a partially used, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition, and which are not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. 
(5)  Sweeping and blowing. It shall be unlawful to sweep or blow with a blower, grass clippings, leaves and other debris onto a city sidewalk or street. 
(6)  Dumping. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this section to dump, place or leave bricks, blocks, rocks, lumber, asphalt, cement, concrete, concrete products or waste, roofing, sheetrock, leaves, limbs, bushes, trees, roots, dead animals, appliances, equipment, bed springs, mattresses, furniture, fixtures, motors, engines' chemical wastes, industrial or commercial waste or rubbish, scrap metal, fence wire, vehicles or parts thereof, tires, building materials or supplies, and inorganic solid material of any type or kind except as authorized herein. 
(7)  Fires. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this chapter to set any fire, to allow a fire to continue to burn, or in any other way attempt to damage or destroy the garbage and solid waste collection containers provided by the city. 
(8)  Container of another. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to dump, place or leave any item at a garbage and solid waste collection area or in any collection container unless such person has permission of the owner and/or occupant of the premises on which the area or container is located. 
(9)  Billboards. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for owners to fail to maintain billboards in a manner that prevents loose paper, bills and other litter and debris resulting from the use of such signs and billboards. Any such debris, loose papers, bills and other litter shall be removed by the owners or their agents immediately upon accumulation. 
b.  Any such item or items which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of 30 days after notice of violation of this article, shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the city without further notice. The city may charge the owner or occupant a fee for the cost to removing such item or items. This section shall not apply to licensed junk dealers or currently licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvaging of equipment or furniture. 
(10)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof or an agent or employee of the director shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, remove any contents therefrom, or remove such container from its collection. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-37. - Abandonment. 
Any such item or items which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of 30 days after notice of violation of this article, shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the city without further notice. The city may charge the owner or occupant a fee for the cost of removing such item or items. In the event the owner is also the occupant of the premises, any unpaid charge for removal may be collected by the city clerk in the same manner as delinquent taxes. This section shall not apply to licensed junk dealers or currently licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvaging of equipment or furniture. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Secs. 58-38—58-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 58-40. - Generally. 
All commercial establishments shall store their refuse in containers, as specified in this article, so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about their establishments. Approved methods of containerization shall include refuse receptacles, bulk containers and detachable containers. Any spillage or overflow shall be immediately cleaned up by such establishment. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-41. - Loading and unloading areas. 
All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The owner or occupant of the commercial establishment shall place a sufficient number of containers in such area to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. The number of such containers to be placed in service for a particular establishment shall be set by the director of public works. The number of such containers to be placed in service for a particular occupant of the premises shall maintain surveillance to insure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. If the occupant violates this section, collection service may be suspended by the director of public works until such time as the owner or occupant of the premises brings such premises into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-42. - Construction sites and demolition sites. 
All construction and demolition contractors shall provide on-site refuse receptacles, bulk containers, or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials and other trash (no hazardous waste shall be deposited in the containers) produced by those working at the construction site. A separate container shall be provided for metal scraps free of all other debris at the construction site. The site shall be kept in a litter-free condition. The number of refuse receptacles (not to exceed four or bulk containers, or detachable containers), shall be determined by the size of the job. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris upon any public or private property belonging to a person other than the owner of the construction site shall be removed by the designated collection contractor upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-43. - Use of dumpsters. 
The provisions of this chapter regarding use of carts shall not apply to any businesses, industries, or apartment buildings or structures within the city that have been approved by the city manager or his designee to utilize dumpsters. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Secs. 58-44—58-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL REFUSE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 58-50. - Industrial waste. 
Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by any factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing such waste. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-51. - Hazardous refuse. 
No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of refuse by the city. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-52. - Dead animals. 
Small dead animals will be collected by the city during operating hours of the city/county landfill or hauling station, provided the body is appropriately wrapped and isolated in an area readily accessible to the collector. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-53. - Building materials. 
The city shall not be responsible for the collecting preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of a new building, alteration or additions to an existing building or of any kind of construction of any and all refuse, trash, debris resulting therefrom as well as from demolition of existing structures. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-54. - Contagious disease refuse. 
The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from some or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be decontaminated prior to removal under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in receptacles or bulk container for the city collection until decontaminated. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-55. - Hypodermic instruments. 
No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of re-use, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by securely placing in a plastic container with lid so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-56. - Cardboard boxes, cartons and tires. 
All cardboard boxes, cartons and tires are to be disposed of at designated recycling centers. The person disposing of any such boxes or cartons or the person in charge of the premises shall collapse all cardboard boxes and cartons. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Secs. 58-57—58-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 58-70. - [Enforcement.] 
The city manager or his designee shall investigate complaints or violations of any provisions of this article. They shall determine if there has been a violation, issue warnings, and initiate an attempt to obtain compliance with this article by the person in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-71. - Initiation of complaint. 
The city manager or his designee shall be authorized to sign a complaint or issue a summons against a violator of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-72. - Civil remedies. 
In case of any violation of this article, the city manager or his designee and the city attorney, in addition to any other remedies, may institute injunction, mandates, or other appropriate proceedings to prevent such violation, or to correct or abate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Sec. 58-73. - Suspension of service. 
Upon appropriate notice to the person violating this chapter, the city manager or his designee may suspend any service or the use of any facility maintained by the city during the period such violation continues to exist. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
DIVISION 1. - CIVIL PENALTY 

Sec. 58-74. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating this article may be held liable for damages, and the recovery shall be in a sum of not less than $110.00, nor more than $550.00 for each violation. The city attorney may institute a proceeding in any court having jurisdiction thereof to collect such civil penalty. If the violation has been committed by the owner of the property on which the violation occurs, the city clerk may further proceed to collect the costs to the city of eliminating, removing or cleaning the premises in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
DIVISION 2. - CRIMINAL PENALTY 

Sec. 58-75. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1-12 upon conviction. Provided, however, the foregoing shall not apply to any occupant who fails to remove a cart by 8:00 a.m. on the day after the assigned collection date for garbage pickup. Rather, such occupant shall be subject to a fine of $10.00 per day until the cart is removed. Provided further, the provisions regarding carts shall not apply to any businesses within the city that have been approved by the city manager to utilize dumpsters. 
(Ord. No. 396, 4-4-00) 
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Streets, § 4.101 et seq. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; fire lanes, § 34-61 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; offenses, ch. 50; signs, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 78; subdivision regulations, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference— Authority to construct and maintain streets and roads, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Permit to dig in streets—Required. 
No person shall make any excavation or opening or dig any ditch, trench, tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the mayor and council. A permit shall not be required where this work is performed under a contract with the city but if this work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially obstructed, the person shall notify the city clerk, the public works department and the police department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or streets, unless prevented by sudden emergency. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1001) 
State Law reference— Obstructing, encroaching on, or injuring public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1. 
Sec. 62-2. - Same—Application; fee. 
All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in section 62-1, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. This application shall be accompanied by a fee established by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1002) 
Sec. 62-3. - Same—City indemnified. 
Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in sections 62-1 and 62-2 agrees as a condition of the issuance of the permit to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees, for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1003) 
Sec. 62-4. - Refilling, repair or excavation. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making this excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening and this refilling shall be done in accordance with the standards and specifications issued by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1004) 
Sec. 62-5. - Protection, safety precautions at excavation site. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit under this chapter to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guardrails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around it, sufficient to warn the public of the excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1005) 
Sec. 62-6. - Supervision and control of work; inspections. 
All excavations and work in streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places of the city shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager, whose duty it shall be to inspect them from time to time during the progress thereof. Upon the completion thereof, he shall make a final inspection and see that the street, sidewalk or public place is restored to a condition as good in all respects as before the excavation or work was made or done, and that all debris, materials, tools and equipment are removed therefrom. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1006) 
Sec. 62-7. - Planting of trees. 
All shade trees in the city shall be planted not less than ten feet from the inside line of the sidewalks. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2001) 
Sec. 62-8. - Encroachments on sidewalks, etc. —Prohibited. 
No person shall erect any fence, railing, steps, platform, portico or other obstruction beyond the line designating the limit of the land appropriated or condemned as streets or public highways, and thus encroach upon the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2002) 
State Law reference— Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43. 
Sec. 62-9. - Same—Failure to remove. 
Any person who has erected or is erecting these encroachments on streets, sidewalks or alleys shall be notified to remove them, and upon failure to comply with the requirements of the notice within 24 hours thereof, the chief of police shall have them removed, and the city clerk shall issue an execution against the person so offending for the amount expended in having them removed. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2003) 
Sec. 62-10. - Displaying goods on sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to display any wares, goods or merchandise of any kind upon any part of a city sidewalk except under the following conditions and limitations: 
(1)  Local merchants having a current business license issued by the city, pursuant to section 18-27, may have the use of city sidewalks to display and sell merchandise on the first Thursday, Friday and Saturday of each month. 
(2)  Merchants using the sidewalks shall maintain a clearance of six feet from the outer edge of the sidewalk closest to the street. 
(3)  Entrances and exits to and from buildings which abut the sidewalks shall be at all times kept free, clear and passable for use by pedestrians and emergency personnel. 
(4)  All merchants wishing to use the sidewalks during the above-stated times must file written application with the city manager at least one week prior to the proposed sale, but no sooner than four weeks prior to the proposed sale. 
(5)  The city manager shall issue a permit upon the following conditions being met: 
a.  The applicant must demonstrate that he holds a current business license issued by the city pursuant to section 18-27. 
b.  The applicant must present a writing signed by an agent of his insurance carrier stating that the applicant currently carries premises liability insurance in an amount equal to or exceeding $500,000.00 and that any accident or mishap occurring as a result of applicant's displaying any wares, goods or merchandise of any kind upon any part of a city sidewalk is covered under the primary liability coverage. 
c.  The applicant must execute an indemnity contract between himself and the city in which he agrees to indemnify and save harmless the city from any and all liability resulting from applicant's displaying any wares, goods, or merchandise of any kind upon any part of a city sidewalk. 
(6)  A merchant using city sidewalks pursuant to this section may use only that portion of the sidewalk directly in front of his own store, and may not in any way encroach upon the sidewalk frontage directly in front of any other store or business. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2004; Ord. No. 255, 8-20-85; Ord. No. 276, 6-9-87; Ord. No. 279, § 6-2004, 10-20-87; Ord. No. 333, § 1, 5-17-94) 
Sec. 62-11. - Obstructing streets; construction. 
No person shall deposit, place or put, or cause to be deposited, placed or put, any vehicle of any kind, or any goods, wares, boxes, barrels, casks, logs or any other obstruction in or upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city, so as to obstruct the free passage and use thereof. This section shall not be construed as to prohibit the use of streets, alleys and sidewalks for delivering goods, wares and merchandise or other hauling where this use is necessary, nor shall it prohibit the use thereof for hauling, moving or transporting building material about the premises where building is being done, provided this obstruction shall be as little 
as possible, and only when and so long as necessary. Before building or remodeling in close proximity to the sidewalk, a passageway shall be constructed so as to leave the sidewalk unobstructed and provide safe and easy passage. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2005) 
Sec. 62-12. - Obstruction of railroad crossings by railroad company. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company or its employees to obstruct with any train, engine, cars or otherwise any of the public railroad crossing within the city for a longer period than five minutes unless they are in continuous motion. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2006) 
Sec. 62-13. - Awnings. 
No person shall erect, or permit to be erected or keep any awnings over any sidewalk in any business district or zone in the city which awnings are supported by posts placed upon the sidewalk or street. No person shall erect any other type of awnings over the sidewalks without first having made application for a building permit and having received a permit from the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2007) 
Sec. 62-14. - Playing ball games on streets prohibited. 
No person shall play any ball game on any of the streets of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2017) 
Sec. 62-15. - Driving through street barricade. 
No person shall drive any vehicle into or upon any alley or street that has been barricaded by an employee of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2019) 
Sec. 62-16. - Unlawful removal of barricade. 
No person, other than an employee of the city, shall remove any barricade which has been erected by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2020) 
Sec. 62-17. - Felling trees. 
It shall be unlawful to fell trees so as to obstruct the streets, alleys and lanes of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2021) 
Sec. 62-18. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Section 6-2022 of the 1976 Code regulating signs is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Sec. 62-19. - Street numbers. 
(a)  Posting required. The owner or owners of the fee simple title to or a life estate or estate for years in any real estate upon which there is situated a residence, business or other building or structure to which there is assigned a street number by the city shall post the street number of such business, residence or other building or structure, in one of the following manners: 
(1)  By affixing the street number to the front of the residence, business, building or other structure in a prominent manner such that the same can be easily viewed from the street or road upon which such residence, business, building or other structure fronts. 
(2)  By incorporating the street number into or onto a sign located on the property, subject however to the city's sign regulations, in such a manner that the same can be easily viewed from the road upon which such residence, business, building or other structure fronts. 
(b)  Size. 
(1)  Residential properties. The size of street numbers posted on property zoned residential shall be a minimum of three inches in height, and shall not exceed six inches in height. 
(2)  Nonresidential properties. The size of street numbers posted on property zoned anything other than residential shall be a minimum of three inches in height and a maximum of one foot in height. 
(c)  Variances. Any person desiring a variance from the size requirement for street numbers set forth in subsection (b) of this section may make application for a variance to the zoning board of adjustment in accordance with section 8-3016-2 of Appendix A of this Code, and shall be governed by the procedures set forth therein. 
(Ord. No. 324, 8-18-92) 
Sec. 62-20. - Liability insurance required for persons trimming and/or felling trees. 
(a)  Insurance required. All persons (as defined in section 1-2 of this Code) who trim or fell trees in the city for money, or other valuable consideration, shall first have in effect liability insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the state in an amount equalling or exceeding $100,000.00 per occurrence, to cover any damage to persons or property resulting from any negligence in such person's tree-trimming or felling operation. 
(b)  Proof of insurance. Upon request by the city manager, city clerk, chief of police, or any police officer, any person who has been engaged for the purpose of trimming or felling trees within the city shall present proof that the insurance required under subsection (a) hereof is in effect, and absent such proof, such person shall immediately terminate any and all tree trimming and felling within the city, until such proof is provided. 
(c)  Violations. Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 341, §§ 2—4, 6-20-95) 
Sec. 62-21. - Parking, standing or driving in private parking areas after request not to do so—Prohibited. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to adopt by reference the provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-252(a), as provided for in the enabling legislation set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-252(c), in order to prohibit parking, standing, or driving vehicles in private parking areas after being requested not to do so. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a monetary fine [as follows]: 
(1)  Not to exceed $50.00 for the first violation; 
(2)  Not to exceed $100.00 for the second violation; and 
(3)  Not to exceed $150.00 for the third or subsequent violation. 
(Ord. No. 389, 2-15-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 389, adopted Feb. 15, 2000, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as § 62-21 was at the editor's discretion. 
Secs. 62-22—62-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The state department of transportation's policy regarding the closing of state roads for parades and group demonstrations is on file in the city clerk's office. 

Sec. 62-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Block means that portion of any street lying between its intersections with other streets. 
Group demonstration means any assembly together or concert of action between or among two or more persons for the purpose of protesting any matter or of making known any position or promotion of these persons, or of or on behalf of any organization or class of persons, or for the purpose of attracting attention of this assembly. 
Parade means any assemblage of two or more persons riding in or operating any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession of any kind in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public grounds or places. 
Person means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association or other organization, whether formal or informal. 
Picket line means any two or more persons formed together for the purpose of making known any position or promotion of these persons, or on behalf of any organization or class of persons. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2008) 
Sec. 62-42. - Permit—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, conduct or participate in any parade, picket line or group demonstration in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place within the city unless a permit therefor has been issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2009) 
Sec. 62-43. - Same—Reasons for denial. 
The city manager shall issue a permit for the proposed parade unless he finds that: 
(1)  The parades, picket lines or group demonstrations are to commence before 6:00 a.m. or terminate after 5:00 p.m. 
(2)  The parades or group demonstrations are to be held at the same time and place as those designated in a permit issued pursuant to a written application previously received by the city manager. 
(3)  The conduct of the parade will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(4)  The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement of the parade and of contiguous areas so that adequate police protection cannot be provided the remainder of the city. 
(5)  The conduct of the parade will require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances so that adequate ambulance service to portions of the city not occupied by the parade and contiguous areas will be prevented. 
(6)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will substantially interfere with adequate fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(7)  The conduct of the parade is reasonably likely to result in violence to persons or property causing serious harm to the public. 
(8)  The parade is to be held for the primary purposes of advertising a product, good or event, and is designed to be held primarily for private profit. 
(9)  The conduct of the parade will interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment to such an extent that adequate fire protection cannot be provided to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2010) 
Sec. 62-44. - Same—Conditions of issuance. 
The city manager shall issue parade permits as required in section 62-43, and in the issuance thereof he shall: 
(1)  Require a written application for permit to be filed not less than 24 hours in advance of the parade, picket line, or group demonstration which application shall specify the time and place for the commencement of the picket line and the time, place, route and duration of the parade or group demonstration. 
(2)  Require that the application for a permit specify whether or not minors will be permitted to participate. 
(3)  Require that the application for a permit shall specify and the permit shall designate the person or persons in charge of the activity. This person shall accompany the parade, picket line or group demonstration and shall carry the permit with him at the time. The permit shall not be valid in the possession of any other person. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2011) 
Sec. 62-45. - Certain activities prohibited. 
The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in conjunction with, or as a part of, any parade, picket line or group demonstration, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful: 
(1)  The carrying on or about the person of any firearm, or any weapon or article, including but not limited to blackjacks, nightsticks or flashlights which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon. 
(2)  The taking or keeping of any dog or other vicious animal, whether leashed or unleashed. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2012) 
Sec. 62-46. - Revocation of permit. 
The city manager shall revoke any permit granted for a parade, picket line or group demonstration for any of the following causes: 
(1)  The violation by any participant of section 62-45. 
(2)  The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2013) 
Sec. 62-47. - Interference prohibited. 
No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade, picket line or group demonstration being conducted under authority of a permit duly issued by the city manager. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2014) 
Sec. 62-48. - Additional regulations applicable to picketing. 
Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following additional regulations: 
(1)  Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for pedestrian movement and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used primarily for vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Not more than ten pickets promoting the same objective shall be permitted to use either of the two sidewalks within a single block at any one time. 
(3)  Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not exceeding two feet in width and two feet in length promoting the objective for which the picketing is done; provided, the words used are not derogatory or defamatory in nature. 
(4)  Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and must not march closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another. Pickets shall not be allowed to walk more than five feet from the curbline and shall be in continuous motion. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2015) 
Sec. 62-49. - Exceptions. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; or 
(2)  Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2016) 
Secs. 62-50—62-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPECIAL EVENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 416, §§ 1—23, adopted March 7, 2003, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article III, §§ 62-71—62-93 is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 62-71. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
City manager means the manager of the city of Sylvania, Georgia, or his designee for the administration of this chapter. 
Producer means any person, group of persons, organization, association, club, or other entity responsible for planning, producing and conducting an event. 
Special event or event means any organized activity having as its purpose entertainment, recreation and/or education, such as a festival or celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade or march, rally or assembly which takes place on a public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, or occurs on private property and impacts government services on public rights-of-way. 
Vendor means any person or persons who engage in the sale to the public of any food or food products, goods, services, or merchandise of whatever nature from any location, either mobile or stationary, on a temporary itinerant basis on any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way. The definition of vendor, as used in this article, shall not be construed to include or prohibit a permanent business, operating under the provisions of the business license ordinance and other applicable laws, from displaying goods or merchandise on a public sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to the permanent business structure so long as such displays do not impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic and so long as other laws and ordinances pertaining to such business or displays are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 1, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-72. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, group, organization, association, club or other entity to conduct or cause to be conducted any special event in the city without having obtained a valid permit for such event. 
(b)  Geographic limitation; responsibility for police and sanitation service. A special event shall be limited to the specific geographic area(s) within which the event is to take place and the producer of a special event shall be responsible for the provision of police and sanitation services within the boundaries of the event for a period of one hour past the conclusion of the event or until the area is cleared of all activities and structures related to such event. 
(c)  Time limitation. Except for clearing of the area, no special event shall be allowed to continue beyond the time approved on the permit for the event. 
(d)  Delineation of boundaries; preservation of areas for circulation. The outermost boundaries of the special event shall be fully and clearly delineated on a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ × 11 inches in size, and attached to the application for a permit. All public streets and/or sidewalks within and adjacent to such area(s) shall be clearly identified. The city manager, or designee, shall require, as part of the approval for the event, that areas no less than five feet in width shall be designated and preserved for public circulation and access to adjoining business establishments outside the area(s) delineated for the event. 
(e)  Maps for walks or runs. The producer of a special event such as a walk or run, as to which the provisions of subsection (d) above would not be practicable, shall submit with the application for a permit a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ × 11 inches in size, showing the exact route of the course for the walk or run. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 2, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-73. - Application; fee. 
(a)  A producer of a special event shall make application for a permit for such event at the office of the city manager on a form prescribed by the city manager. Application forms may be obtained from the office of the city manager, the office of the city clerk, and the police department. 
(b)  An application for a special event should be filed at least 30 days prior to the date the event is scheduled to occur. However, no application shall be accepted earlier than one year prior to the date of the event. 
(c)  A nonrefundable application fee of $25.00 shall be paid at the time the application for a permit is filed. Such fee shall be payable to the city by cash, money order, or cashier's check. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 3, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-74. - Identification of producer. 
The producer of an event, if a group or organization, shall be fully identified on the application. However, a special event permit shall be issued only to an individual person, who may be the actual producer or a designated agent of the producer, and such individual person shall be solely and fully responsible for compliance with all provisions, including all financial requirements, of this chapter and other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 4, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-75. - Administrative review. 
The city manager shall cause the application to be circulated to each government department and/or other agency whose services the city manager determines would be affected by the nature and activities of the proposed event. Each such department or agency shall review the application and note the services which it will be required to perform, the number of personnel to perform such services, the length of time to perform such services, the cost to perform such services, and any other information which would assist the city manager in facilitating the event and services required. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 5, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-76. - Special conditions on permit. 
Each department of the government reviewing an application may recommend in writing certain conditions or restrictions as deemed necessary to facilitate the event, to comply with other laws or regulations, and/or to the safety, health and welfare of the community. In reviewing the recommendations of the departments, the city manager may impose such conditions or restrictions as a part of the permit and such special conditions so imposed shall be construed to have the full force and effect of law as a provisions of this chapter. A violation of such conditions or restrictions shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 6, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-77. - Final approval of permit; minimum review. 
(a)  The city manager is authorized to approve and issue a permit for a special event after considering all comments and conditions of the reviewing departments and agencies as well as other information pertaining to the proposed event as described on the application, and after the payment of all applicable fees and costs. 
(b)  A minimum of 15 working days shall be allowed for the administrative review of an application and the issuance of a permit. 
(c)  The government shall either issue or deny the permit no later than 30 working days following the date the completed application is filed. If the permit is denied, the producer shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reason(s) for the denial. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 7, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-78. - Emergency issuance of permit. 
In extraordinary circumstances, the city manager or the chief of police, as his designee, shall be authorized to waive or otherwise expedite any or all of the review process and to issue a special event permit upon payment by the producer of all applicable fees and costs for such event. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 8, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-79. - Permit fees. 
The fee for a permit to conduct a special event shall be based on all services to be provided by the government for such event and shall be equal to the estimated actual cost to the government to provide such services. The initial permit fee shall be the aggregate of the estimated costs of such services calculated by each government department. If, at the conclusion of the event, the cost of government services is greater than the initial payment, the producer of the event shall be billed for the difference. Failure to pay the outstanding amount within 30 days of the billing date shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 9, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-80. - Liability. 
The producer of any special event shall hold harmless the city, its officers, employees and agents from liability of damages arising from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event. Proof of such waiver shall be filed with, and made a part of, the application form. The producer shall be responsible for providing any and all other insurance that may be necessary for any special event. The amount and kind of insurance required shall be determined by the city manager, or his designee, after considering the nature of the special event, and the potential for harm and the degree of harm to persons and property. The producer shall provide proof to the city manager, or his designee, that such insurance is in effect prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 10, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-81. - Vendors. 
(a)  Sales permitted. The sale of food, or any merchandise or services of any type by a vendor shall be allowed as a component of a special event provided such vendor is approved and authorized in writing by the producer of the event and shall be conducted in accordance with such conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the producer and submitted as part of the application for a permit. 
(b)  Authorization of vendors. The producer of a special event shall have sole responsibility and authority to allow or disallow sidewalk or street vending as a component of an event. Such identification shall be not less than three inches, shall state that the bearer is an official participant in the event, and shall bear the signature of the producer of the event. 
(c)  Identification required. Any vendor authorized by the event producer shall be required to prominently display on his or her person a badge identifying the vendor as an authorized participant in the event. Such identification shall be not less than three inches by three inches, shall state that the bearer is an official participant in the event, and shall bear the signature of the producer of the event. 
(d)  Permit not required. Vendors authorized by the producer of an event as a component of the event shall not be required to obtain any separate vendors permit to operate during the period of the event. However, all other vendors, of whatever nature, not authorized as a participant in the special event shall obtain the appropriate licenses and permits as required under other applicable ordinances. 
(e)  Unauthorized vending prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any vendor not authorized by the producer of a special event as provided under this section to engage in such business within a distance of 25 yards of such event from one hour before until one hour after the event. 
(f)  Food sales. The vendor of any food, whether hot or cold, as a part of a special event shall be subject to all rules and regulations of the county health department. It shall be the responsibility of the producer of an event to assure compliance with this section by any such vendors. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 11, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-82. - Glass containers prohibited. 
The use of glass containers within the area of any special event shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 12, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-83. - Police services. 
Traffic and crowd control shall be provided by the city police department and/or the county sheriff's department, and the number of officers and/or special arrangements shall be determined by the chief of police of the city. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 13, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-84. - Toilet facilities. 
The producer of a special event shall be required to provide temporary outdoor toilet facilities at any event at which 200 or more persons are expected to be in attendance. The number of toilets and their locations shall be determined by the director of the building inspection department. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 14, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-85. - Tents, stages, etc. 
Tents, arbors, stages, grandstands or other temporary facilities constructed or erected as a part of a special event shall be approved by the city building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 15, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-86. - Street closing. 
The complete or partial closure of any street, sidewalk or other public way as a part of a special event shall be approved by the city manager in consultation with the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 16, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-87. - Banners, signs, etc. 
Temporary, noncommercial banners or signs may be permitted overhead across public streets for the purpose of designating "starting" and "finish" lines for a race. Small banners, pennants, signs or other decorations which do not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and which do not damage or deface any tree or public structure, may be allowed as part of a special event. Approval of the building inspection department shall be obtained by the event producer for any banners or signs permitted in this section. The producer of the event shall be responsible for the removal of such banners, pennants or decorations within 48 hours after the close of the event. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 17, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-88. - Duration of permit. 
No permit issued under this article shall be valid prior to or past the date of the special event for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 18, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-89. - Cessation of activities. 
The safety, health, welfare and good order of all citizens and the community shall be first and foremost and every special event shall be conducted in such manner. The chief of police may terminate any activity, whether a part of or the entire event, which does not meet this community standard. Upon notification of the event producer in person by the chief of police to cease any activity, it shall be unlawful for such producer and/or any participants to permit such activity to continue. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 19, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-90. - Picketing and demonstrations, etc. 
Any person, group or organization engaged in any picketing, demonstrations, assembly, gathering, procession or other activity protected by the U. S. Constitution shall be prohibited from blocking the ingress and egress of any public or private place. Any person, group or organization engaged in such activities is required to make application as set forth in Section 6-5-3(a). However, any such person, group or organization shall be exempt from the permit requirement in O.C.G.A. § 6-5-2 and the fees set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 6-5-3(c) and 6-5-9. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 20, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-91. - Funeral processions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any parade or procession conducted under the supervision and direction of a funeral director in conjunction with any funeral. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 21, 3-7-03) 
Sec. 62-92. - Penalties. 
Any violation of this article shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00, and/or imprisonment of not more than six months. 
(Ord. No. 416, § 22, 3-7-03) 
Chapter 66 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; vehicles for hire, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Taxation power of municipal governments, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; limitation on taxing power of municipalities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 8; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-2; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES 

Sec. 66-26. - Dates due and delinquent. 
All ad valorem taxes on property within the corporate limits of the city shall be due on October 1 of each calendar year and shall be considered delinquent and become in default on December 20 of each calendar year. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4031) 
Sec. 66-27. - Taxes in default. 
After ad valorem taxes become in default, the city clerk shall then issue tax execution therefor, which shall be collected or levied as provided by the charter of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4032) 
Secs. 66-28—66-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSE FEES AND TAXES ON INSURERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County and municipal corporation tax on life insurance companies based on gross direct premiums, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; county and municipal corporation tax on other than life insurance companies based on gross direct premiums, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 66-51. - Annual license fee levied. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon insurance companies doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00, for the privilege of engaging in the business of insurance within the city. There shall be an additional annual license fee in the same amount for each separate business location in excess of one, operated and maintained by such company within the city. For the purpose of this article, the term "insurance company" shall mean those companies authorized to sell those five classes of insurance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. 232, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 250, § I, 4-16-85) 
Sec. 66-52. - Additional fee for separate business. 
There is hereby levied an additional annual license fee of $14.00 on each insurance company for each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, which company is operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or sales involving term financing, offers, solicits or taking applications for insurance through licensed agents of insurance companies for insurance. 
(Ord. No. 232, 10-4-83; Ord. No. 250, § II, 4-16-85) 
Sec. 66-53. - Deduction of fee from state premium taxes. 
Life insurance companies within O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1) may deduct from the premium taxes otherwise payable to the state under O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4, in addition to all credits and abatements allowed by law, the license fee imposed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 250, § III, 4-16-85) 
Sec. 66-54. - Independent life insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 66-51, in the amount of $40.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. No. 232, § 3, 10-4-83) 
Sec. 66-55. - Gross premiums tax on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed in section 66-51. 
(Ord. No. 232, § 4, 10-4-83) 
Sec. 66-56. - Gross premiums tax on all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business 
(Ord. No. 232, § 5, 10-4-83) 
Secs. 66-57—66-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to levy and collect a business license tax from depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 66-76. - Levy. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of .25 percent of the gross receipts of the institutions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institutions pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(b)  For purposes of this section "gross receipts" shall be the same as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 and shall mean the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized below during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax imposed by this article is due. 
(Ord. No. 238, § 2, 12-27-83; Ord. No. 286, 2-16-88) 
Sec. 66-77. - Calculation of gross receipts—Banks. 
Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: 
(1)  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others. 
(2)  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions. 
(3)  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale. 
(4)  Interest on other bonds, notes, and debentures, excluding interest on obligations in the state or its political subdivisions and obligations on the United States. 
(5)  Dividends on stocks. 
(6)  Income from direct lease financing. 
(7)  Income from fiduciary activities. 
(8)  Service charges on deposit accounts. 
(9)  Other service charges, commissions and fees. 
(10)  Other income. 
(Ord. No. 238, § 2(A), 12-27-83; Ord. No. 286, 2-16-88) 
Sec. 66-78. - Same—Savings and loan associations. 
Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
(1)  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold in service for others. 
(2)  Interest on mortgages, participations or mortgage-backed securities. 
(3)  Interest on real estate sold on contract. 
(4)  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased. 
(5)  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States. 
(6)  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits. 
(7)  Loan fees. 
(8)  Loan servicing fees. 
(9)  Other fees and charges. 
(10)  Gross income from real estate owned operations. 
(11)  Net income from office building operations. 
(12)  Gross income from real estate held for investment. 
(13)  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries. 
(14)  Miscellaneous operating income. 
(15)  Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans and other assets. 
(16)  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
(Ord. No. 238, § 2(B), 12-27-83; Ord. No. 286, 2-16-88) 
Sec. 66-79. - Deductions from gross receipts. 
The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to section 66-77 or 66-78 of this article: 
(1)  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period. 
(2)  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 7-1-730 through 7-1-734. 
(3)  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions. 
(4)  An amount equal to a depository financial institution's gross income which is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than Georgia. 
(5)  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (2), (3) and (4) of this section, any deductions taken under subsection (1) of this section shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (2) through (4) of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (1) through (4) above. 
(Ord. No. 238, § 2(C), 12-27-83; Ord. No. 286, 2-16-88) 
Sec. 66-80. - Filing of return. 
Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. The returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Ord. No. 238, § 3, 12-27-83; Ord. No. 286, 2-16-88) 
Sec. 66-81. - Due date. 
The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 238, § 3, 12-27-83) 
Secs. 66-82—66-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL AND MOTEL EXCISE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 439, adopted December 19, 2006, amended article V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article V pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 281, § 1—10, 12, adopted November 3, 1987. 
State Law reference— County and municipal excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 66-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, shall be defined as follows: 
City. The City of Sylvania is empowered to impose a hotel-motel excise tax pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
City clerk means the duly appointed city clerk of the city or his designee. 
Due date means the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax(es), and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truck stop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider means any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than ten continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the state and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 439, 12-19-06) 
Sec. 66-102. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of five percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 66-104. 
(Ord. No. 439, 12-19-06) 
Sec. 66-103. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 66-104. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other applicable tax(es). This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable for any amount of tax that he fails to collect appropriately; and must remit to the city any amount of tax collected in excess of that which should have been collected. 
(Ord. No. 439, 12-19-06) 
Sec. 66-104. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official employee of state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat exempted by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. 
(Ord. No. 439, 12-19-06) 
Sec. 66-105. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 439, 12-19-06) 
Sec. 66-106. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for a longer period than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 439, 12-19-06) 
Sec. 66-107. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 66-106. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. No. 439, 12-19-06) 
Sec. 66-108. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 66-107(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 66-106. 
(Ord. No. 439, 12-19-06) 
Sec. 66-109. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. No. 439, 12-19-06) 
Sec. 66-110. - Administration of article; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 439, 12-19-06) 
Sec. 66-111. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 439, 12-19-06) 
Sec. 66-112. - Use of proceeds. 
The proceeds of the tax will be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-50 et seq., including, but not limited to, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Ord. No. 446, 11-20-07) 
Chapter 68 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 68-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the city, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunications facilities within the city so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote the city as a proactive city in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications service. To that end, this chapter shall: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunications facilities in the city; 
(2)  Protect the city's built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunications facilities; 
(3)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunications facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(4)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or antennae failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications tower structures and antennae; 
(5)  Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers through the city; 
(6)  Maximize and encourage use of alternative telecommunication tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; and 
(7)  Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunications facilities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, any device designed for over-the-air reception of radio or television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service of direct broadcast satellite service, or any cable television headend or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
Building inspector means the building inspector of the city or his/her designee. 
Governing body means the City Council/Board of Commissioners for the City of Sylvania. 
Macro telecommunications facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures and which project more than three feet above the top of the structure but no more than ten feet above the roof line, parapet or top of the structure. "Macro telecommunications facilities" may exceed the height limitation specified for the zoning district. 
Micro telecommunications facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures where antennae do not project more than three feet above the top of the structure and there are no more than six antennae per site. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Telecommunications facilities refers to antennae and towers, either individually or together. 
Tower means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-3. - Exclusions. 
The following shall be exempt from this chapter: 
(1)  Any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
(2)  Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service; 
(3)  Any telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city provided a license or lease authorizing the telecommunications facility has been approved by the governing body; 
(4)  Any cable television headend or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-4. - Placement of telecommunications facilities by zoning district. 
(a)  In Light Industrial (I-1) and Heavy Industrial (I-2) zoning districts, micro and macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least one user are permitted as a use of right up to a height of 80 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building inspector. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least two users are permitted as a use of right up to a height of 100 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building inspector. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least three users are permitted as a use of right up to a height of 120 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building inspector. 
(b)  In General Commercial (C-1) Districts and Highway Oriented Commercial (C-2) Districts, micro and macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building inspector. Monopole towers up to a height of 50 feet are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building inspector. Monopole towers up to a height of 80 feet designed and intended to accommodate at least two users are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building inspector. 
(c)  In Multifamily Residential (R-3), Mobile Home Parks (MH), Professional (P) and Developmental (D) zoning districts, micro and macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use by right following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building inspector. Monopole towers up to a height of 50 feet are permitted as a special use following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building inspector. 
(d)  In Single-Family Residential (R-1) and (R-2), micro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a use as of right on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building inspector. Macro telecommunications facilities shall be allowed as a special use on nonresidential structures following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the building inspector. 
(e)  Telecommunications facilities outside the guidelines listed above may only be built after approval of a variance in accordance with Appendix B, § 8-3016-2 of this Code as well as receipt of a building permit. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-5. - Preferred and disfavored location sites. 
(a)  Preferred location sites. 
(1)  Co-location sites. Any existing telecommunications towers currently being used for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication shall be a preferred location site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site, provided, however, that locations which meet this criteria shall be subject to the design and siting components of this chapter and co-location sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise deemed by the building inspector or the governing authority to be visually obtrusive. 
(2)  Publicly used structures. Publicly used structures are preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunications facilities. Therefore, telecommunications facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly used structures than when placed on commercial or residential structures. Publicly used structures include, but are not limited to, facilities such as police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flagpoles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. 
(3)  Industrial and commercial structures. Wholly industrial and commercial structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, or service stations shall be preferred locations particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roofline can and will be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunications facility. 
(4)  Mixed use buildings in high density districts. Mixed use buildings (housing above commercial or other nonresidential space) are also preferred locations sites. 
(b)  Disfavored location sites. Any single-family residential structure or site or multifamily duplex shall be a disfavored site for the location of telecommunications facilities. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-6. - Requirements for telecommunications facilities. 
(a)  Generally. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications facilities governed by this chapter. 
(1)  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local buildings codes and the applicable standards for such telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. 
(2)  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. If lighting is required or necessary, the building inspector may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(3)  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on telecommunications facilities. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this chapter are met. 
(4)  Visual impact. 
a.  Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c.  Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d.  Telecommunications facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
e.  Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports telecommunications facilities must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(5)  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the telecommunications facility from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
b.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
c.  The building inspector may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes, for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms or where an antenna is placed on an existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the building inspector. 
(6)  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
(7)  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
b.  Telecommunications facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. 
(8)  Lot size and setbacks. 
a.  The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities, provided however, that the building inspector may reduce the standard setback requirements of this section if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby. 
1.  Telecommunications towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. 
2.  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
3.  Telecommunications facilities must be setback from any property line a sufficient distance to protect adjoining property from the potential impact of telecommunications facility failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in section 68-7(1)e. 
b.  For antennas attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ratio (for example, a ten-foot high antenna and supporting structure requires a ten-foot setback from the edge of the roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
(b)  Additional requirements for towers. 
(1)  Site location and development shall preserve the pre-existing character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
(2)  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
(3)  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(4)  Towers shall not be located any closer than 1,500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable. 
(5)  When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, it must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance at least equal to its total height. 
(6)  In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard, back yard or side yard in a residential district. 
(7)  Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or any state or federal law or agency or where they will create visual clutter. 
(8)  Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access. 
(9)  Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-7. - Application procedures. 
(a)  General application requirements for all building and special use permits. Application for a building permit or special use permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the building inspector by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit, special use permit or other permit or variance included in this chapter and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
(1)  Basic information. 
a.  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses; 
b.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in subsection 68-6(a)(5); 
c.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors; 
d.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance; 
e.  Report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the state, documenting the following: 
1.  Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
2.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
3.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
4.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
f.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity; 
g.  Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity; 
h.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
i.  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network; 
j.  Designation of which location preference, identified in section 68-5, above, the proposed facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a preferred location or is a disfavored site, describe: 
1.  What publicly-used building, co-location site or other preferred location sites are located within the geographic service area. Provide a list (by address with lot and block number noted) and a map at 1:200 scale of all such buildings within the service area; 
2.  What good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure each of these preferred location sites; 
3.  Why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible and why such efforts were unsuccessful; and 
4.  How and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area and citywide network. 
(2)  Five-year plan and site inventory. Each application shall include a five-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
a.  A list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility sites within the city limits and within one mile of the city limits and a map showing these sites. The list must include the following information for each site: 
1.  Street address; 
2.  Assessor's block and lot or other applicable ad valorem tax identification number; 
3.  Zoning district; 
4.  Type of building (commercial, residential, mixed use) and number of stories; 
5.  The number of antennas and base transceiver stations per site and the location and type of antenna installation (stand alone rooftop, building facade, etc.) and location of the base transceiver station installation(s); 
6.  The height from grade to the top of the antenna installation; and 
7.  The radio frequency range in megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and effective radiated power. 
b.  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list the assessor's blocks contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunications facility site. 
(3)  Additional information requirements for towers. 
a.  If the proposed site is zoned R-1 through R-3, MH, P or D and there are alternative sites in I-1, I-2 or C-2, applicants must justify why those alternate sites have not been proposed. The building inspector will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The building inspector shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
b.  Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the building inspector. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna, and evidence of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If co-location on any such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicants must justify why such co-location is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. The building inspector will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The building inspector shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
c.  In all zones, applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a telecommunications tower. 
d.  The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennae. The applicant shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antennae locations. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The building inspector shall approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means. 
e.  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
(4)  The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the building inspector to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(b)  Expedited review for building permits only. When a telecommunications facility will be a use as of right pursuant to section 68-4 and requires only a building permit and design review before it may be erected, the building inspector will expedite review of the application and render a decision on the application within 30 business days after receipt of a complete application. 
(c)  Special use permits. 
(1)  A request for a special use permit shall be initiated by application to the building inspector and handled in accordance with the special use permit provision of Appendix B, § 8-3013-1 et seq. of this Code. The planning and design commission may issue a special use permit under this section provided it shall have determined that all of the requirements of section 68-6 have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
(2)  In granting a special use permit, the planning and design commission may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-8. - Co-location. 
The applicant and owner shall allow other future personal wireless service companies, including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to co-locate antennae, equipment and facilities on a telecommunications facility unless specific technical constraints prohibit such co-location. The applicant and other personal wireless carriers shall provide a mechanism for the construction and maintenance of shared facilities and infrastructure and shall provide for equitable sharing of cost in accordance with industry standards. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-9. - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the building inspector may be taken by any person aggrieved or 
any official of the city affected by the decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be to the zoning board of adjustment in accordance with Appendix B, § 8-3016-1 et seq. of this Code. Appeals from any decision of the zoning board of adjustment shall be in accordance with Appendix B, § 8-3016-3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-10. - Nuisances. 
Telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times within the limits of the city noise ordinance, shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-11. - Removal of antennae and towers. 
All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the building inspector any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such facility into compliance. In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within 30 days, the city may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the city may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to ensure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-12. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 60 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the city may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to ensure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this chapter as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-13. - Pre-existing towers; nonconforming uses. 
(a)  All telecommunications facilities operative on the fifth day of August, 1997, shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use in accordance with Appendix B, § 8-3004-6 of this Code. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing telecommunications facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  A telecommunications facility that has received city approval as of the fifth day of August, 1997, in the form of either a building permit or special use exception, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(c)  Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming structure. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-14. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Any person who attempts to erect or erects a telecommunications facility covered by this chapter without having first obtained the necessary building permit, special use permit or variance in the manner provided in this chapter shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. Any responsible party or other persons convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city and shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person guilty of violation of this chapter on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(b)  If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this chapter or without obtaining the required permits, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter, the city attorney, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use to correct or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Sec. 68-15. - Coordination with federal law. 
Whenever the governing authority finds that the application of this chapter would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a conditional use permit waiving any or all of the provisions of this chapter may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 8-5-97) 
Secs. 68-16—68-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EQUIPMENT AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 68-31. - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this article, have the following meanings, with all terms defined in this article II in the singular to have the correlative meaning when used in the plural and vice versa: 
City means the City of Sylvania, Georgia. 
Effective date means the date the ordinance from which this article is derived is adopted by the council of the City of Sylvania, Georgia. 
Equipment means the poles, wires, electrical conductors, conduits, subways, manholes, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances that are located in the rights-of-Way. 
Ordinance means the ordinance from which this article is derived, together with any appendices, amendments, or modifications attached hereto. 
Person means an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an association, a trust or any other entity or organization, including a governmental or political subdivision or an agency or instrumentality thereof. 
Rights-of-way or streets means the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, there-over or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Services means any telephone service, interconnection service, access service and any other telecommunications services provided by a telephone company in connection with the telecommunications system, except for "cable service", as that term is defined at 47 USC 522(6). 
Telephone company means any person that is engaged in the provision of telephone exchange service or exchange access over a telecommunications system or the provision of any other telecommunications services over a telecommunications system. Such term does not include a person insofar as such person is engaged in the provision of a commercial mobile service, including wireless telecommunications services, and does not utilize the streets to provide such services. 
Telecommunications system means the system over which services are provided inclusive of all equipment. 
(Ord. No. 397, § I, 7-10-00) 
Sec. 68-32. - General provisions. 
(a)  City's right of oversight. The work of constructing, erecting and maintaining facilities of a telephone company shall be done under the regulation of the city and shall be subject to the police power of the city and the city's ordinances. The city has the right to oversee, regulate and inspect the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment in accordance with the provisions of this article and applicable law. The city reserves the right to adopt or issue such rules, regulations, orders or other directives governing a telephone company or its equipment as it shall find necessary or appropriate in the exercise of its police power or the management of the city streets and such other orders as the city shall find necessary or appropriate pursuant to and in furtherance of the purposes of this article. The use of the streets by a telephone company shall not interfere with the use of the streets by others, except to the extent permitted by this article. The telephone company shall leave all streets and other property in as good condition as that prevailing prior to the telephone company's installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance or removal of the equipment from the streets and without materially affecting, altering or disturbing in any way any electric or other cables or wires, or any pipes, structures or attachments. The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of such streets and to require the telephone company to make any additional repairs in order to bring such streets to the condition required by this article. 
(b)  Regulation of use of streets preserved. Nothing in this article restricts the authority of the city to regulate the use and occupancy of the streets by any person or entity providing service. Persons or entities subject to paying a fee pursuant to ordinance No. ____________ shall not be exempt from municipal regulations relating to the time, manner and method of installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of the equipment located within the city's streets. Pursuant to applicable provisions of the city charter and other general law, the city expressly reserves its right to require a franchise from any telephone company providing service whose equipment occupies the city's streets. 
(c)  Permits and approvals. Pursuant to city ordinances or other applicable regulation, a telephone company shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals necessary before constructing, installing, operating, upgrading, repairing, maintaining or removing equipment. Prior to the city's issuing a construction, building or other permit, a telephone company may be required to (1) submit an application in writing specifically describing the nature, extent, and location of the portion of the rights-of-way to be used by the telephone company and (2) furnish an indemnity bond acceptable to the city or other security acceptable to the city for any damage to any part of the street, the city or to any member of the public caused by the work of the telephone company performed under authority of such permit. The obligations of the telephone company under this article and any liability of the telephone company shall not be limited by the city's acceptance of the bond or the security. Any fees that the city charges to a telephone company to issue construction, building or other permits or approvals shall not be offset against the compensation that a telephone company is required to pay to the city pursuant to Ordinance No. ____________ nor against any other fees or taxes the telephone company may pay the city. 
(d)  Repair and replacement of streets. A telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense, replace, and properly relay and repair the surface, base, and landscape treatment of any public sidewalk or street that may be excavated or damaged by reason of the erection, construction, maintenance or repair of its facilities promptly and in no event later than 30 days after completion of the work in accordance with existing standards of the City in effect at the time of the work. Upon failure of a telephone company to perform any such repair or replacement, after ten days' notice from the city, the city or its agent or contractor may repair such portion of the streets as may have been disturbed by a telephone company, its contractors or agents, and upon receipt of a bill from the city, a telephone company will promptly reimburse the city for its costs so incurred. Such repair or replacement shall restore the streets to the condition required by subsection 68-32(a) of this article. 
(e)  Abandoned equipment. All equipment including both aerial and underground equipment that is abandoned within the public rights-of-way shall be removed by the telephone company unless an alternative plan is approved by the city. Any abandoned equipment allowed to remain in the public rights-of-way shall continue to be the responsibility of the telephone company. Such telephone company shall be liable for all costs and damages arising from the presence of the abandoned equipment in the public rights-of-way. 
(f)  New grades or lines; relocations. If the grades or lines of any street are changed at any time during the term, then a telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the notice of the city, protect or promptly alter or relocate equipment so as to conform with such new grades or lines. Upon notice from the city, a telephone company shall remove and relocate equipment where the city deems such removal and relocation necessary as a result of the construction or maintenance of any part of the street or due to the extension of a public road. If a telephone company refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate equipment, in accordance with this article, subsection (e) of this section, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate such equipment, and a telephone company shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. The city and its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants, and independent contractors shall not have any liability to the telephone company for any damage as a result of or in connection with the breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(g)  Quality. All work involved in the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time, it is determined by the city or any other agency or authority of competent jurisdiction that any equipment is harmful to the health or safety of any person, then a telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions. 
(h)  No obstruction. In connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment, a telephone company shall not obstruct the streets, subways, railways, rivers or other traffic to, from or within the corporate limits of the city without the prior consent of the city. Equipment of a telephone company in the streets shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the use of the streets and adjoining property. 
(i)  No interference. A telephone company shall not interfere with the technical operation of any other telecommunications system or any other utility operating within the rights-of-way within the corporate limits of the city. 
(j)  Underground utilities. A telephone company shall comply with current or future city ordinances, rules, or orders requiring the placement of equipment underground. 
(k)  Moving equipment. A telephone company shall, upon prior written notice by the city or any person holding a permit to move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances, temporarily move equipment to permit the moving of said structure. A telephone company may impose a reasonable charge on any person other than the city for any such movement of its equipment. 
(l)  Safety precautions. The telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites and comply with the Georgia Department of Transportation's Uniform Manual on Traffic Control Devices, as it may be amended from time to time, or any successor manual adopted by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(m)  Emergency relocation of equipment. The city may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster, or other emergency, as determined by the city in its sole discretion, cut or move equipment, in which event the city shall not incur any liability to a telephone company, any affiliated person or any other person. When possible, a telephone company shall be consulted prior to any such cutting or movement of equipment and shall be given the opportunity to perform such work itself. All costs to repair or replace such equipment shall be borne by a telephone company. If the city determines that the failure of a telephone company to properly restore or repair the streets constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts. A telephone company shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city in regard to the repair or restoration. 
(n)  Street closings. If all or any part of the streets are eliminated, discontinued or de-mapped, the telephone company shall cease operation of the telecommunications system with respect to such streets upon the effective date of a final action of the city in connection therewith. 
(Ord. No. 397, § II, 7-10-00) 
Sec. 68-33. - Oversight and regulation. 
(a)  Reports. At the request of the city, a telephone company shall promptly submit to the city such information as the city may reasonably request regarding a telephone company and any affiliated person to verify compliance with any term or condition of this article. The city may require a telephone company to provide, among other things, written construction plans in advance of beginning construction and to provide as-built drawings after construction completion. 
(b)  Treatment of proprietary information. Access by the city to any of the documents, records or other information covered by this article shall not be denied on grounds that such documents, records or information contain proprietary information. A telephone company may label any documents, records or other information as proprietary if it considers them such, and the city shall protect the documents, records or other information from disclosure to the extent permitted under applicable law. In the event that any other person requests such information under the Georgia Open Records Act (O. C. G. A. § 50-18-70, et seq.), and the city reasonably believes that such requested documents, records or information may be within the exclusion guidelines of the Georgia Open Records Act, the city shall not release proprietary documents, records or other information without written notice to a telephone company. 
(Ord. No. 397, § III, 7-10-00) 
Sec. 68-34. - Indemnity, liability and insurance. 
(a)  Insurance: specifications. A telephone company shall, at its own expense, maintain a liability insurance policy or policies, in a form acceptable to the city, together with evidence acceptable to the city demonstrating that the premiums for said policy or policies have been paid. Such policy or policies shall be issued by companies duly licensed to do business in the State of Georgia and acceptable to the city. Such companies must carry a rating by Best of not less than "A". Such policy or policies shall insure (i) a telephone company and (ii) the city and its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees (through appropriate endorsements if necessary) against each and every form of liability of a telephone company referred to in this article in the minimum combined amount of $1,000,000.00, or such other amount as may be agreed to by the city, for bodily injury and property damage. The foregoing minimum limitation shall not prohibit a telephone company from obtaining a liability insurance policy or policies in excess of such limitations, provided that the city, its officers, boards, commissions, councils, elected officials, agents and employees shall be named as additional insureds to the full extent of any limitation contained in any such policy or policies obtained by a telephone company. Notwithstanding the above, in lieu of the insurance coverage required by this subsection, a telephone company may provide such proof of financial resources as may be deemed acceptable by the city that a telephone company may have available to pay claims. 
(b)  Liability not limited. The legal liability of a telephone company to the city and any person for any of the matters that are the subject of the liability insurance policies required by this article including, without limitation, a telephone company's indemnification obligation set forth in this article, shall not be limited by the insurance policies required by subsection (a), nor by the recovery of any amounts thereunder, except to the extent necessary to avoid duplicative recovery from or payment by a telephone company. 
(c)  Liability of telephone company. A telephone company shall be responsible for any liability, including, without limitation, any liability of the city and any person, including, without limitation, any officer, employee, agent, attorney, consultant and independent contractor of the city, arising out of or in connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment. A telephone company shall, at its own cost and expense, replace, repair or restore any damaged property to its prior condition and shall pay appropriate compensation in the event of any injury to or death of any person occasioned by any act or failure to act of a telephone company, any affiliated person, or any officer, employee, agent or subcontractor thereof, in connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment. The city, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors shall not be responsible for any liability of a telephone company, any affiliated person or any other person, arising out of or in connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment or the provision of services through the equipment. 
(d)  Liability limitation of city. Nothing in this article abrogates the right of the city to perform any public works or public improvements. Neither the city nor its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants or independent contractors shall be responsible to the telephone company or any affiliated person for any liability as a result of or in connection with the protection, breaking through, movement, removal, alteration, or relocation of any equipment by or on behalf of a telephone company or the city in connection with any emergency, public work, public improvement, alteration of any municipal structure, any change in the grade or line of any street, or the elimination, discontinuation, and closing of any street, as provided in this article. 
(e)  Indemnification of city. A telephone company and each affiliated person shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, employees, agents, attorneys, consultants and independent contractors from and against all liabilities, whether special, incidental, consequential or punitive, and all other damages, costs and expenses (including reasonable attorneys' fees) arising out of or in connection with the installation, construction, technical operation, upgrade, repair, maintenance and removal of equipment or the provision of services through the equipment. 
(Ord. No. 397, § IV, 7-10-00) 
Sec. 68-35. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed. 
(b)  Effective date. The ordinance from which this article derives shall become effective July 10, 2000 and shall apply to all years thereafter. 
(c)  Reservation of authority. Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to prohibit or otherwise limit the authority of the city to oversee, manage or regulate a telephone company's use of the streets. Among other things, the city expressly reserves its rights to take all actions it deems appropriate in this regard, including but not limited to, amending this article or requiring that a telephone company obtain a franchise and enter into a franchise agreement that may incorporate the terms of this article and impose additional or different terms and conditions. 
(d)  Severability. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby expressly repealed. 
(Ord. No. 397, § V, 7-10-00) 
Sec. 68-36. - Fee for non-franchise companies or carriers. 
(a)  [Purpose]. It is the purpose of this section to establish a fee for the use and rental of streets or rights-of-way within the city for each telephone company or local exchange carrier providing telecommunications services over a telecommunications system located in the public streets or rights-of-way of the city, where there is not in effect now or at any time in the future a franchise agreement between the city and such company or carrier. 
(b)  Fee established. Each telephone company or local exchange carrier providing telecommunications services over a telecommunications system located in the public streets or right-of-way of the city shall pay a fee for use and rental of the streets in the amount of three percent of recurring local service revenues. Provided however, this section shall not apply to any telephone company or local exchange carrier that has in effect a valid franchise agreement with the city, but this section shall be effective for all periods of time that there is no effective franchise agreement between the city and any such telephone company or local exchange carrier. Said fee for use and rental of the streets shall be paid in quarterly installments, each of which shall be due on or before the last day of the second month following the end of each calendar quarter and shall be based on recurring local service revenues received during such calendar quarter. 
(c)  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
Recurring local service revenues shall mean: 
(1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semi-public pay station services; and 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages. 
(2)  Charges for signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the City limits. 
(3)  All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission service) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
(4)  Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by CATV companies. 
Telecommunications services means any telephone service, interconnection service, access service and any other telecommunications services provided by a telephone company in connection with the Telecommunications System, except for "cable service", as that term is defined at 47 USC 422(6). 
Telecommunications system means the system over which services are provided inclusive of all equipment. 
Telephone company or Local exchange carrier means any person or entity that is engaged in the provision of telephone exchange service or exchange access over a telecommunications system. Such term does not include a person or entity insofar as such person is engaged in the provision of a commercial mobile service, including wireless telecommunications services. 
(d)  Records and audits. Each telephone company and local exchange carrier shall provide to the city clerk sufficient records to demonstrate to the city clerk recurring local service revenues as provided for herein. Such records shall be filed with the city clerk on or before the last day of the second month following the end of each calendar quarter. The city clerk, in the city clerk's sole discretion, may request an affidavit from an officer of such telephone company or local exchange character swearing or affirming on oath as to the accuracy of the records submitted as required herein, which affidavit shall be provided within ten days of a written request by the city clerk. Furthermore, the city shall have the right to have an audit performed of the records of each telephone company or local exchange carrier at the expense of the city. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Civil remedies. The city shall have the right to enforce this section in any court of competent jurisdiction in an action at law or equity, including, but not limited to, the right to enjoin the further use of city streets for each such telephone company or local exchange carrier that fails to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  General penalty. Violations of this article shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-12 of this Code. Each day any violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
(f)  First payment. The first payment under this section shall be based on revenues received between the effective date of this section and the end of the calendar quarter in which such effective date falls. 
(Ord. No. 398, § I—V, 8-1-00) 
Secs. 68-37—68-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DUE COMPENSATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Section 4 of Ord. No. 451, adopted June 2, 2009, states the following: "Section 4: All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith or with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. are hereby expressly repealed. To the extent of any conflict between this ordinance and the current Section 68-36 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sylvania, this ordinance shall prevail to the extent of such conflict." 

Sec. 68-51. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. No. 451, § 1, 6-2-09) 
Sec. 68-52. - Authorized designee. 
The city manager, or his designee, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. §§ 46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this article. 
(4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this article. 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 451, § 1, 6-2-09) 
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Regulating vehicular traffic, § 7.101 et seq. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; fire lanes, § 34-61 et seq.; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; municipal court, ch. 46; offenses, ch. 50; signs, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; vehicles for hire, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 70-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted; penalty for violation. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, §§ 40-6-2 through 40-6-395 of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this county with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12 unless otherwise provided by state law. 
Sec. 70-2. - Pursuit beyond city limits. 
(a)  Police officers, peace officers and other law enforcement officers employed by the city shall have the right and duty to pursue any violator of the speed and traffic laws of the city beyond the established limits of the city, but not beyond the limits of the county. 
(b)  These officers are not limited to the prohibitions expressed in O.C.G.A. § 40-13-30, but may make the pursuit and arrest beyond the limits of the city without forfeiting any rights as to employment, compensation, benefits or other compensation resulting from any accident or injury occurring in the course of such pursuit. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1002) 
State Law reference— Authority to make arrests, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-30. 
Sec. 70-3. - Through streets. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering any of the streets listed in appendix C, art. I, hereby incorporated herein. 
(b)  In addition, the drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the intersection of any street not listed in appendix C, art. I in all instances where a stop sign is erected. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1003) 
Sec. 70-4. - Maximum speed. 
The maximum limit of speed at which any vehicle may be operated is as provided in appendix C, art. II, hereby incorporated herein. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1004; Ord. No. 251, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 253, 8-6-85; Ord. No. 263, 6-3-86) 
Sec. 70-5. - Yellow curbs. 
No person shall park any vehicle at any yellow curbing at any location listed in appendix C, art. III, hereby incorporated herein. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1005) 
Sec. 70-6. - Prohibited parking. 
Where signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle in any of the locations listed in appendix C, art. III, hereby incorporated herein, in excess of the time indicated. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1006) 
Sec. 70-6.5. - Time limit parking. 
(a)  No motor vehicle shall be parked within the limits of the city at the locations listed in appendix C, art. IV for more than 12 minutes. 
(b)  No motor vehicle shall be parked within the limits of the city at the locations listed in appendix C, art. V for more than two hours. 
Sec. 70-7. - Downtown parking regulations. 
(a)  Overtime parking. No motor vehicle shall be parked within the limits of the city at the locations hereinafter designated for more than two hours continuously in any one location. 
(1)  The two-hour parking time limit shall apply to the streets listed in appendix C, art. V, hereby incorporated herein. 
(2)  The city shall indicate these parking areas by painted lines upon pavement of the streets and the curbings thereof. 
(3)  The exact location of the parking places so designated shall be established by the mayor and council who shall direct the appropriate city employees to make the appropriate markings on the streets. The location of the parking spaces may be changed from time to time as the mayor and council shall decide. 
(4)  Violation of this subsection (a) shall be punishable by a fine of $5.00 per violation. 
(b)  Parking at fireplug. No motor vehicle shall be parked closer than 15 feet to any fireplug within the limits of the city. Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $8.00 per violation. 
(c)  Improper parking. 
(1)  Streets listed in appendix C, art. V. No motor vehicle shall park on those streets listed in appendix C, art. V, except in designated parking spaces indicated by painted lines upon the pavement of such streets. No motor vehicle shall be double parked in such spaces. Violation of this subsection (c)(1) shall be punishable by a fine of $8.00 per violation. 
(2)  All streets. No motor vehicle shall be parked within the limits of the city at locations on streets at which there is a yellow curb. Parallel parking shall be permitted at other locations except as otherwise provided in this section. Violation of this subsection (c)(2) shall be punishable by a fine of $8.00 per violation. 
(3)  Blocking driveway. No motor vehicle shall partially or totally block any driveway within the limits of the city, whether such driveway is residential, commercial or other. Violation of this subsection (c)(3) shall be punishable by a fine of $8.00 per violation. 
(d)  Enforcement. Violators of this section shall be issued parking tickets by authorized law enforcement officers of the city, the form of which shall be approved by the mayor and council, and the clerk shall be authorized to receive payment of the fines in such a manner as prescribed by the clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1007; Ord. No. 261, § 7-1007, 1-21-86) 
Sec. 70-8. - Offstreet parking—Establishment of need. 
Whenever parking conditions in the city warrant additional offstreet parking, the city manager shall so advise the mayor and council and make recommendations as to meeting these needs. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1008) 
Sec. 70-9. - Same—Establishment of space. 
The mayor and council, upon the advice of the city manager, shall determine the need for additional offstreet parking and shall by resolution authorize the city manager to establish and maintain this parking. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1009) 
Sec. 70-10. - Same—Fees. 
The mayor and council shall establish the fees to be charged, if any, for parking in the new or converted offstreet parking. This fee shall be established in the resolution authorizing the establishment of the additional parking. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1010) 
Sec. 70-11. - Enforcement of restricted parking. 
If additional parking facilities are restricted, those individuals in violation of the restrictions shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 and/or subject to the cost incurred in the removal of illegally parked vehicles. Vehicles parked in violation of section 70-8 shall be impounded at the direction of the chief of police and such fines and cost as indicated above shall apply. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1011) 
Sec. 70-12. - Emergency vehicles. 
(a)  Impeding. No person shall block, either partially or totally, any street, alley or other thoroughfare in the city whereby fire trucks and other emergency vehicles shall be impeded or prevented from reaching the location of any fire or other catastrophe. 
(b)  Interfering with, parking or driving near. No person shall drive, park or cause to be driven or parked any motor vehicle or other conveyance within 500 feet of a fire, conflagration or other catastrophe, within the corporate limits of the city, or to otherwise interfere with the expeditious handling of any emergency by emergency vehicles and personnel. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1012) 
Sec. 70-13. - Loading and unloading prohibited in certain areas. 
No person shall load and unload any truck or other vehicle on the streets listed in appendix C, art. VI, hereby incorporated herein. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1031) 
Sec. 70-14. - Parking at night in residential areas. 
No truck, trailer or combination truck and trailer of a size larger than a one-ton truck commonly called a pickup truck may be parked between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the streets of any residential area in the city during these hours. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1032) 
Sec. 70-15. - Refrigerator trucks; parking restricted. 
(a)  No truck commonly known as a refrigerator truck or similar refrigerator vehicle may be parked on the public streets or on any private property between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. in areas of the city zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3, during which time of parking the motors or refrigeration equipment in these trucks are left running or operating. Such prohibition shall extend to streets and highways both within and immediately abutting areas of the city zoned R-1, R-2 and R-3. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the parking of refrigerator trucks or similar refrigeration vehicles on private property without their motors and refrigeration equipment running or operating. 
(Ord. No. 477, 11-6-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 477, adopted November 6, 2012, repealed the former § 70-15, and enacted a new § 70-15 as set out herein. The former § 70-15 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1976, § 7-1033. 
Sec. 70-16. - Use of residential streets by trucks. 
(a)  No vehicle commonly known as a truck, other than light duty trucks such as what is commonly referred to as pickup trucks up to and including one ton capacity trucks, shall regularly use the residential streets of the city. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, a residential street shall be defined as all portions of streets in the city limits where both sides of such portions of such streets are zoned R-1 or R-2 under the comprehensive zoning ordinance of the city. Such definition shall not include North and South Main Streets, East Ogeechee Street and Singleton Avenue. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit specific deliveries or service calls by truck-type vehicles, it being the intention of this section to prohibit the regular passage of such vehicles through residential areas when no business-related stop within such residential areas is contemplated. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1034) 
Chapter 74 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal utilities, § 5.101 et seq. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 34; health and sanitation, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 58; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Power of city or county to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; city's authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Rates incorporated by reference. 
(a)  Utility rates, fees and deposits shall be as fixed and established from time to time by the city council and the schedule of such rates shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  For rate classifications with more than five utility customers at the time of the rate increase, no change in the rate for any such classification shall be effective without prior advertisement at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(c)  For rate classifications with five or fewer utility customers at the time of the rate increase, the following shall apply: 
(1)  The rate shall be effective for any utility customer(s) within such classification upon the city manager or his designee giving actual notice to such utility customer of the rate increase provided the rate is either adopted by the city council prior to the increase being billed, or subsequently ratified by the city council. 
(2)  All rates currently being billed to existing utility customers within such classifications are hereby deemed adopted effective with the date of actual notice of the rate increase to each respective customer, and each such rate is hereby ratified. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-1004, 5-1013, 5-2001, 5-3008; Ord. No. 245, 11-6-84; Ord. No. 257, 12-30-85; Ord. No. 352, 1-7-97) 
Secs. 74-2—74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 74-26. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
City means the city or the governing body thereof. 
City manager means the city manager or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid waste from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Properly shredded garbage means the waste from the preparation of cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights and is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means a combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangements of the devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Sewer surcharge means a charge for sewer service and treatment service for wastes having characteristics different from sanitary wastes and for which additional charges must be assessed in order for the waste to make compensation for additional expenses incurred. 
Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average 24-hour concentration proposed during normal operation. 
Standard methods means the examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of Standard Methods of Water, Sewage and Industrial Wastes, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm drain or storm sewer means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Street means streets, avenues, drives, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes and viaducts, and all other public highways in the sanitary area. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Total solids means the sum of suspended matter, settleable matter and dissolved matter, both volatile and nonvolatile. 
Watercourse means a channel in which flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(b)  All other words shall be construed as having the meaning defined in Glossary Water and Sewage Control Engineering, published by the Water Pollution Control Federation, Washington, D.C., or by their general usage if undefined. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1021) 
Sec. 74-27. - Restriction on watering lawns. 
Anyone watering their lawns, gardens and other vegetation during the months of June through September, between the hours of 12:00 noon and 8:00 p.m., shall be in violation of this Code; provided, however, that the above restrictions do not apply on Saturday, Sunday or legal holidays; nor do the above restrictions apply during the entire week of the Fourth of July. 
(Ord. No. 242, 7-17-84) 
Sec. 74-28. - Date charges due and payable. 
All charges for water used by customers or patrons of the public waterworks of the city shall be due and payable monthly on the first day of each calendar month. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1001) 
Sec. 74-29. - Delinquent payments; penalty. 
Delinquent payments and penalties for water charges and water rentals shall be dealt with in accordance with sections 74-131 and 74-132 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1002; Ord. No. 482, 9-16-14) 
Sec. 74-30. - Discontinuance of service upon failure to pay charges; levy and execution. 
The discontinuance of service upon failure to pay water, rent, or penalty or other charges shall be dealt with in accordance with sections 74-131 and 74-132 of this Code. The city shall also have all rights and remedies provided for under the city Charter. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1003; Ord. No. 482, 9-16-14) 
Sec. 74-31. - Multiple meters; billing. 
(a)  In no instance where one property owner has more than one meter shall the two meters be added to obtain a lower billing. 
(b)  Monthly billing for sewer service shall be made with and as a part of the water system billing and payment for water service shall not be accepted without payment for any sewer service due. Nonpayment for either service shall result in discontinuance of water service. 
(c)  Except for incorrect billing due to a faulty water meter, no adjustments or deviations shall be made from billing for the amount of water delivered from the city water systems. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1005) 
Sec. 74-32. - Unauthorized withdrawal of water; discharges into sewer. 
Any person who shall, without proper authority, withdraw water from an unmetered connection to the city water system, or discharge material into the city sewer system which, in the opinion of the city's professional engineers, would be detrimental to the sewage treatment plant of the city, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-12 upon conviction. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1006) 
Sec. 74-33. - "Water connection" construed. 
A "water connection" shall consist of and be construed as the piping of water from the nearest or most practical water main of the city water system to the nearest property line of the applicant and shall include the installation of a water meter. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1011) 
Sec. 74-34. - Application for connection; approval. 
No new water connection will be made and no water furnished or provided to any property owner or other person, except upon application to and approval by the city manager and accompanied by payment of a fee or charge in the manner and amounts provided in a schedule of fees approved by the mayor and council, and on file with the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1012; Ord. No. 469, 1-18-11) 
Sec. 74-35. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any sewage or other polluted waters except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for disposal of sewage, where public sewers are reasonably available. In the event of failure to so remove a facility, the city shall have the work done, charging the cost to the property owner. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now or shall be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect these facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 90 days after date of written notice from the city manager to the property owner requiring the property owner to make connection thereto, provided that the public sewer shall be within 100 feet of the property line. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1022) 
Sec. 74-36. - Fees for connection. 
On all connections to the city sanitary sewer system, the schedule of fees for such connections shall be fixed and established from time to time by the mayor and council and such schedule shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1023) 
Sec. 74-37. - Inspection and approval of connections. 
All sewer lines and connections made within the city shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the superintendent of the water, sewer and waste treatment plant department. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1024) 
Sec. 74-38. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under provisions of section 74-35(d), the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system other than a septic tank, privy, privy vault or cesspool for a single-family dwelling, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the city manager. The application for this permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the city manager. A permit and inspection fee set by the council shall be paid to the city at the time the application for permit is filed. 
(c)  A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the city manager. The city's authorized representative(s) shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the city when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within two working days of the receipt of notice by the city manager. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of human resources or other local or state agencies having jurisdiction. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(f)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 74-35(d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge and filled with clean bank-run gravel or dirt within 60 days of notification to do so by the city manager, or other county or state agency having jurisdiction over these matters. 
(g)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to nullify any additional requirements that may be imposed by the appropriate state or county regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over these matters. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1025) 
Sec. 74-39. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city manager. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: residential and commercial service; and for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specification or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the city manager. A permit and inspection fee set by the mayor and council for a building sewer shall be paid to the city when the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer to the property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. Where one building stands to the rear of another on a single lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the city may grant permission for the building sewer from the front building to be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, upon a showing by the applicant that it is not feasible that the two buildings so connected will ultimately be on separate building lots. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the city manager, to meet all of the requirements of this article. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement or first floor. No building sewer shall be made parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from live loads (automobiles, etc.) which may be superimposed. The building sewer shall be made at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. The building sewer shall be constructed to such point as directed by the city manager. 
(h)  No person shall maintain or make a connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  Before any underground portions thereof are covered, the applicant of the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection thereof shall be made to the public sewer by an authorized representative of the city and only after inspection. 
(j)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(k)  The city manager shall keep a permanent and accurate record of the location, depth and direction of all new sewer connections, including such land marks as may be necessary to make an adequate description. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1026) 
Sec. 74-40. - Prohibited discharges into public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, to create a public nuisance or to create any hazard in the receiving waters in the sewage treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 9.0 or containing heavy concentrations of salts or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works. 
(4)  Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction in the flow of sewage or other interference to the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the city manager, that these wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment having adverse effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city manager will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 65 degrees Celsius. 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils whether emulsified or not in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit or zero and 65 degrees Celsius. 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-quarters hp. or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals or toxic substances in excess of the following daily concentrations: 

 
The above concentration limits are set by the city as maximal. The limits may be reduced by order of the city manager at any time when it is found that the wastewater treatment plant does not meet its proper limits of treatment, and the city manager may establish concentration limits for other substances as may be appropriate. All users on the system must comply with such revised standard limits within a reasonable time period established by the city manager, or as required by other regulatory agencies. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the city as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage to meet requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction of this discharge to the receiving waters. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the city in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH outside of the range of 6.0 to 9.0. 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids; such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues or of dissolved solids; such as, but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium sulfate. 
b.  Excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of state or federal agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1027; Ord. No. 229, 8-2-83; Ord. No. 409, § 1, 8-20-02) 
Sec. 74-41. - Authority of city to reject wastes, require pretreatment, etc. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 74-40(c), which in the judgment of the city manager may have a deleterious act upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving water, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject wastes. 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition with discharge to the public sewers. 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions of section 74-43(d). 
(b)  If the city permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plant and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1028) 
Sec. 74-42. - Grease traps and interceptors for oil and sand. 
(a)  All new business entities in the city that generate waste water containing oil or sand must collect this waste water and discharge it into the city's sanitary sewer system. A city approved oil/sand interceptor must be installed on the sanitary sewer service line. The location of the oil/sand interceptor must be as per the standard plumbing code. Existing businesses must install interceptors or be in compliance within six months from the enactment of this section, provided that such existing businesses shall continue to be subject to the former section 74-42 during such six-month period. 
(b)  All food service operations in the city that discharge waste water containing grease must install a grease trap or interceptor. 
(c)  All grease traps and interceptors must be designed using standard engineering principles for sedimentation and floatation in gravity separators. All grease traps and interceptors must be approved by the utility department of the city. 
(d)  All newly constructed food service establishments shall be required to install a grease interceptor sized at 20 gallons per food service seat, but not less than 1,000 gallons capacity. 
(e)  All existing food service establishments shall be required to install and establish grease handling traps and interceptors. Existing establishments operating without grease traps and interceptors shall have six months from the date of this section to render their establishment in compliance with this section. If an existing food service establishment cannot meet the outdoor type grease interceptor requirements, an alternate under-the-counter grease trap and interceptor may be used, if approved by the director of utilities. 
(f)  Each entity or establishment governed by this section shall maintain a service log reflecting the maintenance of their grease trap and interceptor and/or oil or sand interceptor. The service log shall be available in a conspicuous location for appropriate review by city personnel. 
(g)  Food service operations that do not generate grease will not require a grease trap or interceptor. These facilities include, but are not limited to, the following: 
Bagel shops; 
Bakeries with no deep frying; 
Canteens; 
Coffee shops; 
Delicatessens that do not require a grease hood; 
Fish shops; 
Fruit and vegetable markets; 
Juice bars; 
Meat sales; 
Muffin shops; 
Pretzel shops; 
Sandwich shops that do not deep fry. 
Any other establishment not included in the above categories that do not generate waste water containing grease or solids may request an exemption from the city manager. 
(h)  Failure to comply with this section shall be punishable as provided by section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 443, 3-6-07) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 443, adopted March 6, 2007, amended § 74-42 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 74-42 pertained to interceptors, and derived from the Code of 1976, § 5-1029. 
Sec. 74-43. - Private preliminary treatment facilities; control manhole; tests, sampling, etc.; special agreements. 
(a)  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities is provided for any waters or wastes, it shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(b)  It shall be required by the city that the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes install a suitable control manhole. When deemed necessary, the city may require additional meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste. This manhole shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city manager. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(c)  All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards of life, limb and property. 
(d)  No statement contained in sections 74-40 through 74-43 shall be construed as preventing any agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1030) 
Sec. 74-44. - Removal, transportation and disposition of scavenger wastes. 
(a)  The city may require a formal permit for discharge of scavenger wastes after submission of an application on forms supplied by the city. Scavenger wastes shall mean putrid or offensive matter, the contents of all privies, septic tanks and cesspools. All other materials and substances, chemicals or chemical compounds and/or industrial wastes will not be permitted to be discharged into the public sewerage system except as heretofore provided. The discharge of these wastes shall be made only at a location in the sewage treatment plant as shall be designated by the city manager. 
(b)  Scavenger wastes will be admitted into the sewage system only by approval of the city and subject to payment of fees or charges fixed by the city. This fee or charge shall be based upon the full capacity of each scavenger vehicle for each discharge. 
(c)  The applicant shall be the owner of the vehicle discharging these wastes. Any false, misleading or untruthful statements as to the nature of material shall be cause for rejection of any further discharge from the applicant. Discharges may also be suspended or terminated at any time by the city manager for willful, continued or persistent violations of these rules and regulations or upon such grounds as the city may deem proper. 
(d)  All equipment (trucks, tanks, pumps and hose used in the collection and/or transportation of scavenger wastes) shall be modern equipment in good repair. When more than one vehicle is used by an applicant, each vehicle shall bear an identifying number. 
(e)  All applicants for a permit shall furnish information with each application: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant. 
(2)  Volume of scavenger waste for each numbered vehicle. 
(3)  Number of scavenger vehicles in collection service. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1031) 
Sec. 74-45. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city manager or his representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) above, the city manager or duly authorized employees of the city, shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees. The city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging, sampling operations, except as this may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 74-43(b). 
(c)  The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1032) 
Sec. 74-46. - Protection from damage. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this section shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1033) 
Sec. 74-47. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except sections 74-28, 74-29, 74-30 and 74-46 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in this notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction thereof shall be fined, for each violation as provided in section 1-12. Each day in which this violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of the violation. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1034; Ord. No. 482, 9-16-14) 
Sec. 74-48. - Grievances and arbitration. 
(a)  Upon formal request by the sewer user, the mayor and council may hear any required arbitration of differences or grievances between the sewer user and the city manager on matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If deemed appropriate by the mayor and council, an independent hearing board may be appointed for arbitration purposes. This board shall consist of at least three persons, one of whom shall be a lawyer and the other two shall have a technical knowledge of the provisions of this article. The cost of arbitration shall be equally divided between the city and the sewer user. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1035) 
Sec. 74-49. - Self-inspection by master plumbers or utility contractors not applicable. 
Pursuant to the authority contained in Section 3 of Act 1046 Ga. L., 1996, P. 1632, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), relating to the self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the city. 
(Ord. No. 347, 9-23-96) 
Secs. 74-50—74-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICITY 

Sec. 74-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross local revenue means the revenue generated by any company, firm or utility covered by this article which is distinctly local in nature, such as, but not limited to, the difference between local telephone tolls and long distance telephone tolls, the long distance tolls not being considered local revenues. 
Pole means any structure or device to which electric power lines, telephone lines and similar items are attached for purposes of carrying these lines or items from point to point within the city. 
Utility means an organization providing a service or product such as, but not limited to, electric power, natural gas, water, telecommunications, etc. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2011) 
Sec. 74-72. - Tampering with facilities; penalty. 
Any individual, person, firm, corporation or organization that shall without proper authority damage, operate, manipulate or in any manner tamper with the meters, lines, transformers, regulators or any other equipment which is a part of the electrical distribution system of the city, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2002) 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 74-73. - Load management devices. 
(a)  Once a city electric power customer obtains, by election, what is commonly referred to within the city management as a "load management device" it shall be required of such customer to maintain the device in place and in an operating condition until such customer notifies the city in proper fashion that such customer wishes to have the device disconnected. Should it be discovered that a particular load management device, once so installed, has become disconnected or rendered inoperative otherwise, or has been removed, then the customer responsible for the electric bill at that location shall be charged, effective with the next regular electric bill, the electric rate for persons not having load management devices. Further, such customer shall be charged the difference between the rate which was charged under the load management rate and the rate which would have been charged had it not had a load management device. This payment shall be retroactive inclusive to the first billing after installation of the load management device. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $500.00 per occurrence and/or six months in the city jail. 
(c)  The penalties herein described shall not apply if it can be shown that the load management device in question is not operative because of a mechanical or similar defect inherent in the device, and the rate differential shall not be charged retroactively to the first billing after installation, but the customer will be charged the nonload management rate after discovery until a new load management device is installed and operating. 
(d)  Should a new load management device be necessary after installation, the particular customer shall bear the costs of replacing the device. 
(Ord. No. 235, § 5-2003, 11-15-83) 
Sec. 74-74. - Pole use. 
Any person desiring to use any poles owned and erected by the city may apply to the city manager for permission to do so. The city manager shall review the application considering the necessity therefor and the safety thereof. The city manager shall then make his decision based on his assessment of the best service to public interest. The city manager then shall have authority to give permission for this use and direct the city clerk to make note of this permission on the regular records of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2012) 
Sec. 74-75. - Pole rental. 
Any user of a city utility pole shall pay the city the sum as set out in the schedule of fees and charges per year per pole for use of the pole. This rental shall be payable semiannually and shall be due within 90 days after the close of the preceding six-month period. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2013) 
Sec. 74-76. - City use of privately owned utility poles. 
The city shall be entitled to use utility poles owned and erected by any person within the city, but shall pay for the use of this pole the sum of $3.60 per year per pole. This rental shall be payable semiannually and shall be due within 90 days after the close of the preceding six-month period. 
(Code 1976, § 5-2014) 
Secs. 74-77—74-100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 440, adopted March 6, 2007, repealed §§ 74-77—74-79 in their entirety, which pertained to utility franchise fee, limitation on franchise fee, and initial period waiver, respectively, and derived from the Code of 1976, §§ 5-2015—5-2017. 
ARTICLE IV. - GAS SYSTEM 

Sec. 74-101. - Interference with gas system. 
No gas services shall be furnished except through a meter or other appropriate measuring device. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3001) 
Sec. 74-102. - Free service. 
No free service shall, at any time, be furnished from the gas system. All services shall be furnished in accordance with the rates now or hereafter established, including services furnished to any county, municipal corporation or other public body. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3002) 
Sec. 74-103. - Deposit for new connections. 
(a)  Users of natural gas supplied by the city, whether residential, commercial or industrial, shall pay to the city a deposit in an amount as determined from time to time by city council in accordance with section 74-1. Such deposit must be paid prior to being connected with the city's gas mains. 
(b)  Users of natural gas supplied by the city shall not be required to pay any deposit if these users own the fee simple title to the property to be supplied with gas and occupy it. 
(c)  These deposits shall be kept separate and distinct from other funds derived from the operation and maintenance of the gas system and shall be deposited in a special account to be known as the gas system deposit account. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3003) 
Sec. 74-104. - Billing. 
Utility bill due dates and cutoff dates are dealt with in sections 74-131 and 74-132 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-3004, 5-3005; Ord. No. 482, 9-16-14) 
Sec. 74-105. - Disconnecting and reconnecting charges. 
(a)  If the customer's bill is not paid when due and service to the customer is disconnected, a charge shall be made for this disconnection in accordance with section 74-1. 
(b)  A charge determined in accordance with section 74-1 shall also be made if the services are voluntarily disconnected at the customer's request. 
(c)  The deposit required in section 74-103 shall be used and applied against any amount owed by the customer, however arising, and any balance shall be returned to the customer. 
(d)  The full deposit will be returned to the customer only if gas service is disconnected and the customer's bill, including the disconnecting charge, has been paid in full. 
(e)  Should this customer thereafter wish to be reconnected to the gas system, a new deposit in the amount hereinabove provided for will be required before reconnection. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3006) 
Sec. 74-106. - Persons authorized to make connections, turn on gas. 
No one except the city shall, at any time, turn any valve or cock or in any way tamper or make any connection with any gas main, meter, meter connection or gas service pipe between the main and the meter. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3007) 
Sec. 74-107. - Interference with gas system. 
Any person who shall, without proper authority, damage, operate, manipulate or in any manner tamper with the valves, meters, regulators, lines or any other equipment which is a part of and owned by the natural gas system of the city shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3009) 
Secs. 74-108—74-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UTILITY SERVICE 

Sec. 74-131. - Fees. 
(a)  Payment due date. Utility bills shall be for services provided prior to the first day of the month. Utility bills shall be due and payable between the first day and the tenth day of the month immediately following the date of the last service being billed. A penalty for non-residential customers of ten percent of the amount owing shall be added on the 15th day of the month if the payment has not been received by the city at the close of business on the 15th. For residential customers, a penalty of the lesser of ten percent of the amount owing or $40.00 shall be added on the 15th day of the month if the payment has not been received by the city at the close of business on the 15th. If the 15th falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or city holiday, payments received by the city on the following business day shall be accepted without penalty. 
(b)  Cut-off date. If payment for all of a customer's utility bill (or bills, if applicable) has not been received by the close of the city business office on the 24th day of the month, utility services shall be cut off on the 25th day of the month. If the 24th is a Saturday, Sunday, or city holiday, full payment received the following business day shall be accepted, and there shall be no cut off. If the 24th is a Saturday, Sunday or city holiday, and full payment is not received the following business day, utility services shall be cut off the succeeding business day. 
(c)  Customers receiving more than one utility bill must pay all bills or all services will be discontinued. 
(d)  Turn-on fees and reconnection fees shall be as determined from time to time by city council in accordance with section 74-1. 
(e)  Turn-on fees are not required for new homeowners. 
(f)  All residential customers are required to make deposit according to section 74-1 before services are connected. At the end of one year, deposits will be refunded to residential customers who have had a good paying record. Commercial customers are not eligible for deposit refund. 
(g)  In case the supply of electricity, gas or water should be reduced or interrupted by reason of accident or otherwise, the city shall not be liable for damages by reason of such failure. The city reserves the right to shut off or curtail the supply of electricity, gas, or water at any time whenever necessary for repairs or on account of the lack of a full supply. 
(h)  Each metered service shall be billed at a service schedule prescribed for the class of service, and service supplied through more than one meter at the same or different locations shall not be combined and billed under one service schedule, unless it shall be to the advantage of the city to do so. 
(i)  The city shall not be responsible for extension of facilities for any utility beyond the metering point. 
(Code 1976, § 5-4001; Ord. No. 245, 11-6-84; Ord. No. 303, 6-10-90; Ord. No. 338, § 1, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 403, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 481, 8-19-14) 
Sec. 74-132. - Extension of payment due date; utility board established. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. Irrespective of any cutoff date referred to in this chapter, the city clerk is hereby authorized in his or her sole discretion, for reasonable cause, to extend the payment due date of utility bills for a reasonable period of time. Provided, however, the city clerk is authorized to extend the payment due date for any one customer only twice within a 12-month period. 
(b)  Utility board. The mayor and council are hereby authorized to appoint two members of the council to a utility board. The utility board shall meet at the second regularly scheduled city council meeting during each month at 5:30 p. m., or such other time that may be designated by the city clerk. The term of each utility board member shall be one year. Any vacancy of any board member may be filled for the unexpired term by the city council. Any member may hold over beyond his term until a new member to the board is appointed by the council. 
(c)  Procedure where alleged billing error, etc. Any utility customer of the city may notify the city clerk or the city clerk's designee in person or in writing that the customer takes the position that there has been a billing error or other legitimate reason (other than financial hardship) for not paying the customer's utility bill by the payment due date. In order for notification to be effective, the customer shall notify the city clerk or the city clerk's designee in person or in writing on or before the tenth day of the month in which the bill is due. Failure by the customer to either provide notice as set forth herein, or pay the bill in full, including penalty, shall result in cutoff as provided in section 74-131 above. If the customer and the city clerk are unable to resolve the alleged billing error or other legitimate reason (other than financial hardship) for not paying the customer's utility bill by the payment due date, if the customer has provided the notice set forth in this subsection (c), the customer shall have the right to pay the bill in full under protest, and to appear before the utility board, which shall have the authority to uphold, reverse, or modify the decision of the city clerk. 
(d)  Procedure where possible financial hardship. When a customer takes the position that the customer is unable to pay the bill by the payment due date due to financial hardship, and the clerk has denied an extension, the customer may make a written request to the city clerk or the city clerk's designee, on or before the 20th day of the month in which the bill is due to appear before the utility board, which written request shall automatically extend the payment due date until the board meets, except that the penalty will be added for any utility bill not paid in full by the 15th day of the month in which the bill is due. Failure by the customer to either provide the notice set forth herein or pay the bill in full, including penalty, shall result in cutoff as provided in section 74-131 above. The failure of the customer to appear before the utility board at the date set will result in an automatic cutoff of utilities on the day following the meeting of the utility board. 
(e)  Request for additional extension. In the event the city clerk extends the payment due date under the authority provided in subsection (a) above, and the customer desires to request an additional extension of the payment due date set by the city clerk for reasonable cause, such utility customer shall have the further right to appear before the utility board to request an additional extension of the payment due date as set by the city clerk for reasonable cause by making a written request to the city clerk or the city clerk's designee, to appear before the utility board, which written request shall automatically extend the payment due date until the board meets, except that the penalty will be added for any utility bill not paid in full by the 15th day of the month in which the bill is due. Failure by the customer to either provide the notice set forth herein or pay the bill in full, including penalty, shall result in cutoff as provided in section 74-131 above. The failure of the customer to appear before the utility board at the date set will result in an automatic cutoff of utilities on the day following the meeting of the utility board. 
(f)  Powers of utility board. The utility board has the power to uphold, reverse or modify decisions of the city clerk to extend payment due dates, and shall have additional authority to make reasonable extensions of payment due dates if it finds that financial hardship or other just or reasonable cause exists in particular cases that come before the board. Provided, however, the utility board shall not have the power to credit or forgive all or any portion of a customer's utility bill unless it finds that there has been a billing error by the city. 
(Ord. No. 241, 6-26-84; Ord. No. 338, § 2, 1-3-95; Ord. No. 403, 9-4-01; Ord. No. 481, 8-19-14) 
Sec. 74-133. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
Ord. No. 303 adopted June 10, 1990 containing a special provision for publicly funded hospitals created under the Hill-Burton Act is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Sec. 74-134. - Meter locations. 
(a)  Meter locations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Gas. 
a.  Residential: usually at the side of customer's residence nearest the city gas main. 
b.  All other: usually at the customer's property line nearest the city gas line. 
(2)  Water. All usually adjacent to the customer's property line nearest the city water main. 
(3)  Electric. 
a.  Residential: usually at the rear of the customer's residence nearest the city electric line. 
b.  All other: 
1.  If served jointly with other customers from a single transformer station, usually on customer's structure nearest the city electric line. 
2.  If served individually from a transformer station, usually at the transformer station. 
(b)  Any deviation from all abovementioned meter locations shall be determined by the city and shall be solely for the benefit of the city. 
(c)  Each individual residence in the city, including but not limited to single-family dwelling buildings, one or more apartments contained in the same building, one or more residence buildings located on the same lot, etc., shall have separate meters for gas, water and electric service to this place of residence. Business property in the city shall have separate meters for gas, water and electric service to each separate building in use on the premises occupied by the business. 
(d)  All utility meters shall be accessible to utility personnel at all times. Failure by the customer to so provide such access shall result in discontinuance of utility service after 30 days' notice to the customer by the city manager. 
(Code 1976, § 5-4002) 
Sec. 74-135. - Temporary electric service. 
The initial charge for temporary electric service shall be as determined from time to time by city council in accordance with section 74-1 plus monthly bill at applicable rate, if temporary installation can be extended to permanent service; otherwise, monthly bill at applicable rate plus cost of installation and removal of facilities at end of temporary service period. For conditions and situations not specifically covered by the foregoing, the policy of the city will be guided by the Georgia Power Company's Rules and Regulations for Electric Service on file with the state public service commission, and by similar rules and regulations applicable to other utility service. 
(Code 1976, § 5-4003) 
Secs. 74-136—74-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 

Sec. 74-156. - Short title. 
This article may be cited as the "underground utility damage prevention ordinance." 
(Code 1976, § 5-5001) 
Sec. 74-157. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Damage means the substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility, penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective device of an underground utility, and the partial or complete severance of an underground utility. 
Demolish or demolition means any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, rendered, moved or removed by means of any tools, equipment or discharge of explosives. 
Excavate or excavation means an operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock or other materials in or on the ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, and including augering, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but not including the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes. 
Mechanized equipment means equipment operated by means of mechanical power including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augers, backhoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows and other equipment used for plowing-in or pulling-in cable or pipe. 
Operator means any person who owns or operates a utility. 
Utility means any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting, or distributing communication, electricity, gas, petroleum, petroleum products, hazardous liquids, water, steam or sewerage. 
Working day means every day, except Saturday, Sunday and national and legal state holidays. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5002) 
Sec. 74-158. - Excavation and demolition permits. 
A permit issued pursuant to law authorizing excavation or demolition operations shall not be deemed to relieve a person from the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5003) 
Sec. 74-159. - Ascertaining location of underground utilities prior to performing excavations, demolishing buildings, etc. 
Except as provided in section 74-164, no person may excavate in a street, highway, public space, a private easement of an operator, or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer served by such utility, or demolish a building without having first ascertained in the manner prescribed in sections 74-161 and 74-163 the location of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5004) 
Sec. 74-160. - Filing requirements of utility operators. 
(a)  No later than 30 days before the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives, all other sections of this chapter, each operator having underground utilities within the jurisdictional limits of the city, shall file with the city clerk a list containing the location of all such underground utilities (including those utilities that have been abandoned in place by the operator but not yet physically removed), the name of the operator and the name, title, address and telephone number of its representative designated to receive the written or telephonic notice of intent required by section 74-161. 
(b)  Changes in any of the information contained in the list filed under section 74-160 shall be filed by the operator with the clerk within five working days of the change. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5005) 
Sec. 74-161. - Notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 74-164, before commencing any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 74-159 each person responsible for such excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephonic notice of intent to excavate or demolish at least three but not more than ten full working days, on each operator which has filed a list required by section 74-160 indicating that it has underground utilities located in the proposed area of excavation or demolition; provided, where demolition of a building is proposed, operators shall be given reasonable time to remove or protect their utilities before demolition of the building is commenced. 
(b)  The written or telephonic notice required by subsection (a) must contain the name, address and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent and, if different, the person responsible for the excavation or demolition, the starting date, anticipated duration, and type of excavation or demolition operation to be conducted, the location of the proposed excavation or demolition, and whether or not explosives are to be used. 
(c)  If the notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of such notification shall be maintained by the operators and associations notified to document compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5006) 
Sec. 74-162. - Response to notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)  Each operator or designated representative notified in accordance with section 74-161 shall, not less than two working days in advance of the proposed excavation or demolition (unless a shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or designated representative), supply by use of maps when appropriate the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition: 
(1)  The approximate location and description of all of its underground utilities which may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition. 
(2)  The location and description of all utility markers indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities. 
(3)  Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities, including providing adequate temporary markings indicating the approximate location of the underground utility in locations where permanent utility markers do not exist. 
(b)  For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utilities is defined as a strip of land at least three feet wide but not wider than the width of the utility plus 1½ feet on either side of the utility. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5007) 
Sec. 74-163. - Emergency excavation or demolition. 
Compliance with the notice requirements of section 74-161 is not required of persons responsible for emergency excavation or demolition to ameliorate an imminent danger to life, health or property; provided, however, that such persons give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to each operator having underground utilities located in the area where such excavation or demolition is to be performed and requests emergency assistance from each operator so identified in locating and providing immediate protection to its underground utilities. An imminent danger to life, health, or property exists whenever there is a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health, or property will result before the procedures under sections 74-161 and 74-162 can be fully complied with. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5008) 
Sec. 74-164. - Precautions to avoid damage. 
In addition to the notification requirements of section 74-161, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 74-159 shall: 
(1)  Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground utilities in and near the construction area. 
(2)  Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such utility. 
(3)  Provide such support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such utilities. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5009) 
Sec. 74-165. - Excavation or demolition damage. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 74-159 that results in any damage to an underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator of such utility of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of such utility. 
(b)  Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 74-159 that results in damage to any underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator, police and fire departments, and take any other action as may be reasonably necessary to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until arrival of the operator's personnel or police and fire departments. 
(Code 1976, § 5-5010) 
Secs. 74-166—74-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 74-171. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Identity Theft Prevention Program." 
(Ord. No. 447, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-172. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-173. - Defintions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply. Other than "city" and "personal identifying information," definitions provided in this section are based on the definitions provided in 16 CFR § 681.2. 
City means the City of Sylvania. 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-174. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, electric, natural gas and garbage. 
(c)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is primarily a check that was stolen on someone else's account, and that the reporting agency will sometimes report back that a social security number does not match with the submitted social security number, or that the social security number may be connected with multiple names (though, in those situations, the city does not have knowledge that identity theft was involved). 
(d)  The processes of opening a new covered account and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring where an applicant uses another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account. 
(g)  The city determines that there is a moderate risk of identity theft occurring where one uses another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment to pay such customer's covered account or accounts. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-175. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer as follows: 
(1)  A valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account; 
(2)  The full name of the applicant; 
(3)  The service address of the applicant; 
(4)  The location of other service in the applicant's name; 
(5)  Nearest relative's name, address and telephone number for the applicant (or in the case of an applicant which is not a natural person, the nearest relatives name, address and telephone number of the agent of the applicant opening the account); 
(6)  If applicable, the applicant's landlord's name, address and telephone number; 
(7)  The applicant's employer's name, address and telephone number; 
(8)  The utility services requested by the applicant; 
(9)  The amount of the deposit made on the account; 
(10)  If there is a disabled person in a residence which is served pursuant to such application, the name of all disabled persons residing or who shall reside in such residence, together with a description of such person or person's disability or disabilities; 
(11)  The social security number of the applicant, or if the applicant is not a natural person, the social security number of the agent of the applicant; 
(12)  The telephone number of the applicant; 
(13)  The mailing address of the applicant; 
(14)  The driver's license number and state of issuance of the applicant, or if the applicant is not a natural person, the agent of the applicant; 
(15)  The date of birth of the applicant, or if not a natural person, the date of birth of the agent of the applicant; 
(16)  Whether or not the applicant owns his or her home; 
(17)  If the applicant requests that the applicant's account be drafted for the payment of utilities, the routing code and account number for such draft; 
(18)  The date that service is requested; 
(19)  The date of the deposit payment; 
(20)  If there are disabled persons in a residence to be served by such utilities, if available, proof of such disability in the form of a doctor's statement or other proof that may be available. 
Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system. The paper copy of the application for utility service shall be placed at all times in a secured place such as the city's vault to which access is limited only to authorized city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-176. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel; 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the finance director on a regular basis; 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately; 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-177. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments; 
(b)  All credit card payment made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base; 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-178. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patters of fraud patterns. For example: The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patters of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments. 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-179. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the finance director or city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the finance director or city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the finance director or city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director or city manager: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account. 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue. 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 48 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account. 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the finance director of city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the finance director or city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the finance manager or city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director or city manager: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-180. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-181. - Program administration. 
The finance director is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The finance director will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The finance director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-182. - Outside service providers. 
In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 1, 10-21-08) 
Secs. 74-183—74-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 74-201. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as "Treatment of Address Discrepancies." 
(Ord. No. 447, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-202. - Purpose. 
Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this Article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-203. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means City of Sylvania. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. See 16 CFR § 681.1(b). 
(Ord. No. 447, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-204. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-205. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Sec. 74-206. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 447, § 2, 10-21-08) 
Chapter 75 - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY 
ARTICLE I. - DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS 

Secs. 75-1—74-10. - Reserved. 
Sec. 75-11. - Intent and purpose. 
The City of Sylvania (the "City") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including, but not limited to, Article 9, Section 1, Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. 36-35-3 and O.C.G.A. 32-4-92(10), has adopted the ordinance codified in this chapter for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-12. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-13. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
City means the City of Sylvania, Georgia. 
Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Sylvania. 
Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, of facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
Director means the utility director of the city, or his or her designee. 
Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances; 
Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part hereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Secs. 75-14—74-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY REGISTRATION 

Sec. 75-21. - Registration required. 
Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the right-of-way at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-22 - Registration procedure. 
The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i. e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, e-mail address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, e-mail address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, e-mail address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-23. - Incomplete registration. 
If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-24. - Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. 
Acceptance of the registration is only the non-exclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-25. - Facilities in place without registration. 
Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Secs. 75-26—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION PERMITS 

Sec. 75-31. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the department of utilities in accordance with the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-32. - Permit procedure. 
Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the department of utilities. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, e-mail address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the state public service commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-33. - Permit fees. 
Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-34. - Issuance of permit. 
If the director determines the application has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit: 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this chapter; 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-35. - Emergency situations. 
(a)  Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(b)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-36. - Effective period of permit. 
(a)  Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(b)  The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance of acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
(3)  Practices any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-37. - Cancellation for cause. 
If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach; 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-38. - Expiration of permit. 
If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Secs. 75-39, 75-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED MINIMUM STANDARDS 

Sec. 75-41. - Utility accommodation manual adopted. 
The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this ordinance and the manual shall be resolved in favor the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required as meaning the city municipal equivalents. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-42. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-43. - Grading. 
If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part hereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-44. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-45. - Locate request. 
As provided in O. C. G. A. 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Secs. 75-46—74-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESTORATION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 75-51. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)  A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Secs. 75-52—74-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INSPECTION 

Sec. 75-61. - Inspection. 
(a)  The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)  At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this chapter or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. 
(c)  When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Secs. 75-62—74-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OTHER APPROVALS, PERMITS AND AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 75-71 - Additional permits required. 
The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. The rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as outlined in section 75-35. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Secs. 75-72—74-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 75-81. - Penalties. 
Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Secs. 75-82—74-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OTHER PROVISIONS 

Sec. 75-91. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-92. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and Laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the City's Codified Ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-93. - Compliance. 
No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-94. - Appeal of administrative decisions. 
All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification to the city required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director as specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Sec. 75-95. - Chapter headings. 
Chapter headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 452, § 1, 8-18-09) 
Chapter 78 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; taxation, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; zoning, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 78-1—78-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 78-26. - Application for license. 
Any person owning a taxicab and desiring to operate it within the city must first make application to the mayor and council in the following form, the terms and conditions of which are made a part of this article: 
"To the mayor and council of the City of Sylvania. 
Gentlemen: 
I (or we) hereby apply for a license to operate a public taxicab (or taxicabs) in Sylvania for the year beginning June 1, 19 ____________ . If I (we) am (are) granted this license I (we) pledge to observe all traffic laws of the city, and I (we) also pledge that I (we) will not use my (our) taxicab(s) for transporting passengers for immoral purposes, or for transporting any intoxicating beverages. I (we) understand that if I (we) violate any of the above regulations that the mayor and council may revoke my (our) license. (Here give the following information: make of car; number of passengers that can be carried; state license number; driver's license number; name of insurance company insured with and amount of property damage, liability and bodily injury liability insurance.) 
(Applicant's Signature)" 
(Code 1976, § 6-1051) 
Sec. 78-27. - Liability insurance. 
A copy of the applicant's liability insurance policy must be filed with the city clerk before the taxicab license is issued. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1052) 
Sec. 78-28. - Revocation of license. 
Should any owner of any taxicab permitted to operate under this article fail to meet all of the requirements stated herein, the mayor and council may revoke his license and retain the money paid therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1053) 
APPENDIX A - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; signs, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62. 

ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION 

Section 8-2001. - Authority. 
In pursuance of the authority granted by the Georgia General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, No. 358, as amended, the mayor and council hereby enacts and ordains as follows. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 11, 11-5-68) 
State Law reference— Ga. Code Ann., § 69-12. 
Section 8-2002. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this chapter shall govern all subdivision of land within the corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 12, 11-5-68) 
Charter reference— Regulation of street locations, division 1, section 1.105(19). 
Sections 8-2003—8-2010. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE AND SHORT TITLE 

Section 8-2011. - Purpose. 
To encourage the development of an economically sound and stable community; to assure the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to new land developments; to assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; to assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments to the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; to assure, in general, the wise development of areas in harmony with the master plan of the community; and to secure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for observance both of the subdivider and the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 21, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2012 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision Regulations, City of Sylvania, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 110, § 22, 11-5-68) 
Sections 8-2013—8-2020. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITION OF TERMS 

Section 8-2021. - General definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall carry their customary dictionary meanings. For the purpose of this chapter, certain words or terms used herein are defined as follows: 
City means the City of Sylvania, Georgia. 
City council means the city council for the City of Sylvania, Georgia. 
Mayor and council means the mayor and council of Sylvania, Georgia. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
(Ord. No. 110, § 31, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 414, § 1, 3-4-03) 
Section 8-2022. - List of definitions. 
Cul-de-sac means a dead end street where there is room for a vehicle to turn at a circular end. 
Master plan (same as comprehensive plan) means any part or element of the overall plan for development adopted by the planning commission as provided by the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, No. 358, as amended. 
Street means, relates to and includes streets and avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, expressways, lanes, alleys and other ways. For the purpose of this chapter, streets are classified by function as follows (see following page): 


Major street means those indicated as such on the major street plan map, which serve primarily as major traffic ways for travel through and within the city. 
Collector street means those streets which serve as feeders to a major street, as collectors of traffic from minor streets and for circulation around a residential neighborhood. 
Minor street means those streets provided for the primary purpose of furnishing access to abutting properties. 
Subdivider means an individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust or any other legal entity (or agent therefor) that undertakes the activities covered by these regulations. Inasmuch as the subdivision plat is merely a necessary means to the end of assuring a satisfactory development, the term "subdivider" is intended to include the terms "developer" and "builder" even though the persons involved in successive stages of the project may vary. 
Subdivision means a subdivision shall be construed to be a division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of conveyance, transfer, improvement, sale, legacy or building development, and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision, and where appropriate to the context relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or areas subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards set forth in this chapter. 
The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 32, 11-5-68) 
Sections 8-2023—8-2030. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PREAPPLICATION 

Section 8-2031. - Preapplication consultation. 
Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the city is proposed, the subdivider is urged to consult early and informally with the planning commission. The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and its vicinity, and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. The purpose of the preapplication review is to facilitate the subsequent preparation of plans, and no fees are charged for this review. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. IV, 11-5-68) 
Sections 8-2032—8-2040. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS 

Section 8-2041. - Conformance to major street plan. 
All streets and other features of the major street plan shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimensions indicated on the major street plan adopted by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 51, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2042. - Public sites and open spaces. 
When a proposed school site or other public building site, park or other land for public uses is located in whole or in part in the subdivision, the planning commission may require that, as a prerequisite to plat approval, these sites shall be dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition by the appropriate public agency. 
Areas for parks, playgrounds or other public uses shall be of reasonable size. No arbitrary percentage of areas shall be insisted upon by the planning commission but, in general, developers shall set aside not less than five percent of the area for these purposes. 
If, in the opinion of the planning commission, an area greater than five percent is deemed necessary for recreational purposes, the planning commission shall refuse to approve the plat until sufficient land is dedicated for this public purpose. 
Where, in the opinion of the planning commission, a public area may not be suitable within the proposed subdivision, the subdivider may be required to furnish an in-lieu cash payment to provide for the acquisition of land which will serve the proposed subdivision. 
Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the planning commission finds not required or suitable for this public use, the planning commission shall refuse to approve the plat. 
The approval of a plat by the planning commission shall not be deemed to constitute or effect an acceptance by the city of the dedication of any street or other grounds shown upon the plat. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 52, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2043. - Subdivision names. 
The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or too closely approximate the name of any other subdivision within the city. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 53, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2044. - Suitability of land. 
Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the commission to be uninhabitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravate the flood hazard, but this land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 54, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2045. - Large parcels. 
In case a tract is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, these parcels shall be arranged so as to allow the opening of future streets and logical future resubdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 55, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2046. - Lots. 
Lots shall front upon a public street. Lot lines shall be generally perpendicular or radial to street lines. Lot dimensions shall meet the requirements of the comprehensive zoning ordinance for the district or districts in which the subdivision is located. Corner lots shall be increased in size wherever necessary so as to provide that any structure to be placed thereon shall conform to the minimum setback line of each street as required in the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 56, 11-5-68) 
Cross reference— Zoning section 8-3001 et seq. 
Section 8-2047. - Blocks. 
The length shall not exceed 1,200 feet or be less than 400 feet and the width sufficient to provide for two tiers of lots, but irregularly shaped lots indented by cul-de-sac streets and containing interior parks will be acceptable when properly designed, and provision made for maintenance of interior parks. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 57, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2048. - Streets. 
(a)  Conformance to major street plan and other elements of the master plan. The arrangements of streets in the subdivision shall provide for the continuation of the principal streets in adjoining subdivisions or for their proper projection when adjoining property has not yet been subdivided, and in general, conform to the master plan. 
(b)  Street names. Street names shall require the approval of the planning commission. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already existing and named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets. 
(c)  Street jogs. Street jogs with center line of off-sets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. (See below) 
(d)  Existing street jogs. Where development is proposed on an existing street which jogs or offsets less than 125 feet, these streets shall be realigned before development is permitted. 
(e)  Dead end or cul-de-sac streets. Dead end or cul-de-sac streets shall not be greater in length than 500 feet. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having a property line radius of at least: 50 feet with an outside pavement radius of at least 40 feet. (See below) 
(f)  Alleys. Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multi-family, commercial or industrial developments, but shall not be provided in one- and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. 
(g)  Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys and public grounds shall not be permitted unless the control is placed in the hands of the mayor and council under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
(h)  Street intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees unless required by unusual circumstances. (See below) 
(i)  Curb radii. Curb radii at street intersections shall be at least 25 feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, a radius of at least 30 feet shall be required. 
(j)  Easements. Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided where necessary for utilities or drainage. 
(k)  Double frontage lots. Except under special conditions, double frontage lots shall be avoided. Where the planning commission under special conditions permits double frontage lots, the frontage along the rear lot lines shall be screened with a masonry wall, or evergreen hedge at least five feet in height. 



(Ord. No. 110, § 58, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2049. - Geometric standards and other requirements of streets. 

 
* Major streets shall meet all requirements shown on the major thoroughfare plan. (See following page) 

(Ord. No. 110, § 59, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2050. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS IN SUBDIVISIONS 

Section 8-2051. - Approval of preliminary plat required. 
Construction of improvements shall not commence until the preliminary plat has been approved. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. VI, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2052. - Improvements installed by subdivider. 
The subdivider shall be required to install or have installed at his expense the following improvements: 
(1)  Monuments. Two concrete monuments at least 36 inches in length and four inches square with a suitable center point at each street intersection on the right-of-way line and iron pin monuments three-fourths inches in diameter and 24 inches long at all points on boundary lines of lots where there is a change in direction, and at all lot corners. 
(2)  Streets. At least one and one-half inches of hot plant mix asphalt (or, if Georgia DOT specifications are more stringent, such specifications shall be met) on a base of at least six inches thickness of compacted Class "A" or "B" sand-clay or top soil, or equivalent or crush and run (or, if Georgia DOT specifications are more stringent, such specifications shall be met). No final grading or paving of the street, or construction or installation of utilities in the bed of a street, shall be permitted until the grade has been officially established. No paving shall begin until the compacted base has been inspected and approved by the official representative of the city and underground utilities installed and approved. 
(3)  Water mains. 
a.  Where a public water main is within 1,500 feet of the subdivision at its nearest point, the subdivision shall be connected with such water main in the manner hereafter provided. In such cases, mains of at least six inches shall be required, unless the engineering consultants regularly employed by the city shall approve a lesser diameter. The City of Sylvania shall bear the expense of materials and labor in installing such water main from the existing public water main to the property line of the subdivision. In extending water mains within the subdivision, the subdivider shall purchase all required materials, but the City of Sylvania will bear the expense of installing such lines. Where a public water main is not reasonably accessible as determined by the planning commission, the subdivider shall provide an individual water supply according to the standards of the City of Sylvania or the Screven County Health Department, and the most restrictive standard shall apply. 
b.  In installing water mains as herein provided, the materials shall be of such composition and nature as shall be approved by the consultant engineers of the city. Notwithstanding any conflicting provision of the charter of the City of Sylvania and its code of ordinances, it shall be acceptable to use polyvinylchloride, otherwise known as PVC pipe. 
(4)  Sanitary sewers. Wherever a public sanitary sewer is within 1,500 feet of the subdivision at its nearest point and connection by gravity flow is feasible, the subdivider shall connect with this sanitary sewer and provide a connection for each lot. The size of the mains shall be at least eight inches. The subdivider shall be responsible for the costs of all taps, lift pump stations, manholes and extensions to existing municipal facilities. Where sanitary sewers are not available, an oxidation pond, septic tank or other disposal devise designed and installed according to standards of the city or the county health department may be permitted, and the most restrictive standards shall apply. 
(5)  Storm sewers. Storm sewers, catch basins and traps or adequate drainage ditches or cross ditches shall be provided in each subdivision. They shall be designed to carry not less than the storm water from a rainfall expected to occur once in ten years with a runoff factor of 90 percent for pavements and buildings and a variable runoff factor depending on the topography of the ground for other areas. Storm drainage design shall be based upon Talbot's formula. 
(6)  Variance or other improvements. Where the subdivider can show that a provision of these regulations would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without destroying the intent of these provisions, the planning commission may authorize a variance. Likewise, if because of peculiar conditions or circumstances relative to a particular subdivision, the planning commission may require the installation of sidewalks, street trees or other improvements. Any variance thus authorized or additional improvement thus required is to be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning commission with the reasoning on which the variance or addition was justified as set forth. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 61, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 174, § 1, 5-18-76; Ord. No. 231, 9-20-83; Ord. No. 414, § 2, 3-4-03) 
Section 8-2053. - Improvements to be installed by city. 
(a)  Street name markers. Street name markers shall be provided at the corners of all street intersections. 
(b)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed so as to comply with the latest requirements necessary to maintain the city's class rating for fire insurance purposes. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 62, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 231, 9-20-83) 
Sections 8-2054—8-2060. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Section 8-2061. - Submission of plat. 
Following the preapplication consultation of a proposed land subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the city council the following: 
(1)  The preliminary plat and other documents as specified hereafter; 
(2)  A letter requesting review and approval of the preliminary plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of a hearing by the city council on the preliminary plat shall be sent; and 
(3)  A preliminary plat filing fee of $15.00 unless the plat contains five or less lots in which case the fee shall be $2.00 per lot. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 71, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 414, § 3, 3-4-03) 
Section 8-2062. - Review of preliminary plat. 
(a)  Review by planning commission. The planning commission shall review the preliminary plat for conformance to the rules and regulations of this chapter, and the requirements of the zoning ordinance, and shall take into consideration the general requirements of the community and the best use of the land to be subdivided. The preliminary plat may be approved, disapproved or approved subject to modifications. The commission may indicate the specific changes required, and the public improvements which must be provided as required by this chapter, or the amount of the performance bond therefor which it will require as a prerequisite to the approval of the final plat. 
(b)  Recommendation to city council. If the planning commission approves the preliminary plat, it shall forward the same to the Sylvania City Council for final approval. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 72, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 414, § 4, 3-4-03) 
Section 8-2063. - Notice of hearing on preliminary plat. 
The city council shall hold a hearing on the preliminary plat within 45 days of receiving the same from the planning commission. Notice of the time and plat of the hearing shall be sent by the city clerk by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter requesting preliminary review and approval, not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. If action is not taken within 45 days after the hearing, the preliminary plat shall be deemed approved and a certificate of approval issued on demand. The subdivider may waive the 45 day time limit and consent to an extension of time. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 73, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 414, § 5, 3-4-03) 
Section 8-2064. - Tentative and conditional nature of preliminary plat approval. 
Tentative and conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the planning commission and city council and for recording upon fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations and the stipulations in the conditional approval, if any. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 74, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 414, § 6, 3-4-03) 
Section 8-2065. - Expiration of tentative approval of preliminary plat. 
The tentative approval shall expire after one year unless an extension of time is granted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 75, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 414, § 7, 3-4-03) 
Section 8-2066. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
The preliminary plat shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Number of copies. Five copies of the preliminary plat shall be furnished by the subdivider: One copy to be retained in the files of the planning commission, one copy to be submitted to the county health department, one copy to be submitted to the Sylvania Public Works Department, one copy to be reviewed by appropriate city and county officials and the postmaster, and one copy to be returned to the subdivider. 
(2)  Form. The preliminary plat shall be drawn clearly and legibly at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or larger. The sheet size shall be not less than 16 by 24 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 76, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2067. - Data required on preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Proposed subdivision name or identifying title and acreage to be subdivided. 
(2)  Name and address of owner of record, subdivider and owners of adjoining property. 
(3)  Date, graphic scale and north point. 
(4)  Contours at an interval of not greater than five feet and such street cross sections and profiles as may be required by the planning commission. Where the land is relatively flat, spot elevations at intervals sufficient to show the drainage pattern, shall be plotted. Elevations of monuments or other permanent fixed points shall be noted. 
(5)  Exact boundaries of the tract to be subdivided by distances and bearings. 
(6)  Existing and proposed easements and their approximate location, width and distances. 
(7)  Names and dimensions of existing and proposed streets and alleys on and adjacent to the tract. 
(8)  Location and type of existing and proposed sewerage and storm drainage and water supply facilities and other utilities on or adjacent to the tract, showing proposed connections. 
(9)  Lot lines with approximate dimensions and lot numbers. 
(10)  Sites, if any, and their acreages, to be reserved or dedicated for public uses. 
(11)  Vicinity map showing location of subdivision and its relationship to the rest of the city and surrounding countryside. This may be shown at a smaller scale. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 77, 11-5-68) 
Sections 8-2068—8-2070. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FINAL PLAT 

Section 8-2071. - Certificates of approval required. 
After tentative approval of the preliminary plat and before approval of the final plat, there shall be filed with the planning commission by the building inspector and all other departments of the city and county concerned with the requirements of subdivisions, certificates as to the satisfactory completion of all improvements required, and for any requirements not so completed, a certificate by the city attorney as to the sufficiency of the bond offered in lieu thereof. 
(Ord. No. 110, art. VIII, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2072. - Procedure for final plat approval. 
The subdivider shall submit to the city council the following: 
(1)  The final plat and other documents as specified hereafter. 
(2)  A letter requesting review and approval of the final plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of a hearing by the city council on the final plat shall be sent. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 81, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 414, § 8, 3-4-03) 
Section 8-2073. - Review of final plat. 
(a)  Review by planning commission. The planning commission shall review the final plat for conformance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat and with the rules and regulations of this chapter. The final plat may be approved, disapproved or approved subject to modifications. 
(b)  Recommendation to city council. If the planning commission approves the final plat, it shall forward the same to the city council for final approval. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 82, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 414, § 9, 3-4-03) 
Section 8-2074. - Notice of hearing on final plat. 
The city council shall hold a hearing on the final plat within 45 days of receiving the same from the planning commission. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent by the city clerk by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter and on the plat, requesting review and approval, not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. After the hearing, notation of the action taken shall be made on each of the five required copies of the plat. If action is not taken within 45 days of the hearing, the final plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval issued on demand. The subdivider may waive the 45 day limit and consent to an extension of time. The ground of disapproval of any plat shall be stated in the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 83, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 414, § 10, 3-4-03) 
Section 8-2075. - Recording of final plat. 
Upon approval of the final plat, with the signature of the secretary of the planning commission, the signature of the mayor or mayor pro tem, and the signature of the city clerk thereon, the developer shall have the plat recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county. The subdivider shall have responsibility for payment of the recording fee. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 84, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 414, § 11, 3-4-03) 
Section 8-2076. - Final plat specifications. 
The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the preliminary plat and certain additional specifications as follows: 
(1)  The final plat shall be drawn in permanent ink on tracing cloth or mylar base film. 
(2)  The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of 100 feet or less equals one inch. Profiles shall be drawn at a horizontal scale of 100 feet equals one inch and a vertical scale of five feet equals one inch. The size of the sheet shall not exceed 42 inches in any one dimension. Separate sectional sheets may be submitted if necessary. 
(3)  Exact location and description of monuments. 
(4)  Exact locations, widths and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat. 
(5)  Street center lines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii and lengths of tangents. 
(6)  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth-foot and bearings. 
(7)  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
(8)  Locations and dimensions of all improvements constructed or installed. 
(9)  Private convenants or restrictions, if any, shall either be recorded on the final plat or on an identified document attached to the final plat. 
(10)  Certification by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor stating that the plan represents a survey made by him and that all the monuments as shown thereon actually exist, and that their location, size and material are correctly shown. A certified copy of computation and closure shall be submitted by the engineer or land surveyor. 
(11)  Owner's certification that he has approved plat and will comply with all regulations and requirements of the planning commission. 
(12)  Certificate of dedication of all streets, utilities, rights-of-way, easements and public areas to the city. 
(13)  Space for signatures of chairman and secretary of the planning commission if plat is approved. 
(14)  Space for signatures of mayor and city clerk if plat is approved by mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 85, 11-5-68) 
Sections 8-2077—8-2080. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Section 8-2081. - Plat approval. 
After this chapter shall have been put into effect, any subdivision that fails to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be disapproved by the planning commission and/or city council. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 91, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 414, § 12, 3-4-03) 
Section 8-2082. - Recording of plats. 
No plat of a subdivision lying within the corporate limits of the city shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county unless it has been given final approval by the planning commission and city council and the description by metes and bounds on the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from these requirements. No plat shall be recorded that does not bear the signature and seal of a registered land surveyor. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 92, 11-5-68; Ord. No. 414, § 13, 3-4-03) 
State Law reference— Improper filing or use of plats, Ga. Code Ann., § 69-9905. 
Section 8-2083. - Sale or transfer of lots. 
The subdivider of any land within the city who transfers or sell or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before such plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor (Section 19 of the Georgia General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957). 
(Ord. No. 110, § 93, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2084. - Acceptance of streets. 
No public authority shall accept, improve or maintain any street not shown on an approved and recorded final plat unless this street has received the legal status of a public street. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 94, 11-5-68) 
Section 8-2085. - Building permit. 
No building permit shall be issued and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lots within the city unless the street giving access to the lots is a public street. Any building erected in violation of these provisions is an unlawful structure and the building inspector, city attorney or other agent of the city shall enjoin this erection or cause the building to be vacated or removed. 
(Ord. No. 110, § 95, 11-5-68) 
APPENDIX B - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the city's zoning ordinance, as adopted by the city council on November 3, 1992, and effective on November 3, 1992. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 42; signs, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 62; vehicles for hire, ch. 78. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 4; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

ARTICLE 1. - AUTHORITY, PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION 

Section 8-3001-1. - Authority and purpose. 
Pursuant to the authority conferred by article IX, section II, paragraph IV of the 1982 Constitution of the State of Georgia and to guide development in accordance with existing and future needs; to protect, promote and improve public health, safety, morals, convenience, order, appearance, prosperity and the general welfare; to insure the adequate provision of light and air; to promote safety from fire and other dangers; to facilitate economical and adequate provision of public facilities such as transportation, water, sewerage, education, recreation, sanitation and other public requirements; with reasonable consideration of the character of each area and its suitability for particular uses, and with a view toward promoting desirable living conditions and sustained stability of living areas, protecting property against blight, conserving the value of land and buildings, securing economy in governmental expenditures, and encouraging the most appropriate use of land, buildings and structures, the Sylvania city council does ordain and enact into law the following regulations: 
(a)  Dividing the city into districts and establishing the boundaries thereof; 
(b)  Regulating the location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures; 
(c)  Regulating the percentage of lot which may be covered; 
(d)  Regulating the size of yards, courts and other open spaces; 
(e)  Regulating the density and distribution of the population; 
(f)  Regulating the uses and locations of buildings, structures and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, conservation, public activities, airports, water supply, sanitation, protection against floods; 
(g)  Establishing a planning and design commission and defining the powers and duties thereof; 
(h)  Regulating the design of structures within R-1, R-2, R-3, P-1, C-1 and C-2 zones; 
(i)  Providing for the method of administration and amendment of these regulations; 
(j)  Defining the powers and duties of the planning commission and board of adjustment with respect to these regulations; 
(k)  Defining certain terms used herein; and 
(1)  Providing penalties for violations of these regulations. 
Section 8-3001-2. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Sylvania, Georgia." 
Section 8-3001-3. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall apply to all land, buildings and structures within the incorporated limits of the City of Sylvania, Georgia. 
Section 8-3001-4. - Zoning map. 
The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by this ordinance are defined and shown on the map entitled "Official Zoning Map of Sylvania, Georgia," adopted June 15, 1980, as amended, and hereby made a specific part of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 8-3002-1. - Interpretation of certain words and terms. 
2-1.1. Words used in this ordinance shall have their customary meanings except for specific words which will be defined in this section. 
2-1.2. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tenses. 
2-1.3. Words in the singular number include the plural number; and words in the plural number include the singular. 
2-1.4. The word "person" shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership, trust, company or corporation. 
2-1.5. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is discretionary. 
2-1.6. The words "used" and "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall include the words "intended, designed or arranged to be used or occupied." 
2-1.7. The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
Section 8-3002-2. - Definitions. 
Accessory use. An accessory use is one which: 
(1)  Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or use; 
(2)  Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal structure or use served; 
(3)  Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use; and 
(4)  Is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use. 
Adjoining lot. Land immediately adjacent to the lot in question, including lots located immediately across streets, alleys, watercourses of less than 100 feet in width, drainage easements and other rights-of-way. 
Alley. A thoroughfare either used or shown on any recorded description of the subject parcel(s) which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Alteration of building. Any addition to the height, width or depth of a building or structure; or any change in the location of the exterior walls. 
Automobile sales lot. A lot which is used principally for the storage and sale of complete and operable automobiles. 
Automobile wrecking yard. A lot where three or more vehicles not in running condition, or parts thereof, are stored, or any building or structure used principally for wrecking and storage of automobiles not in running condition. 
Billboards. Any sign or advertisement used as an outdoor display by the painting, posting or affixing on any surface of a picture, emblem, words, figures, numbers or letters; such sign or advertisement being remote from the point of sale. 
Buffer. A portion of a lot set aside for open space and visual screening between land uses to minimize conflicts between them. 
Building. A structure built, maintained or intended for use as a shelter for persons, animals or property of any kind. Where independent units with separate entrances are separated by common walls, each unit is a separate building. 
Building, accessory. A building which: 
(1)  Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or use; 
(2)  Is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the principal structure or use served; 
(3)  Is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served; and 
(4)  Is customarily incidental to the principal structure or use. 
Building height. The vertical distance measured from the average established grade at the building line to the highest point of the structure. 
Building, principal. A building in which is conducted, or in which is intended to be conducted, the main or principal use of the lot on which it is located. 
Central business district the term "central business district" is defined as follows: For a point of beginning, commence at the northeastern corner of parcel S-18 025, and proceed thence in a general westerly direction along the southern right-of-way of East W. T. Sharpe Drive to a point at the northwestern corner of parcel S-18 026; proceed thence in a general westerly direction across North Main Street to a point on the northeastern corner of parcel S-18 054; proceed thence in a general westerly direction along the southern right-of-way of West W. T. Sharpe Drive to a point at the northwestern corner of parcel S-18 079; proceed thence across Maple Street to a point located at the northwestern corner of parcel S-18 093; proceed thence along the western boundaries of parcels S-18 093 and S-18 092 to the southeastern corner of parcel S-18 092 to a point; thence in a general southerly direction along the western right-of-way of Maple Street to a point located at the northwestern corner of parcel S-18 089A; proceed thence in a general southerly direction along the western boundaries of parcels S-18 089A, S-18 089C, S-18 089, S-18 089B, and S-18 086 to a point located at the southwestern corner of parcel S-18 086; thence in a general easterly direction along the northern right-of-way of West Ogeechee Street along the eastern boundaries of parcels S-18 033, S-18 032, S-18 031, S-18 030, S-18 029, S-18 028, S-18 027, and S-18 025, back to a point of beginning. Tax Map S-18 dated January, 2007, is expressly incorporated herein and made a part of this description of the central business district. A copy of the relevant portion of map S-18 is attached hereto, and is made a part hereof, with the red line forming the outer boundaries of the central business district, and the properties shaded in yellow being a part of the central business district for purposes of this ordinance. 
Club, lodge, civic or fraternal organization. Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person or persons for a social, educational, religious or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
Customary home occupation. An occupation, profession or trade customarily carried on by an occupant in a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly incidental to the dwelling unit for residential [purposes] and which meets with the following conditions: 
(a)  The occupation, profession or trade is carried on wholly within the principal building. 
(b)  Not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the principal building is used for the conduct of said home occupation. 
(c)  No merchandise or articles are displayed for advertising purposes, nor are [they] displayed in such a way as to be visible from outside the dwelling. 
(d)  No merchandise or articles are stored other than inside the principal building. 
(e)  There is no alteration of the residential character of the building or premises. 
(f)  No person who is not a resident on the premises is employed. 
(g)  No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front yard. 
Day nursery, day care center. Any agency, institution, center, home, nursery school, kindergarten, play school or other place, however styled and whether operated under public auspices, as a private business, or by an established religious denomination, in which are received for temporary custodial care apart from their parents, part of the day or all of the day or night, and upon any number of successive days, one or more children not related to the persons providing such temporary custodial care. 
Dwelling. Any building which is designed or used for permanent living quarters for one or more families. 
Dwelling, multifamily. A building designed for and used as a residence for three or more families and consisting of three or more separate dwelling units. 
Dwelling, single-family. A dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than one family and having no roof, floor or wall in common with any other dwelling unit. 
(a)  Mobile home. A movable or portable dwelling unit constructed to be towed on its own chassis, connected to utilities and designed without a permanent foundation for year-round occupancy, which can consist of one or more components that can be retracted for towing purposes and subsequently expanded for additional capacity, or two or more units separately towable but designed to be joined into one integral unit. Removal of wheels does not change the classification of said dwelling. Construction of permanent improvements and attachments can change the classification of a mobile home to that of a modular building. 
(b)  Modular building. A factory fabricated, transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential or commercial purposes. Placement of permanent foundation, porches, roof design and other like factors distinguish a modular building from a mobile home. 
Dwelling, two-family. A building designed for and used as a residence for two families and consisting of two separate dwelling units; also referred to as a "duplex." 
Family. One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship and not more than three unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit. 
Flood. A temporary rise of water level in lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, natural drainage courses, artificial drainage courses or other waterways that results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
Flood hazard area. Those areas subject to periodic inundation by large floods which occur with calculable flood frequency and subject to flooding which may reasonably be expected to cause damage or hazard of damage sufficient to justify protection therefrom. 
Frontage. The distance along which the property abuts one side of a street, roadway, highway or right-of-way. 
Garage. A building or structure used, or intended to be used, for the parking and/or storage of motor vehicles. 
Group commercial or industrial development. More than one commercial or industrial structure erected on a single lot. 
Group housing development. More than one residential structure (single-family, duplex or multifamily) on a single lot. 
Hotel. A building or group of buildings used, or intended to be used, for the provision of daily lodging of persons for compensation. 
Junkyard. Any use involving the storage or disassembly of wrecked automobiles, trucks or other vehicles, or the dismantling, demolition or abandonment, sale or resale of junk, including scrap metal, used paper or other scrap materials, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment, storage, baling or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, cloth or rags, used plumbing fixtures, appliances, furniture and used brick, wood or other building materials. Such uses shall be considered junkyards, whether or not all or part of such operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, in addition to, or accessory to, other uses of the premises. 
Land use plan. A plan consisting of proposals as to how physical development should take place in the future. Reference is made to the "Sylvania Future Land Use Plan, 1978," and subsequent modifications, editions and revisions of this plan. 
Lot. A piece, parcel or plat of land which may consist of one or more platted lots in one ownership, occupied or intended to be occupied by one principal building and its accessory building, including the open space required by this ordinance. 
Lot, corner. A lot which abuts at the intersection of two or more streets, or upon a curved street, provided that the two sides of the lot intersect to form an interior angle of not more than 135 degrees. 
Lot, depth. The mean distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines. 
Lot frontage. The distance between the side lot lines measured at the street right-of-way line. 
Lot width. The mean distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to those side lot lines. 
Major street. A street designated as a major street on the "Official Street Map." 
Miniwarehouse. A one-story building or series of one-story buildings with separate enclosed areas available for rent for the storage of personal goods. 
Mobile home park. A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes for nontransient use. 
Motel. A building or group of buildings used, or intended to be used, for the provision of daily lodging of persons for compensation, with a provision for direct vehicular access to each unit. 
Nonconforming use. Any building, structure or use existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance or subsequent amendment that does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
Off-street loading space. The area required to load or unload goods or other material, plus the necessary driveways and maneuvering areas. 
Off-street parking space. The area required to park one automobile, plus the necessary driveways and maneuvering areas. 
Personal care. Shall mean protective care and watchful oversight of a resident who needs a watchful environment but who does not have an illness, injury or disability which requires chronic or convalescent care including medical and nursing services. Protective care and watchful oversight includes but is not necessarily limited to a daily awareness by the care provider of the resident's functioning, his or her whereabouts, the making and reminding a resident of appointments for medical checkups, the ability and readiness to intervene if a crisis arises for a resident, supervision in areas of nutrition, medication and actual provision of transient medical care, with a 24-hour responsibility for the well-being of the resident. 
Personal care home. A building occupied as a permanent primary residence and also occupied by up to five unrelated ambulatory adults who reside there temporarily or long term and receive services, including room, meals and personal care from the permanent occupants. This term does not include buildings which are devoted to independent living units which include kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. 
Public notice. As required by Georgia law, a notice published in the newspaper of general circulation in Sylvania, Georgia, setting forth the time, place and purpose of a public hearing on a proposed zoning decision, at least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
R-1 home occupations. Any occupation or profession engaged in by the family of the owner of an R-1 dwelling unit, not including the conduct of a retail, manufacturing or repair business of any kind on the premises. R-1 home occupations shall not be conducted in any new building constructed on the premises for business purposes. Outbuildings in existence when this ordinance is adopted may be adapted by the owner for home occupation purposes, provided such adaptation does not damage the residential nature of the R-1 neighborhood. In general, R-1 home occupations shall be limited to personal services such as are furnished by a physician, dentist, accountant, bookkeeper, music teacher, hairdresser, artist or seamstress, when performed by the occupant of a private dwelling when only family members of the owner are employed. 
Radial lot. An irregular (pie-shaped) lot fronting on a curved street, and which is formed by its side lot line(s) being established along the course of a radius from the axis of the street curve. 
Setback line, building setback line. A line beyond which no foundation wall, eave or other part of any building shall project, unless specified exceptions are made elsewhere in these regulations. 
Shopping center. A group of three or more commercial establishments planned, developed and managed as a unit with off-street parking provided on the property. 
Signs. Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the device is located. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground. 
Subdivision. Any division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel into two or more lots, tracts, sites or parts by means of mapping, plotting, conveyance or rearrangement of boundaries. See also: Subdivision Regulations [appendix A]. 
Yard. The open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front. A yard extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street or road right-of-way line and the front building setback line of the building. For the purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and double frontage lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered as frontage. 
Yard, rear. A yard extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear building setback line and the rear property line. Any lot line not deemed a side or front line shall be deemed a rear line. 
Yard, side. A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard, situated between the side lot line and the side building setback line. In the case of corner lots, the yard along all established street right-of-way lines shall meet the requirements for front yards. 
(Ord. No. 456, § 3, 12-15-09) 
ARTICLE 3. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Section 8-3003-1. - Division of area into districts. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, the areas shown on the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Sylvania, Georgia," are hereby divided into the following districts or zones: 

 
Section 8-3003-2. - Zoning map and district boundaries. 
The boundaries of the districts listed in section 8-3003-1 are hereby established as shown on the map which is entitled "Official Zoning Map of Sylvania, Georgia," adopted June 15, 1980, as amended. An official copy of the zoning map shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector. 
Section 8-3003-3. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
Where reasonable uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the board of adjustment shall decide the location of said boundaries, and in so doing shall be guided by the following rules: 
3-3.1. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, railroads, streets or highways, or right-of-way lines, then such centerlines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
3-3.2. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
3-3.3. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. 
Section 8-3003-4. - Higher uses in lower use districts. 
3-4.1. As is evidenced by the permitted uses in each district, higher uses shall be allowed in lower use districts based on the following hierarchy of uses: 

 
Districts D, H, R-MH and FH shall stand alone and shall not be included in the above hierarchy of uses. 
3-4.2. In the event a higher use (as defined in section 8-3003-4.1) is located in a zone or district permitting lower uses, the persons or entities owning or using the property on which such higher use is being employed shall not be entitled to any greater protection of the law, including nuisance laws, than would persons or entities employing a use specifically permitted within such zone or district. Provided further, it shall be the responsibility of the person or entity employing the higher use in the lower use zone to comply with the requirements of section 8-3013-14. The requirements of section 8-3013-14 shall not be required unless either [sic] the person employing the lower use requests that said section be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 471, 5-17-11) 
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 8-3004-1. - Use within districts and zones. 
No building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. Further, no building, structure or land shall be used for any purposes other than a purpose permitted by this ordinance in a zone in which such building, structure or land is located. 
Section 8-3004-2. - Height, density and lot area. 
No building or other structure shall be created or altered: 
4-2.1. To exceed the height; or 
4-2.2. To exceed the number of families; or 
4-2.3. To reduce or diminish front yards, rear yards, side yards or other open spaces unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
Section 8-3004-3. - Yards applying to only one building. 
No part of a yard, off-street parking or loading space, or other open space around a building or structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, off-street parking or loading space, or other open space for any other building or structure. 
Section 8-3004-4. - One principal building on lot. 
Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereinafter be erected on any lot, except as otherwise provided by this ordinance. (See article 10 for exceptions permitting group development.) 
Section 8-3004-5. - Public street frontage. 
No principal building shall be erected on any lot which does not have immediate frontage on at least one public street or road for a distance of at least 25 feet. 
Section 8-3004-6. - Nonconforming uses. 
4-6.1. It is the intent of this section to respect established private property rights. The lawful use of any building, structure or land existing prior to the time of enactment of or subsequent amendment to this ordinance may be continued subject to the regulations contained in this section. 
4-6.2. The nonconforming use of a building, structure or land shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
4-6.3. Any nonconforming use of a building, structure or land which has been abandoned for a period of one year or more shall not be re-established. 
4-6.4. Repairs and alterations to a nonconforming use: 
(a)  May be made up to 75 percent of the fair market value of the building or structure as determined from the Screven County Tax Assessor's Office. 
(b)  In the event of destruction by fire or by an act of God, shall be permitted to the full value of the building or structure. 
(c)  Shall be permitted to the full value of an owner-occupied dwelling. 
4-6.5. The nonconforming use of a building, structure or land shall not be extended or enlarged unless such addition is made to conform to the regulations of the zone in which it is located. 
ARTICLE 5. - DEVELOPMENTAL DISTRICTS (D-1) 

Section 8-3005-1. - Purpose. 
[The purpose of this article is] to establish a district on the fringe of urban growth where the predominant character of development has not yet been fully established, but where the current characteristics of use are primarily agricultural and residential. As urban growth continues, demand will grow for amendments to remove land from the development district and place it in more intensely developed zones. However, the intent of the development district is to reserve the bulk of the land for agricultural and low density residential uses. 
Section 8-3005-2. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry (excluding feed lots, hog operations, dairy farming and commercial chicken operations), forestry and similar agriculturally related uses. 
(b)  Single-family dwellings. 
(c)  Accessory buildings and uses of structures customarily incidental to any permitted use, including buildings used for agricultural purposes, provided that such structures shall not be less than five feet from any property line. 
(d)  Customary home occupations. 
(e)  Special exceptions, as prescribed in section 8-3013-1. 
ARTICLE 6. - RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-MH) 

Section 8-3006-1. - General purpose. 
[The purposes of this article are] to establish residential districts and to protect property in the districts from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. Residential uses are intended to be the primary uses within each district. The residential districts are intended to preserve and protect the residential character of neighborhoods. 
Section 8-3006-2. - Single-family residential district (R-1). 
6-2.1.  Purpose. To establish a low density, single-family residential district and to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
6-2.2.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in R-1 districts subject to the provisions of article 14, section 8-3014-5: 
(a)  Single-family dwellings. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and uses of structures customarily incidental to any permitted use, provided such structures are located in the rear yard and not less than five feet from any property line. 
(c)  R-1 home occupations as defined by section 8-3002-2; customary home occupations. 
(d)  Special exceptions, as prescribed in section 8-3013-1. 
Section 8-3006-3. - Single-family residential (R-2). 
6-3.1.  Purpose. To establish a medium density residential district and to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
6-3.2.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in R-2 districts subject to the provisions of article 14, section 8-3014-5: 
(a)  Any use permitted in [an] R-1 residential district. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and uses of structures customarily incidental to any permitted use, provided such structures are located in the rear yard and not less than five feet from any property line. 
(c)  Special exceptions, as prescribed in section 8-3013-1. 
Section 8-3006-4. - Multifamily residential (R-3). 
6-4.1.  Purpose. To establish a medium to high density residential district and to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
6-4.2.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in R-3 districts subject to the provisions of article 14, section 8-3014-5: 
(a)  Any use permitted in [an] R-2 residential district. 
(b)  Two-family dwellings (duplexes). 
(c)  Residential group developments including single-family, two-family and multifamily residences, such as apartment and condominium developments and mobile home parks, subject to the provisions of section 8-3006-6. 
(d)  Accessory buildings and uses of structures customarily incidental to any permitted use, provided such structures are located in the rear yard and not less than five feet from any property line. 
(e)  Rest homes, convalescent homes and nursing homes, provided that no building in connection with such facility shall be closer than 50 feet from the lot line. 
(f)  Central laundry or sanitation facilities accessory to a mobile home park, apartment complex or other residential group development. 
(g)  Special exceptions, as prescribed in section 8-3013-1. 
Section 8-3006-5. - Mobile home provisions, general. 
6-5.1.  Purpose. To establish a medium to high density residential district and to protect property in the district from the depreciating effects of incompatible land uses. 
6-5.2.  General. Any dwelling which is classified as a mobile home by the definition stated herein shall be subject to the following provisions of this ordinance: 
(a)  A building permit shall be required to be filed at city hall for each mobile home which is henceforth located in the City of Sylvania. In addition to the provisions of section 8-3015-2, the applicant for a mobile home building permit shall: 
(1)  Prepare a written request to the building inspector which shall: 
i.  Include a complete description of the proposed mobile home. 
ii.  Identify its manufacturer or place of origin. 
iii.  Identify the location of the lot on which it is to be erected or placed. 
iv.  Include a sketch of the property in question showing the location of the unit thereon. 
v.  Include a photograph or design drawing showing the external appearance of the unit when completed. 
vi.  Contain such other information as the building inspector may require with regard to the foundation on which the unit is to be placed. 
(2)  Not take any steps toward the placement of the housing unit, including site preparation, for a period of 30 days from the actual receipt of the request by the building inspector. 
(b)  The building inspector shall, as soon as practicable: 
(1)  Determine the zoning of the property on which the unit is to be located. 
(2)  Thoroughly review the pertinent facts with regard to design and construction of the unit with a view to its meeting the requirements of the Southern Standard Building Code. 
(3)  Review the placement of the proposed unit on the property in question. 
(4)  Issue or deny a building permit based upon the criteria set forth in this ordinance. 
6-5.3.  Single unit mobile home. In all of the incorporated areas of [the] City of Sylvania, a mobile home, as herein defined, shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  The lot area and dimensions must meet the requirements of the county health department in regard to water and sewer systems. 
(b)  On lots exceeding five acres in size, additional mobile homes shall be allowed for tenant dwellings and other uses, provided that said uses shall not be inconsistent with the mobile home park regulations contained herein, and provided further that the number of said additional mobile homes in such areas shall not exceed the ratio of one such unit per five acres of land. 
(c)  In no case shall the unit be located within 200 feet of any permanent type of building owned by another party; provided, the owner of said building may waive in writing this requirement, but provided further, that said distance shall be at least 50 feet. 
(d)  The mobile home unit must have a border or supporting foundation which surrounds all of the exterior walls completely enclosing the undercarriage or underside area of the mobile home. The border or foundation material shall consist of concrete block, brick, wood, composition board or metal skirting or some similar type material. The mobile home must be connected to water and sewerage as provided in paragraph (i) of this article [section]. 
(e)  A single unit mobile home must be equipped with tiedown bands and shall be anchored securely. 
(f)  All mobile homes used as residences shall meet the adopted building, gas, plumbing, electric and other codes, if any, of the governmental area. 
(g)  Temporary usage. A single mobile unit may be used as an office in a subdivision by the developer, [as a] temporary residence during construction of [a] permanent residence, or for other special purposes, for a period not to exceed six months upon written approval from the building inspector. Extensions may be granted. 
(h)  Nonconformance. After [the] date of approval of this ordinance [November 3, 1992], any mobile home located in the incorporated areas of the city which does not meet the requirements in the above paragraphs shall be removed after receipt of notice of its nonconformance from the building inspector or health officials. 
(i)  All mobile homes in the City of Sylvania must be served by a water and sewer system approved by the county health department. 
6-5.4.  Districts. These regulations shall generally apply to all zoning districts within [the] incorporated area of the City of Sylvania, Georgia, except for section 8-3006-6, regulating mobile home parks, which shall apply only in the R-MH district. 
6-5.5.  Mobile home tiedowns. Any mobile home which is not anchored may blow over or off its blocks when the wind velocity reaches approximately 70 miles per hour. Therefore, this section of this ordinance is intended to make certain that all mobile homes hereafter placed in the area are equipped with tiedowns and anchored. 
(a)  Tiedowns. 
(1)  All mobile homes placed in the incorporated areas of the City of Sylvania after the adoption of this ordinance shall have tiedowns with provisions for distributing the load of these tiedowns and provisions for the attachment to ground anchors so as to resist wind overturning and sliding. 
(2)  Each tiedown shall be designed to resist an allowable working load equal to or exceeding 3,150 pounds and shall be capable of withstanding a 50 percent overload without failure. 
(b)  Ground anchors. Ground anchors shall be installed at each mobile home stand when a mobile home is located thereon to permit tiedowns of mobile homes to comply with this section. 
(1)  Each ground anchor shall be capable of resisting an allowable working load equal to or exceeding 3,150 pounds applied in the direction of the tiedown. In addition, each ground anchor shall be capable of withstanding a 50 percent overload without failure. 
(2)  Ground anchors shall be resistant to weathering deterioration at least equivalent to that provided by a coating of zinc on steel strapping of not less than 0.30 ounce per square foot of surface coated. 
Section 8-3006-6. - Mobile home parks (MH). 
6-6.1.  General. Mobile home parks as so defined in these regulations must adhere to the following conditions: 
(a)  The minimum area per park shall be five designated and described acres; the minimum width for [the] portions used for entrances and exits shall be 50 feet; and the minimum width for portions containing mobile home spaces or stands shall be 50 feet. 
(b)  The minimum number of spaces completed and ready for occupancy before the first occupancy is permitted shall be 15 spaces, and the minimum area for each mobile home space or stand shall be 6,000 square feet. Each space shall contain a permanent mobile home stand constructed of at least concrete on a suitable subgrade material to support the mobile home. 
(c)  No mobile home space or stand shall be rented for residential use of a mobile home in any such park except for periods of 30 days or more, and no mobile home shall be admitted to any park unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of any additional laws and regulation of the governing authority. 
(d)  In addition to meeting the above requirements, the mobile home park site plan shall be accompanied by a certificate of approval from the area health department. 
(e)  No mobile home shall be located within: 
(1)  Ten feet of its individual lot line. 
(2)  25 feet from any exterior boundary of the mobile home park. 
(f)  A buffer strip at least 25 feet wide shall be located adjacent to each exterior property line of the mobile home park and not be included within any individual trailer lot. Such a buffer shall include a solid fence not less than ten feet in height or of evergreen vegetation of sufficient density to accomplish the purposes of a solid fence, and shall be maintained in good order at all times. 
(g)  Water, sewerage and electricity. All mobile home stands shall be completed with underground water, sewer and electrical connections. 
(h)  Street access. All mobile home spaces shall be made accessible from an abutting street by a driveway having a width of not less than 12 feet. 
(i)  Off-street parking facilities. Off-street parking facilities established in connection with a mobile home park shall be either located on each mobile home space or in integrated groupings, bays, clusters, etc., provided that no parking space shall be further than 50 feet from the mobile home space it is to serve. 
(j)  Shelters. Every mobile home park shall have a shelter for the protection of persons within the park in case of storm or disaster. Each shelter shall be placed below ground level, either as a basement of another structure or centrally located within the park and clearly identified as a shelter. The shelter shall be designed and built in compliance with City of Sylvania building codes. The size of the shelter shall be at a ratio equal to five square feet per mobile home unit (to be computed based upon the maximum number of units planned for the park in its ultimate configuration). 
6-6.2.  Required improvements to mobile home parks. In every mobile home park the following street improvements and utilities shall be planned for and provided by the developer, by installation and/or payment prior to the approval of the mobile home park: 
(a)  All streets shall be named and marked with signs in accordance with city-approved names and shall include street grading and street paving. 
(1)  Base and paving shall meet the requirements of the department of transportation for rural roads. 
(2)  Mobile home park street improvement widths shall be 20 feet unless a street serves 15 homes or less, then it may be 18 feet wide. 
(3)  Linear street grades. Maximum and minimum linear street grades shall be as follows: 
i.  Collector streets: not more than 12 percent. 
ii.  Subcollectors, lanes and parking spaces: not more than 15 percent. 
iii.  No linear street grade shall be less than one-half of one percent. 
(b)  Sanitary sewer lines, septic tanks or other sewerage disposal systems shall be in conformity with requirements of the county health department. 
(c)  All utilities, except power lines and telephone lines, shall be installed underground in the shoulders of the road. 
(d)  Storm drainage facilities: 
(1)  A registered engineer must certify that the proposed storm drainage improvements indicated on the mobile home park plan are adequate. 
(2)  If a storm drainage sewer system exists in the City of Sylvania area, then the proposed mobile home park must contain an underground storm drain- age system which will be connected to the existing area system. Such system shall be indicated on the plan. 
(3)  If a storm drainage sewer system does not exist in the City of Sylvania area, the adequate surface drainage facilities, as certified by an engineer, shall be included in the mobile home park and so indicated on the plan. 
(4)  Where a proposed mobile home park is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way along each side of the channel or course for the purpose of widening, deepening, relocating, improving or protecting such drainage easement. 
(e)  All mobile home subdivisions shall be required to meet all the standards and provisions of the subdivision regulations, if any, adopted by the City of Sylvania. 
(f)  All mobile home places erected or located in the City of Sylvania shall be required to meet the adopted building, heating, plumbing, electrical, fire, gas, mechanical, air conditioning and all other codes, if any, adopted by the City of Sylvania. 
(g)  Penalties to single-family mobile home owners. Failure by the owner of a mobile home to obtain and utilize tiedowns and anchors for his mobile home placed in the City of Sylvania after the effective date of these regulations [November 3, 1992] shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
6-6.3.  Grandfather clause. This ordinance does not apply to any mobile home park or lot developed prior to the passage of this ordinance [November 3, 1992]. 
ARTICLE 7. - PROFESSIONAL DISTRICT (PI) 

Section 8-3007-1. - Purpose. 
This district is established to provide areas for the development of structures for professional services which complement the character of adjacent districts. This district is not intended to accommodate general and highway oriented commercial uses or residential uses, but rather to serve as a transition between more intensely developed commercial areas and residential districts. 
Section 8-3007-2. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in R-3 districts subject to the provisions of article 14, section 8-3014-5: 
(a)  Any use permitted in [the] R-3 district. 
(b)  Physicians, lawyers, engineers, architects, accountants and similar professional uses which may occupy an entire building or group of buildings, excluding veterinarians. 
(c)  Commercial and retail uses which are incidental to the above professional practices, e.g., prescription shops and optical sales. 
(d)  Accessory buildings and uses of structures customarily incidental to any permitted use, provided such structures are located in the rear yard and not less than five feet from any property line. 
(e)  Signs, subject to the provisions of section 8-3013-13. 
(f)  Special exceptions, as prescribed in section 8-3013-1. 
ARTICLE 8. - COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS (C-1, C-2) 

Section 8-3008-1. - General purpose. 
These districts are established to provide appropriate areas for the development of commercial and service activities consistent with the existing character of commercial development. Commercial districts should have access from major traffic arteries, however, it is the intent of this ordinance to discourage the development of long, narrow strips of commercial development fronting on major arteries, often referred to as "strip commercial" areas. Such strip commercial development damages the traffic-carrying capacity of streets, increases congestion, is often incompatible with adjacent residential areas, and creates disproportionate costs in the provision of government services. Extension of commercial zoning requiring amendments to this ordinance should be made principally for the provision of planned, unified commercial areas, and not in such a way that strip commercial areas are encouraged. Extension of commercial zoning should only be made after careful consideration of compatibility with adjacent uses and whether or not other land is available which is already zoned for commercial use. 
Section 8-3008-2. - General commercial district (C-1). 
8-2.1.  Purpose. This district is intended to be a general commercial zone to provide a wide variety of commercial and service facilities and serve a large market area but should be consistent with the established nature of the downtown business district. 
8-2.2.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in C-1 districts subject to the provisions of article 14, section 8-3014-5: 
(a)  Any use permitted in the PI district. 
(b)  Branch bank or other financial institution. 
(c)  Retail establishments, including the following: 
(1)  Apparel. 
(2)  Bakery. 
(3)  Confectionery store. 
(4)  Drive-in type retail business where customer is waited upon in an off-street parking area or where customer conducts business directly from a vehicle with an agent in the building. 
(5)  Drugstore. 
(6)  Dry goods or notions store. 
(7)  Florist or gift shop. 
(8)  Grocery, fruit or vegetable market. 
(9)  Hardware or electric appliance store. 
(10)  Jewelry store. 
(11)  Meat market or delicatessen. 
(12)  Music store. 
(13)  Newsstand. 
(14)  Retail filling station. 
(15)  Shoe store and shoe repair shop. 
(16)  Supermarket. 
(17)  Variety store. 
(d)  Personal service establishments including the following: 
(1)  Barbershop or beauty parlor. 
(2)  Photographer. 
(3)  Tailor. 
(4)  Dry cleaning and laundry establishment, excluding steam and power laundries, operated in conjunction with customer service counters and limited to the dry cleaning and laundering of articles delivered to the premises by individual customers; provided, however, that no materials may be used in any laundering or cleaning process which are explosive, inflammable, combustible or toxic in greater degree than perchloroethlylene or equivalent, and provided further, that no odor, fumes or other nuisance producing agents are expelled in such a way as to be detectable beyond the property lines of the property used for such a business. 
(e)  Eating and drinking establishments. 
(f)  Commercial recreational uses, such as theaters, but specifically excluding poolrooms, dancehalls and video game rooms. 
(g)  Hotels and motels. 
(h)  Service and repair establishments including automobile service stations and repair garages and automobile washing establishments; subject to the provisions of section 8-3013-14 but excluding junkyards. 
(i)  Commercial parking facilities. 
(j)  Accessory buildings and uses of structures customarily incidental to any permitted use, provided such structures are located in the rear yard and not less than five feet from any property line. 
(k)  Cold storage and freezer locker facilities. 
(l)  Retail or wholesale business outlets operated as part of a manufacturing establishment, provided that there is no open storage of junk or salvage materials of any type in conjunction with the operation, and provided that the outlet is incidental to the operation. 
(m)  Private recreational facilities, provided that such facilities are incidental to a permitted use and located on the same premises subject to the provisions of section 8-3013-14.3. 
(n)  Commercial group developments. 
(o)  Veterinary clinics, provided that all animals shall be kept inside enclosed buildings. 
(p)  Private and public schools offering business and vocational courses. 
(q)  Any business which is similar in character or nature to the above-mentioned uses, upon written approval of the planning and design commission shall be permitted in a C-1 zone. 
(r)  Signs, subject to the provisions in section 8-3013-13. 
(s)  Special exceptions, as prescribed in section 8-3013-1. 
Section 8-3008-3. - Highway oriented commercial district (C-2). 
8-3.1.  Purpose. This district is intended to be utilized by those commercial uses which serve community and regional shopping needs as well as the traveling public. These commercial uses occupy relatively large sites and require access to major thoroughfares. It is intended that this district be located at major road intersections. 
8-3.2.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in C-2 districts subject to the provisions of article 14, section 8-3014-5: 
(a)  Any use permitted in the C-1 district. 
(b)  Commercial recreational uses, such as theaters, bowling alleys, pool rooms, miniature golf courses, driving ranges, video game rooms and the like, subject to the provisions of section 8-3013-14.3. 
(c)  Radio and television stations. 
(d)  Wholesaling, warehousing bulk storage, supply and distribution operations; 
(e)  Truck and bus terminals, freight and passenger terminals. 
(f)  Mobile home sales lots, new farm equipment sales lots, boat sales lots, other lots for the sale of large items which cannot reasonably be stored indoors, but excluding the display of scrap, salvage, or junk products. 
(g)  Distributors of gasoline, fuel oil, agricultural chemicals and fertilizers, and liquefied petroleum gases. 
(h)  Accessory buildings and uses of structures customarily incidental to any permitted use, provided such structures are located in the rear yard and not less than five feet from any property line. 
(i)  Miniwarehouses. 
(j)  Baking, confectionery, dressmaking, dyeing, laundry, printing, tailoring, upholstering and similar establishments, and businesses of a similar and no more objectionable character, subject to the following provisions: All goods or products manufactured or processed shall be sold on the premises. All such manufacturing and processing shall be done on the premises. 
(k)  Any business which is similar in character or nature to the above-mentioned uses, upon written approval of the planning and design commission shall be permitted in a C-2 zone. 
(l)  Signs, subject to the provisions in section 8-3013-13. 
(m)  Special exceptions, as prescribed in section 8-3013-1. 
ARTICLE 9. - INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS (I-1, I-2) 

Section 8-3009-1. - General purpose. 
These districts are intended to provide areas for industrial uses and related activities such as wholesaling, warehousing and storage, and to protect adjacent districts from potentially harmful effects of industrial uses. These districts are not intended to accommodate general commercial uses or residential uses. 
Section 8-3009-2. - Light industrial district (I-1). 
9-2.1.  Purpose. This district is intended to provide areas for light industrial uses and related uses such as wholesaling, warehousing and storage, and to protect adjacent districts from potentially harmful effects. 
9-2.2.  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the C-2 district. 
(b)  Light manufacturing plants, processing plants and industrial uses which do not produce obnoxious noises, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odors, dust or other similar conditions which would be incompatible with the character of the district or with development outside the district. 
(c)  Retail or wholesale business outlets operated as part of a manufacturing establishment. 
(d)  Business offices associated with, and secondary, to individual industrial uses within the district. 
(e)  Automotive repair garages. 
(f)  Trade schools and technical schools engaging in activities of an industrial nature. 
(g)  Junkyards, salvage yards, scrap yards and secondhand materials operations. 
(h)  Laundry and dry cleaning processing plants. 
(i)  Veterinary clinics, kennels and animal hospitals. 
(j)  Lumber and building supply yards, offices and yards for storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, and outdoor storage of material, supplies or equipment. 
(k)  Scientific, technical and medical laboratories and research facilities. 
(l)  Agricultural uses such as general farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, forestry, wild crop harvesting, vineyards and orchards. 
(m)  Coal yards. 
(n)  Accessory buildings and uses of structures customarily incidental to any permitted use, provided such structures are located in the rear yard and not less than five feet from any property line. 
(o)  Signs, subject to the provisions in section 8-3013-13. 
(p)  Special exceptions, as prescribed in section 8-3013-1. 
Section 8-3009-3. - Heavy industrial district (I-2). 
9-3.1.  Purpose. This district is intended to provide areas for basic industrial and related uses, to encourage the proper design, placement and grouping of industrial uses, and to protect adjacent districts from potentially harmful effects. 
9-3.2.  Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use permitted in the I-1 district. 
(b)  Manufacturing plants, processing plants and industrial uses which would not produce excessive noise, vibration, smoke or particulate matter in the atmosphere, offensive odors, excessive levels of toxic or noxious matter in the atmosphere or in water bodies, dangerous levels of radiation, hazards of fire or explosion, excessive heat, humidity or glare, or electromagnetic interference, or other similar conditions which would be incompatible with adjacent development outside of the heavy industrial district in which the use is located. 
(c)  Private heliports. 
(d)  Industrial group developments, subject to the provisions of article 10. 
(e)  Accessory buildings and uses of structures customarily incidental to any permitted use, provided such structures are located in the rear yard and not less than five feet from any property line. 
(f)  Signs, subject to the provisions in section 8-3013-13. 
(g)  Special exceptions, as prescribed in section 8-3013-1. 
ARTICLE 9.5. - HISTORICAL DISTRICT (H) 

Section 8-3009.5-1. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this article are to establish a zoning district in which there are located a significant number of older residential structures having architectural features and characteristics of structures built by earlier generations, which features and characteristics are indigenous to the East Central Georgia area; and to encourage the preservation of such structures and their architectural features by allowing certain compatible commercial and professional uses within such districts. 
(Ord. No. 360, § I, 10-6-98) 
Section 8-3009.5-2. - Historical district established. 
There is hereby established a new zoning classification within the city to be known as a historical (H) district or zone. 
(Ord. No. 360, § II, 10-6-98) 
Section 8-3009.5-3. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in historical (H) districts: 
a.  Any use permitted in an R-1 residential district; 
b.  Bed and breakfast inns; 
c.  Restaurants; 
d.  Gift shops (all merchandise must be displayed indoors except on occasions when a sidewalk sale permit is obtained); 
e.  Antique shops (all merchandise must be displayed indoors except on occasions when a sidewalk sale permit is obtained); 
f.  Furniture import shops (all merchandise must be displayed indoors except on occasions when a sidewalk sale permit is obtained); 
g.  Physicians, lawyers, engineers, architects, accountants and similar professional uses, excluding veterinarians. 
(Ord. No. 360, § III, 10-6-98) 
Section 8-3009.5-4. - Design regulations. 
The design regulations as set forth in article 14 of appendix B, Zoning, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sylvania, shall apply to historical (H) districts, and section 8-3014-1 is hereby amended by adding (H) zones to the zoning classifications within the City of Sylvania to which the design regulations apply. 
(Ord. No. 360, § IV, 10-6-98) 
Section 8-3009.5-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 471, adopted May 17, 2011, repealed § 8-3009.5-5, which pertained to hierarchy of uses and derived from Ord. No. 360, adopted October 6, 1998. 
ARTICLE 10. - GROUP DEVELOPMENTS 

Section 8-3010-1. - Purpose. 
This section is intended to permit greater flexibility in the development of residential areas, commercial, office and industrial parks, and to establish a review process by the planning and design commission for such development plans. In order to prevent creation of traffic hazards, insure the provision of off-street parking and access and the provision of necessary utilities, plans for group developments shall be submitted to the planning and design commission for review and approval. 
Section 8-3010-2. - Definition. 
A group development is defined as a development project, comprehensively planned as an entity, with an overall site plan which permits flexibility in building siting, mixtures of land uses, and the provision of open spaces. Group developments include shopping centers, industrial parks, condominiums, apartment complexes and other single-family and multifamily residential complexes where the site is not divided into lots and public streets, but is retained in one ownership. 
Section 8-3010-3. - Procedures for group development approval. 
10-3.1.  Site plan. 
(a)  The developer shall submit at least two copies of a site plan to the planning and design commission for review and approval. The planning and design commission shall approve, disapprove or approve with modifications the site plan within 30 days after submittal. 
(b)  The action of the planning and design commission to review and approve, disapprove or approve with modifications the site plan, as well as pertinent comments and recommendations, shall be noted in the minutes of the planning and design commission meeting at which the report is made. 
(c)  Failure of the planning and design commission to act within these time limits shall be deemed to constitute site plan approval and a certificate to that effect shall be issue by the planning and design commission upon request. 
10-3.2.  Construction drawings. 
(a)  The developer shall submit at least two copies of the construction drawings along with supporting data to the planning and design commission. 
(b)  Upon determination that the construction drawings conform to the approved site plan, the planning commission shall submit these plans to their designated city planning consultant for review and comment. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the report from the city planning consultant, the planning and design commission shall approve, disapprove or approve with modifications the site plan within 30 days after submittal. Pertinent comments and recommendations shall be noted in the minutes of the planning and design commission meeting at which the report is made. 
(d)  Failure of the planning and design commission to act within these time limits shall be deemed to constitute site plan approval and a certificate to that effect shall be issue by the planning and design commission upon request. 
10-3.3.  General plat information. 
(a)  Site plan. 
(1)  Total acreage in the tract proposed for the group development, and a statement of contiguous acreage owned by the developer. 
(2)  Street access and street layout. 
(3)  Approximate right-of-way of existing and proposed streets, alleys, easements and other rights-of-way. 
(4)  Arrangement of existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
(5)  Existing and proposed land uses throughout the tract. 
(6)  Existing uses of land and all existing street intersections surrounding the tract. 
(7)  Average daily traffic volumes on all existing streets surrounding the tract. 
(8)  Topography by contours at intervals of at least five feet and extending at least 100 feet outside the tract. 
(9)  Name, date, north arrow and graphic scale of not less than 200 feet to one inch. 
(10)  A vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch equals one mile showing the relationship of the proposed group development to surrounding development especially schools, parks and shopping areas. 
(b)  Construction drawings. 
(1)  A plat of the tract drawn to a scale at least 100 feet to one inch, and shall include the name of the development, north arrow, graphic scale and date. 
(2)  The location of the parcel with respect to adjacent right-of way. 
(3)  The shape, dimensions and location of all buildings and property lines, exiting and proposed, on said parcel. 
(4)  The nature (residential, commercial, industrial, etc.) of the proposed uses of buildings and/or land. 
(5)  Topography by contours at intervals of at least five feet and extending at least 100 feet outside the tract. 
(6)  The location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading spaces and the means of ingress and egress to and from such. 
(7)  The location and size of all proposed utility and storm drainage facilities and solid waste collection points. 
(8)  Such other information as the planning and design commission may deem necessary because of physical characteristics peculiar to the particular development. 
[10-3.4.  Reserved. ] 
10-3.5.  Standards for group development. 
(a)  Uses permitted. In no case shall a use be permitted in connection with group developments that is not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which the project is to be located. 
(b)  Street access. Any building established in connection with a group development that cannot properly be served by emergency or service vehicles from an abutting street shall be made accessible to such vehicles by a paved driveway with a width of not less than 20 feet, exclusive of parking space. 
(c)  Off-street parking. Off-street parking facilities established in connection with a group development shall be landscaped and of such a design that it [they] will not interfere with the safe movement of pedestrians, the efficient flow of traffic, and will not interfere with the access of emergency or service vehicles. The requirements for off-street parking for uses in a group development shall follow the requirements set forth in section 8-3013-2. 
(d)  Separation within development. All buildings within a group development shall be at least 20 feet apart; but at least 40 feet apart when front to front. 
(e)  Building length. In residential buildings, no single row of dwelling units which are physically attached shall be greater than 200 feet in length. 
(f)  Setback requirements. Unless otherwise provided by this ordinance, all buildings and structures established in connection with a group development shall comply with the front yard, side yard and rear yard setbacks established for the district in which the development is located. 
(g)  Residential area requirements. A group residential development shall conform to the minimum lot area per dwelling unit for the district in which it is located, excluding mobile home parks. 
(h)  Residential general requirements. Residential group developments shall be designed to complement and enhance the character of the area in which it is located. At least ten percent of the total acreage of a residential group development shall be devoted to open space. Such uses shall consist of predominantly undeveloped land which has value for park and recreational purposes, including playgrounds and other outdoor recreational uses; conservation of land and other natural resources, including land covered by forest, lakes, rivers or streams; or historic or scenic purposes. Open space uses do not include streets, parking areas or the end spaces between buildings. Every dead-end street shall have an adequate turnaround facility. 
(i)  Water, sewerage and drainage. Adequate provisions for water supply, sanitary sewerage and storm drainage shall be installed by the developer in accordance with accepted engineering principles. 
ARTICLE 11. - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 

Section 8-3011-1. - Purpose. 
The flood hazard areas of the City of Sylvania are subject to periodic inundation which results in the loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. These flood losses are the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other properties which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damages. Therefore, it is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions. 
Section 8-3011-2. - Application of flood hazard areas. 
The flood hazard (FH) designation is not intended to be utilized as a district classification, but as a designation which identifies areas subject to regulations which are supplementary to the regulations of the district to which they are attached, appended or overlaid. Regulations which apply to areas designated on the zoning map as being within FH areas must be determined by joint reference to the regulation of the basic district classification and the appended classification. Permitted uses and structures, minimum yard requirements, maximum lot coverage, maximum height of structures, off-street parking and loading requirements, regulation of signs and all other general and special regulations of this ordinance shall apply as provided for the basic district to which the FH is appended. 
Section 8-3011-3. - Definitions of terms used in this article. 
Areas of special flood hazard. Land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood. Flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Flood. A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland waters; and 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface water from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). The official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, FEMA, where areas of special flood hazard have been designated. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent area that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Habitable floor. Any floor usable for living purpose, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or a combination thereof. A floor used only for storage purposes is not a habitable floor. 
Substantial improvement. A structure built prior to the enactment of the ordinance, any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the structure's market value either: 
(1)  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
(2)  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. Substantial improvement occurs when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. It does not include any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Section 8-3011-4. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
11-4.1. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, FEMA, on its flood hazard boundary map, number 130163 A-H-01-02, dated April 9, 1976, and subsequent revisions are adopted by reference and declared to be part of this ordinance. 
11-4.2. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, or extended, converted or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
11-4.3. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
11-4.4. In the interpretation of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
11-4.5. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur an rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted in such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Sylvania or any of its officials or employees for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
Section 8-3011-5. - Administration. 
11-5.1. A building permit shall be required in meeting the provisions of this article. Application for a building permit shall be made to the building inspector on forms furnished by him and may include, but not [be] limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage or materials; drainage facilities; and the location of the intended activity. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(a)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (MSL) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed structures. 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed. 
(c)  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the floodproofing criteria set forth in section 8-3011-7.2. 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
11-5.2. The building inspector is appointed to administer and implement this article by granting or denying building permit applications in accordance with its provisions. Duties of the building inspector shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Review all building permits to determine that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(b)  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the building permit. 
(c)  Review all building permits to determine if proposed development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the floodplain. For purposes of the article, "adversely affects" means damage to adjacent properties because of rises in flood stages attributed to physical changes of the channel and the adjacent overbank areas. 
(1)  If it is determined that there is no adverse effect, and the development is not a building, then the permit shall be granted without further consideration; 
(2)  If it is determined that there is an adverse effect, then technical justification (i.e., a registered professional engineering analysis) for the proposed development shall be required; and 
(3)  If the proposed development is a building, then the provisions of this article shall apply. 
11-5.3. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 8-3011-4, then the building inspector shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer section 8-3011-7. 
(a)  [The building inspector shall] verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures. 
(b)  [The building inspector shall] verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed. Certification of such floodproofing shall be obtained in accordance with section 8-3011-7.2. 
(c)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the building inspector and shall be open for public inspection. 
11-5.4. Alteration of watercourses. [The building inspector shall:] 
(a)  Notify adjacent communities and the Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and shall submit evidence of notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, FEMA. 
(b)  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of [the] altered watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
11-5.5. Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual physical conditions), the building inspector shall make the necessary interpretation. 
Section 8-3011-6. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
11-6.1. In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(b)  All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top ties to ground anchors. 
(c)  Specific requirements shall be that: 
(1)  Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring one additional tie per side. 
(2)  Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional ties per side. 
(3)  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds. 
(4)  Any additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored. 
(d)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(e)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by practices and methods that minimize flood damage. 
(f)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(g)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into the floodwaters. 
(h)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(i)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(j)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electric and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(k)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(l)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which is greater than the lesser of 50 lots or five acres. 
(m)  The cumulative effect of any proposed development shall not adversely affect the area of special flood hazard. This determination is to be made in accordance with section 8-3011-5.1(c). 
Section 8-3011-7. - Elevation. 
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 8-3011-5.3, the following provisions are required: 
11-7.1. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure (including mobile homes) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation. 
11-7.2. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure (including mobile homes) shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in section 8-3011-5.1(c). 
Section 8-3011-8. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in areas designated FH, but only if such uses are permitted within the basic district to which the designation is appended, and excluding buildings in connection with such uses: 
11-8.1. Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, multifamily dwellings and mobile homes. 
11-8.2. Agriculture, horticulture, animal husbandry (excluding dairy farming, feed lots, hog operations and commercial chicken operations) forestry and similar agriculturally related uses. 
11-8.3. Parking and loading areas. 
11-8.4. Open-air uses such as lawns, gardens, play areas and parking areas. 
11-8.5. Recreational uses which are primarily open-air uses and which do not offer substantial impediment to water flow. 
11-8.6. Airport runways and landing strips. 
11-8.7. Streets, bridges, utility lines, storm drainage facilities, sewerage lines, waste treatment plant outlets and water supply intake structures. 
11-8.8. Open mining, extraction of sand, clay, gravel, minerals, ores and the like. 
11-8.9. Railroads. 
_____
ARTICLE 12. - AREA, YARD AND HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS 

Section 8-3012-1. - Residential requirements. 
12-1.1. Minimum lot area (square feet). 

 
12-1.2.  Minimum lot width at building line (in feet). 

 
12-1.3. Minimum building line setback (in feet). 

 
12-l.4. Maximum percent of lot covered. 

 
12-1.5. Maximum height of structures (in feet). 

 
NOTES: 
(1)  For multifamily developments in the R-3 zone, the minimum lot size shall be 18,000 [square feet] for the first three dwelling units, and 5,112 [square feet] for each additional dwelling unit. 
"N/A" = Not applicable, no regulation applied. 
Section 8-3012-2. - Nonresidential requirements. 
12-2.1. Minimum lot area (square feet). 

 
12-2.2. Minimum lot width at building line (in feet). 

 
12-2.3. Minimum building line setback. 

 
12-2.4. Maximum percent of lot covered. 

 
12-2.5. Maximum height of structures (in feet). 

 
NOTES: 
"N/A" = No minimum requirements for this category. 
_____
ARTICLE 13. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Section 8-3013-1. - Special use exceptions. 
13-1.1.  Authorization. The planning and design commission may authorize, under conditions prescribed herein, special use exceptions in specified zoning districts. However, the planning and design commission reserves full authority to deny any request for such a use as it deems appropriate to protect the general health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens. 
13-1.2.  Special use exceptions. The following special use exceptions may be permitted in any zone (except as noted) where such uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare and are in harmony with the various elements or objectives of the future land use plan: 
(a)  Churches and other places of worship (not permitted in central business district as defined in section 8-3002-2). Within said central business district, a use shall not be considered a "church or other place of worship" if there is no established business office of the religious organization on the premises and meetings of the regions organization occur on the premises on a frequency less than 12 times annually; 
(b)  Public and private schools which offer general educational courses (not permitted in central business district as defined in section 8-3002-2). 
(c)  Buildings used by federal, state, county or city governments. 
(d)  Parks, public and semipublic grounds for games and sports. 
(e)  Clubs, lodges, civic and fraternal organizations, community centers, and meeting houses or halls (not permitted in central business district as defined in section 8-3002-2). Within said central business district, a use shall not be considered a club, lodge, civic organization, fraternal organization, community center, meeting house or meeting hall if there is no established business office for the organization on the premises and meetings of any such organization occur on the premises on a frequency of less than 12 times annually. 
(f)  Public utilities, distribution lines, transformer stations, water tanks and towers and telephone exchanges, provided that when these uses are located in a residential area: 
(1)  No vehicles or equipment are stored on the premises. 
(2)  All district yard requirements are met. 
(3)  The lot is suitably landscaped. 
(4)  All such uses are designed so as not to cause interference with radio and television reception. 
(g)  Rest homes, convalescent homes, orphanages, sanitariums and hospitals (not permitted in R-1 zone or in central business district as defined in section 8-3002-2). 
(h)  Funeral homes (not permitted in R-1 zone or in central business district as defined in section 8-3002-2). 
(i)  Cemeteries (not permitted in R-1 zone or in central business district as defined in section 8-3002-2). 
(j)  Day nurseries and kindergartens (not permitted in R-1 zone or in central business district as defined in section 8-3002-2). 
(k)  Personal care homes (not permitted in R-1 zone or in central business district as defined in section 8-3002-2). 
(l)  Commercial leasing in R-1 zones for weddings, receptions, social gatherings and business meetings for properties having at least five acres under single ownership. All parking must be off street parking; there shall be no on-site advertising of any kind; and outdoor lighting must be ample; said requirements being in addition to all other requirements provided for in other parts of this Code. 
13-1.3.  Planning and design commission consideration and decision. The planning and design commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications for special use exceptions and consider the merits of the applications. In making a determination to grant or deny the special use exception, the planning and design commission shall use the following general guidelines for its inquiry: 
(a)  The effect of the proposed activity on traffic flow along the joining streets. 
(b)  The location of off-street parking facilities. 
(c)  The number, size and types of signs proposed for the site. 
(d)  The amount and location of open space. 
(e)  Protective screening. 
(f)  Hours and manner of operation of the proposed use. 
(g)  Outdoor lighting. 
(h)  Ingress and egress to the property. 
(i)  Compatibility with surrounding land use. 
After hearing testimony from all interested parties, the planning and design commission shall have 30 days to render its decision. When granting a special use exception, the planning and design commission shall instruct the building inspector to issue a building permit. When an application for special use exception is disapproved, the applicant shall be notified in writing with reason for disapproval. 
13-1.4.  Notice of public hearing. Prior to the public hearing on the proposed special use exception, the building inspector shall cause to be conspicuously located on or adjacent to the property affected, a sign of not less than nine square feet, with not less than three-inch black letters upon a white background which shall read as follows: 
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC 
An application for special use exception has been filed with the planning and design commission requesting that this property be permitted for use as a (insert special use) . A public hearing will be held at (insert place) on (date) at (time) . All those in favor [of] or objecting to this special use exception should be present to voice their support or objection. 
Such notice shall be posted at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 
13-1.5.  Submission requirements. An application shall be submitted to the building inspector at least 15 working days prior to the date of the planning and design commission meeting at which it is considered. Applications shall, at a minimum, contain such information as prescribed in section 8-3015-2.2. 
(Ord. No. 456, § 2, 12-15-09) 
Section 8-3013-2. - Off-street parking regulations. 
No structure hereinafter shall be erected nor any of the uses listed in this section shall be established unless at least the minimum number of automobile parking spaces as specified in this section are provided. Each automobile parking space, along with its necessary maneuvering space, shall have an area of at least 300 square feet. If the required automobile parking or storage space cannot be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is located, the planning and design commission may permit such space to be provided on other off-street property, provided such space is within five 500 feet of such principal use. Such spaces shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. All off-street parking and storage space except for single-family residential uses shall be designed and arranged so as to prevent vehicles from backing onto a public street, road or highway. 
13-2.1.  Auto sales and repair: One space for each 150 square feet of auto repair or maintenance space. 
13-2.2.  Churches, synagogues or other places of worship: One space for each four seats in the main assembly room or sanctuary. 
13-2.3.  Gasoline filling stations: Three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility, plus one space for each employee on the shift with the highest employment. 
13-2.4.  Hospitals, nursing homes or similar institutions: One space for each two beds intended for patients, not including bassinets, plus one space for each three employees on the shift with the highest employment. 
13-2.5.  Industries: One space for each three employees on the shift with the highest employment. 
13-2.6.  Funeral homes: One space for each four seats in the chapel, one additional space for each two employees, one additional space for each resident family, and one additional space for each funeral vehicle. 
13-2.7.  Motels, hotels, rooming and boarding houses or similar uses: One space for each room to be let, plus one space for each two employees on the shift with the highest employment. 
13-2.8.  Offices, including banking institutions, but excluding doctor's and dentist's offices: One space for each 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
13-2.9.  Offices for doctors and dentists: Seven spaces for each doctor or dentist. 
13-2.10.  Places of public assembly, lodges and clubs: One space for each four seats of maximum seating capacity in the main assembly room. 
13-2.11.  Restaurants or similar eating establishments: One space for each four seats for patron use and one additional space for each two employees on the shift with the highest employment. 
13-2.12.  Residences, single-family, duplex and multifamily: Two spaces for each dwelling unit. 
13-2.13.  Retail and services businesses: One space for each 300 square feet of sales floor area. 
13-2.14.  Schools, elementary, junior high and middle schools: One space for each classroom and administrative office. 
13-2.15.  Schools, senior high and vocational schools: One space for each four seats in the main auditorium or assembly room. 
13-2.16.  Shopping centers: One space for each 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
13-2.17.  Wholesaling and warehousing: One space for each three employees on the shift with the highest [number of] employees. 
The off-street parking regulations shall not apply to structures or uses within the central business district (as defined in section 8-3002-2), where public parking is available, except for uses which require 12 or more parking spaces under the off-street parking regulations. 
(Ord. No. 456, § 1, 12-15-09) 
Section 8-3013-3. - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off of a street or public alley. Such space shall have access to a street or alley and shall be designed and arranged so as to prevent vehicles from backing onto a public street, road or highway. 
13-3.1.  Retail business and services: One space, ten by 25 feet, for each 20,000 square feet of total floor area or fraction thereof. 
13-3.2.  Wholesale and industry: One space, ten by 50 feet, for each 10,000 square feet of floor area, plus one additional space for each 60,000 additional square feet of total floor area or fraction thereof. 
13-3.3.  Bus and truck terminals: Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of vehicles to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
Section 8-3013-4. - Nonconforming lots of record. 
13-4.1.  Single lots. Where the owner of a lot at the time of adoption of this ordinance or his successor in the title thereto does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this ordinance, such lot may be used as a building site for a single-family residence in a district where residences are permitted, providing other requirements not including area and width or both shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the lot is located. 
13-4.2.  Adjoining lots. If two or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of this ordinance and such lots individually are too small to meet the yard, width and area requirements of the district in which they are located, such groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size and the lot or lots in one ownership shall be subject to the requirements of this ordinance. 
Section 8-3013-5. - Special conditions for corner lots. 
13-5.1.  [Width.] Corner lots shall be 20 percent wider than interior lots in order to meet minimum front yard requirements on all sides adjacent to a street. 
13-5.2.  Vision clearance. On any corner lot, no fence, sign or other structure, planting, or other obstruction to vision above three feet above the established street grades shall be erected or maintained within the line connecting points on the street right-of-way line 20 feet distant from the corner. 
Section 8-3013-6. - Double frontage lots. 
On each double frontage lot, front yard requirements set forth in article 12 shall be observed for the principal and/or accessory buildings on each street. 
Section 8-3013-7. - Yard requirements, existing buildings. 
The minimum yard requirements set forth in article 12 shall not be construed as prohibiting the conversion of an existing building which does not meet said yard requirements to another permitted use, as long as no further encroachment is made into the existing yard. 
Section 8-3013-8. - Front yard setbacks for dwellings. 
The setback requirements of this ordinance for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average existing setback line on lots located wholly or in part within 200 feet on each side of such lot, within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street or road as such lot, is less than the minimum setback required. In such cases, the setback on such lots may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average setbacks of the aforementioned lots, counting any undeveloped frontage as if it were developed at the required setback distance from the street, and in no case shall [be] less than ten feet from the street or right-of-way. 
Section 8-3013-9. - Height limits. 
The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy, monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, television towers, radio towers, conveyers, flagpoles, chimneys, masts, aerials and similar structures. 
Section 8-3013-10. - Inspection of required buffers. 
In the event that a screen wall, fence, planted dividing strip or other type of buffer is required by this ordinance for any use, or is required by the planning and design commission, such screen, fence, etc., will be subject to periodic inspection by the building inspector to determine that such required screen, fence, etc., are properly maintained. In the case of landscaping, all planted material shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. Failure to maintain such required screen, fence, etc., to an acceptable standard may be deemed a violation of this ordinance. 
Section 8-3013-11. - High-rise structures. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, a high-rise structure is defined as a structure having four or more stories. The high-rise structure shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
13-11.1. Minimum lot sizes as required by, and maximum height as limited by, article 12 shall not apply, provided the other requirements listed below are met. 
13-11.2. Minimum yard requirements of article 12 shall be met. However, in no case shall any front, side or rear yard be less than 25 feet. 
13-11.3. All off-street parking and loading requirements shall be met, as required by sections 8-3013-2 and 8-3013-3. 
13-11.4. Maximum lot coverage for high-rise structures containing residential units shall be not more than 30 percent. Maximum lot coverage for high-rise structures containing no residential units shall be not more than 50 percent. 
13-11.5. Elevators or escalators shall be provided. 
13-11.6. Residential density shall not exceed 50 residential units per gross acre. 
13-11.7. All fire codes and other codes relating to high-rise structures shall be met. 
Section 8-3013-12. - Day nurseries and kindergartens. 
Day nurseries and kindergartens shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
13-12.1. A fenced play area of no less than 100 square feet shall be provided for each child. No play area shall be closer than 20 feet to any residential lot line. 
13-12.2. A solid wall or vegetative screening which furnishes equal protection against noise shall be provided when determined to be appropriate by the building inspector. 
13-12.3. Facilities, operation and maintenance shall meet all requirements of the Screven County Health Department and the Georgia Department of Human Resources, Division of Community Services. 
13-12.4. An area adequate for loading and unloading children to be accommodated shall be provided and such area shall not be located within any public right-of-way. 
Section 8-3013-13. - Sign regulations. 
This section is intended to regulate the use of signs, billboards and other outdoor advertising structures. 
13-13.1.  General provisions. In any zoning district the following shall apply: 
(a)  Signs may be erected within required front yard setbacks. 
(b)  No portion of any sign shall overhang any public right-of-way. 
(c)  No sign shall be erected or maintained in a manner which materially impedes visibility of or from automobiles or pedestrians, or which creates a traffic safety hazard. 
(d)  Signs which imitate warning signals or emergency flashing lights or could otherwise be confused with an authorized traffic control or emergency sign, signal or device are prohibited. 
13-13.2.  Types of signs not subject to regulations. The following types of signs are not subject to sign regulations outlined in this section: 
(a)  Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property numbers, post office route and box numbers or names of occupants on premises. 
(b)  Flags and insignias of any government, except when used as part of commercial display or advertisement. 
(c)  Legal notices, identification, informational or directional signs erected by governmental bodies or required to be erected by governmental bodies. 
(d)  Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings or grounds except letters, trademarks, moving parts, moving or apparently moving lights or advertising in any form. 
(e)  Signs directing and guiding traffic on private property, but bearing no advertising matter. 
13-13.3.  Temporary signs. Temporary signs are permitted in any zone, provided that they are nonilluminated and conform to the following provisions: 
(a)  Temporary signs, not exceeding 40 square feet in area, announcing a land subdivision development are permitted on the premises of the subdivision. Such signs shall be set back not less than ten feet from any street right-of-way or from any property line, and shall be spaced not less than 300 feet apart. Such signs shall be kept in a good state of repair and shall be removed no later than 30 days after such time as 75 percent of the lots are conveyed. 
(b)  One sign, not exceeding 60 square feet in area, and displaying the names of the building, the contractors, the architects, the engineers, the owners, and the financial, selling and development agencies, is permitted upon the premises of any work under construction, alteration or removal. The sign shall be removed no later than 30 days after completion of the project. 
(c)  Signs, not exceeding 15 square feet in area, and displaying the names of house painters, craftsmen, contractors and others involved in the repair, remodeling or improvements are permitted on the premises on which the work is taking place. The signs shall be removed no later than seven days after the completion of the work. 
(d)  In advertising any property for sale, rent or lease, temporary signs may be erected. Such signs shall not exceed a surface area of five square feet per 100 feet of street frontage. 
13-13.4.  Signs in residential zones. In residential zones the following regulations shall apply: 
(a)  For home occupations or professional offices located in residences: One nonilluminated sign, not to exceed two square feet of sign area, is permitted. 
(b)  For group housing developments, apartments or other multifamily residences, one identification sign, not to exceed 30 square feet, is permitted for each separate street frontage. 
(c)  For other permitted nonresidential uses: 
(1)  Not more than two identification signs with combined surface area not exceeding 20 square feet; plus 
(2)  Not more than two bulletin or notice boards with combined surface area not exceeding 30 square feet. 
(d)  In single-family or duplex subdivisions, not more than two permanent identification signs are permitted per entrance totaling not more than 30 square feet. 
13-13.5.  Signs in other zones. In all other zones, not more than two sign structures, with combined sign surface area not to exceed one square foot per foot of street frontage, is [are] permitted for each separate street frontage. 
Section 8-3013-14. - Nonresidential uses located adjacent to or located in residential areas. 
13-14.1.  Required separation between commercial and/or industrial and residential lots. When the rear or side lot line of a lot zoned and used for commercial or industrial purposes adjoins the rear or side lot line of a lot zoned or used for residential purposes, the commercial or industrial development shall comply with the following requirements: 
(a)  The required setback line for buildings on the commercial or industrial lot shall be increased to 20 feet from the property line of the residential lot. 
(b)  A vision screening buffer shall be provided along the rear or side lot line used and zoned for commercial or industrial purposes. This buffer shall consist of a vegetative, opaque screen designed to be at least six feet deep and eight feet tall at maturity, a solid wall or fence at least eight feet tall, or any combination of the above as deemed necessary by the building inspector. 
(c)  These provisions shall not apply when the aforesaid side or rear lot lines do not meet due to the presence of a street, easement, watercourse or other right-of-way greater than 25 feet in width. In such cases, said street, easement, watercourse or other rights-of-way shall be deemed as a sufficient buffer for the purposes of this ordinance. 
(d)  The required setback line in an R-1, R-2 or R-3 district for a church building, Sunday school building, church education building or an accessory building to a church customarily incidental to the primary use as a church shall be at least 50 feet from any property line, whether the same be front, side or rear property line. Additionally, there shall be an evergreen planted buffer strip at least 10 feet wide and eight feet high along the side and rear property line. 
13-14.2.  Parking setbacks adjacent to residential uses. Parking facilities shall not be permitted in the side and rear yard setbacks for a distance of four feet from the property line for lots in residential districts. 
13-14.3.  Recreational facilities adjacent to residential uses. Outdoor recreational facilities which are adjacent to lots which are zoned or used for residential purposes shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  No swimming pool, playground, miniature golf course, ball field or game court shall be located closer than 50 feet from the property line of a lot zoned or used for residential purposes. 
(b)  No lighting shall be installed in connection with any outdoor recreational facility which is closer than 50 feet to the property line of a lot zoned or used for residential purposes, unless such lighting is of such a nature, as determined by the planning and design commission, that it will not be a nuisance to an adjacent residential use. 
(c)  A solid wall or fence, or vegetative screening which furnishes equal protection against noise and light, shall be provided when determined appropriate by the planning commission. 
(d)  No commercial activities shall be permitted in conjunction with recreational uses in residential zones except as listed below. 
(1)  Charges and fees for use of the recreational facilities; and 
(2)  Other activities which are directly incidental with the recreational facility and which, in the judgment of the planning and design commission, would not be in conflict with the residential nature of the neighborhood. 
13-14.4.  Cemeteries adjacent to residential uses. Cemeteries, cemetery plots or other facilities for the burial of the dead which are adjacent to lots which are zoned or used for residential purposes shall be no closer than 50 feet from the property line of the lot zoned or used for residential purposes. 
Section 8-3013-15. - Gasoline service stations and other establishments which dispense gasoline. 
Automobile service stations and other establishments which dispense gasoline shall comply with the following standards: 
13-15.1. Product displays, parked vehicles, signs and other obstructions which impair visibility to or from station driveways shall be prohibited. 
13-15.2. No driveways parallel to the street or road shall be constructed on the right-of-way in front of gasoline pumps, loading or unloading platforms or other structures requiring an outside or frontage driveway. 
13-15.3. Pump islands or other structures requiring an outside driveway should be located at a minimum distance of 20 feet from the right-of-way line in order that the outside driveway and service area should not encroach on the right-of-way line. In instances where angle pump island or islands are to be located opposite any part of the driveway, the end of the pump island nearest the right-of-way shall be a minimum of 40 feet behind the right-of-way line. Pump islands which must be less than 20 feet behind the right-of-way shall in all cases require the erection of an acceptable barrier along the right-of-way line for, at minimum, the length of the pump island. This 20-foot distance from the right-of-way line to the pump island should be increased if space is available when planning to accommodate tractor-trailers, recreational vehicles, buses or other long-wheelbase vehicles. 
13-15.4. An island with right-of-way barrier is required opposite all structures which will function as traffic obstacles (such as bumper curbs, sidewalks, fronts of buildings, etc.) located or to be located less than 40 feet from the right-of-way line. Except that such a right-of-way barrier may not be necessary in cases where such structures will not have an outside driveway or service area between the right-of-way and the front of the structure. 
Section 8-3013-16. - Modifications for residential lots abutting major streets. 
In all residential districts, and where a lot of record, abuts and is served by or which may be served by a major street as identified on the street map, the following minimum requirement shall apply: 
13-16.1. The minimum building line setback from abutting street rights-of-way shall be not less than 50 feet, excluding sales pumps at gasoline service stations. 
Section 8-3013-17. - Modification of radial lot frontage. 
In all residential districts, the minimum lot frontage required in district regulations may be reduced where radial lots are platted, except that in no case shall the lot frontage for a radial lot be reduced to less than 50 feet. This provision shall apply only to lots abutting minor streets as identified on the street map, and in no case shall the minimum required frontage be reduced for lots 
abutting major streets, except through the process of hardship appeal to the board of adjustment. 
Section 8-3013-18. - Street access control. 
In order to promote the safety of the motorist and pedestrian and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict, the following regulations shall apply to all nonresidential uses abutting non-state-maintained routes: 
13-18.1. No driveway shall exceed 40 feet measured parallel with the roadway or, if the roadway is on a curve, parallel with the tangent of the curve at the point where the centerline of the driveway intersects the curb, or edge of pavement where no curb exists. Furthermore, 40-foot driveways shall be approved only where long-wheelbase vehicles are to be a majority of the traffic to a building. 
(a)  Parallel service station driveways shall not exceed 35 feet unless catering to truck traffic. 
(b)  Parallel driveways serving banks, grocery stores, drive-in restaurants or similar uses shall not exceed 30 feet. 
(c)  "Exit Only" driveways from drive-in windows and other facilities shall not exceed 30 feet. 
13-18.2. The angle of driveways at the intersection of the street or roadway shall not be less than 60 degrees. 
13-18.3. The maximum width of [a] joint driveway shall be 40 feet. A joint driveway may be at any angle between 60 degrees and 90 degrees with the street. 
13-18.4. The two sides of any driveway shall be parallel with each other. 
13-18.5. Any two driveways connecting with a street or road shall be separated by an island area. The side of the island adjacent to the travel lane shall be located at the existing curbline, if any. Otherwise, the side of the island shall be ten feet from the edge of the pavement. 
13-18.6. When a curbed turning lane lies within the frontage of the property, an island shall extend to the existing curb of the turning lane; where no turning lane curb exists, the side of an uncurbed island will be at the roadside ditch. If the island is required to be curbed by the planning and design commission, the curb shall be installed 24 inches from the edge of the turning lane pavement (where this pavement is greater than ten feet from the edge of the pavement of the normal section) utilizing paved concrete gutter between the edge of the pavement and the curb. 
13-18.7. Islands shall extend to the right-of-way and shall be a minimum length of 20 feet, including radii at that point. The length of the island at the shoulder will be determined by the angle of the driveway and right-of-way depth, but shall not be less than 20 feet. Where a roadside ditch exists providing an acceptable obstacle to prevent vehicular traffic over the island, the condition may be retained on approval of the planning and design commission. 
13-18.8. All driveways shall be located, designed and constructed so that vehicle operators using them will have adequate sight distance in both directions along the street or road. The stopping sight distance for a designated road speed is found in the Georgia Department of Transportation's Geometric Design Standards. In determining the sight distance for driveways, the height of the eye will be considered as 3.75 feet and the height of the object as 0.5 foot. In instances where frontage is limited and a driveway cannot be constructed due to inadequate sight distance, a plan may be required by the planning and design commission which incorporates a service or approach road off of the right-of-way to a point where a satisfactory and safe intersection with the street or road is possible. 
13-18.9. When frontage is 100 feet or less, only one driveway is authorized. Additional entrances or exits for parcels of property having frontage in excess of 100 feet may be permitted by the planning and design commission upon proof that such additional entrances and exits are necessary and would not tend to increase traffic congestion or otherwise tend to militate against the safety or convenience of the traveling public. However, no more than two entrance-exit combination driveways shall be permitted when frontage is 200 feet or greater. 
Section 8-3013-19. - Personal care homes. 
Personal care homes shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
13-19.1. Facilities, operation and maintenance shall meet all requirements of the Screven County Health Department and the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
13-19.2. A personal care home shall not be located within a radius of 1,200 feet of an existing personal care home, as measured from the nearest point of the existing personal care home to the nearest point of the proposed personal care home via path of travel. 
ARTICLE 14. - DESIGN REGULATIONS 

Section 8-3014-1. - Purpose. 
The mayor and council of the City of Sylvania, under its powers to protect the welfare of its citizens, find it desirable to provide by ordinance for the preservation of the aesthetic beauty of Sylvania, and further to promote the maintenance of property values and an adequate tax base for its citizens, by requiring the approval by a planning and design commission as hereinafter established of the building design and architectural compatibility of new improvements made in R-1, R-2, R-3, PI, C-1, C-2 and H zones within the City of Sylvania. 
(Ord. No. 360, § IV, 10-6-98) 
Section 8-3014-2. - Definition of terms used in this article. 
Architectural feature. The exterior architectural treatment and general arrangement of the portions of an improvement and site as shall be open to external view, including, but not by way of limitation, the kind, color and texture of building materials, types of windows and doors, attached or detached signs, and other fixtures appurtenant to such portions. 
Improvements. Any new construction or remodeling or additions to an existing structure which in any way affects the "architectural feature," as defined above, of the structure. 
Neighborhood. An area within 500 feet of any part of an improvement. 
Surrounding area. An area within 500 feet of any part of an improvement. 
Section 8-3014-3. - Planning and design commission. 
There is hereby created a planning and design commission for the city, which shall have the powers, duties and functions as hereinafter provided. 
14-3.1.  Membership. The planning and design commission shall consist of five members, two of which shall be selected from the professions of architecture, real estate broker or agent, civil engineering, building construction or surveying. The remaining members shall be lay persons. Any three of the five members shall constitute a quorum and may act. Each member shall be a resident of the State of Georgia. One member shall be appointed for a four-year term, two members for a three-year term. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term. Any member whose term has expired shall continue to serve into the successive term for a like term until such member voluntarily resigns or a different person at some point in time is appointed for the next successive term. The mayor shall appoint all members of the planning and design commission, subject to confirmation by council. The mayor, with the concurrence of a majority of the council, shall have the authority to remove any members without cause. 
14-3.2.  Meetings. All meetings of the planning and design commission shall be called by the building inspector for the City of Sylvania. Such meetings shall be held within ten days of the receipt of an application for a building permit by the building inspector unless such time period is waived by the applicant. The meeting shall be chaired by the building inspector, who [shall] have no vote except in the event of a tie. 
14-3.3.  Powers of the commission. No building permit or other required permit shall be issued by the city for any improvement except upon prior approval of the planning and design commission, and no significant changes shall be made in or to an architectural feature of any improvement without the prior approval of the planning and design commission. Deviations from a plan approved by the planning and design commission shall be permitted only upon the filing and approval of an amended plan. 
14-3.4.  Action by planning and design commission. The planning and design commission shall approve or disapprove the issuance of a building permit based only upon the criteria set forth in this ordinance. Approval or disapproval shall be within ten days of the meeting of the planning and design commission, unless such time period is waived by the applicant, which approval or disapproval shall be set forth in writing. In the event of disapproval, the reasons for disapproval shall be set forth. Nothing contained herein shall in any way limit the powers of the building inspector to issue or deny building permits within any timeframe allowed based upon other applicable laws, ordinances or regulations, except that the building inspector shall issue no building permit until approved by the planning and design commission. 
14-3.5.  Appeal. Any applicant for a building permit may appeal the decision within a reasonable time, in accordance with section 8-3016-1 et seq. of [appendix B of] the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sylvania, to the zoning board of adjustment. 
Section 8-3014-4. - Procedure. 
An applicant seeking planning and design commission approval shall submit to the building inspector prior to the meeting of the planning and design commission a site plan and exterior elevations of the improvement, together with a detailed explanation of the kind, color and texture of building materials, types of windows and doors, attached or detached signs and other fixtures appurtenant to portions of the improvement and site, as shall be open to external view. The building inspector shall in turn refer such documents to the planning and design commission at or prior to the meeting. 
Section 8-3014-5. - Criteria. 
The planning and design commission shall make decisions based only upon the following criteria: 
14-5.1.  Relationship of building and site to surrounding area: 
(a)  The height and scale of each improvement shall be compatible with its site and adjoining improvements. 
(b)  Harmony in textures, lines and masses shall be provided in the design of buildings in the surrounding area. 
(c)  Attractive landscape transition to adjoining properties shall be provided. 
(d)  Any nonresidential buildings in an R-1 or R-2 zone shall be consistent with the established neighborhood character. 
(e)  There shall be harmony of "architectural feature" (as defined herein) of each improvement with the established neighborhood character and surrounding area. 
14-5.2.  Building design: 
(a)  While no particular architectural style is prohibited by this ordinance, evaluation of a project shall be based on quality of its design and relationship to surroundings. 
(b)  Buildings shall be of proportionate size to be in harmony with permanent neighborhood development. 
(c)  Building components such as windows, doors, roofs, eaves and parapets shall have good proportions and relationship to one another. 
(d)  Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. Excessive brightness and brilliant colors should be avoided, except when used for accent, and then only where appropriate. 
(e)  Design attention shall be given to mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground or buildings so as to screen them from view. 
(f)  Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards and all exposed accessories should be harmonious with building design. 
(g)  Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variety of detail, form and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple buildings projects, variable siting of individual buildings may be used to prevent monotonous appearance. 
14-5.3.  Signs: 
(a)  Signs, where allowed by other law or ordinance, shall be part of the architectural concept. Size, materials, color, lettering, location, number and arrangement shall be harmonious with the building design. 
(b)  The number of signs shall be minimized in order to avoid visual clutter. 
(c)  Colors shall be used harmoniously and with restraint. Excessive brightness and brilliant colors should be avoided. Lighting shall be harmonious with the design. If external spot[lighting] or floodlighting is used, it shall be arranged so that the light source is shielded from view. 
Section 8-3014-6. - Special provision for residential structures. 
The planning and design commission is authorized to appoint one of its members to act for the commission as a whole without the necessity of a meeting of the commission as a whole for single-family residential dwellings and accessory buildings to single-family residential dwellings only. Provided, however, if either the building inspector or such designated member of the planning and design commission fails to approve any such structure under this special provision, a meeting of the commission as a whole shall be held in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 8-3014-7. - Applicability to portions of developmental zones. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the design regulations set forth in sections 8-3014-1 through 8-3014-6, said regulations shall be applicable in areas within developmental zones within the city. In developmental zones, the terms "neighborhood" and surrounding area" are defined to mean an area within 1,500 feet of any part of an improvement located in an area zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, P-1, C-1, or C-2. In the event there is no improvement within 1,500 feet of the building site for which a building permit is requested within an area zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, P-1, C-1 or C-2, the design regulations shall be inapplicable to the structure for which a building permit is requested. 
(Ord. No. 335, § III, 7-5-94) 
Section 8-3014-8. - Design regulations inapplicable to historic properties. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of the design regulations set forth in sections 8-3014-1 through 8-3014-7, this article shall not be applicable to an historic property or to properties within an historic district after the property or district has been designated as an historic property or district by the city council under the city's historic preservation ordinance. After such designation, such properties shall fall under the jurisdiction of the historic preservation ordinance and dealt with in accordance with said ordinance by the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 449, 2-3-09) 
Cross reference— Historic properties and districts, ch. 14, art. IV. 
ARTICLE 15. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Section 8-3015-1. - Enforcement. 
15-1.1.  Enforcing officer. The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector of the City of Sylvania or his delegated representative who is hereby given the authority to perform these functions. His duties shall include receiving applications, inspecting premises and issuing building permits and certificates of occupancy for uses and structures that meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
Section 8-3015-2. - Building permit required. 
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building or to commence construction of any building or to commence the moving or alteration of any building or to commence the development of land for a use not requiring a building permit until the building inspector has issued a building permit for such work. 
15-2.1.  Application for building permit. 
(a)  Application to the building inspector for a building permit shall be made in writing on [a] form provided for the purpose. The application must be accompanied by a plan or plat drawn to scale showing the following items in sufficient detail to enable the building inspector to ascertain whether the proposed excavation, construction, moving or alteration is in conformance with this ordinance: 
(1)  The shape, size and location of the lot to be built upon. 
(2)  The shape, height, use and location on the lot of buildings or structures to be erected or altered. 
(3)  The sizes, locations and uses of all existing buildings or structures on the lot. 
(4)  The number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, if any. 
(5)  The setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots. 
(6)  The layout of off-street parking spaces. 
(7)  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. 
(b)  If the proposed excavation, filling, construction, moving or alteration as [is] set forth in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and other ordinances of the City of Sylvania then in force, the building inspector shall issue a building permit. If a building permit is not approved, the building inspector shall state such refusal in writing [and] the cause for disapproval. 
(c)  The building permit shall contain at least the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The block or street number of the lot to which the permit applies. 
(3)  The zoning district in which the property is located. 
(4)  Whether the permit authorizes excavation, filling, construction, moving or alteration and the type of structure being built. 
(5)  The date of the application. 
(6)  The signatures of the applicant, the building inspector and the public works director. 
(7)  Grading, drainage and erosion control plan. 
(d)  Before commencing excavation, filling, construction, moving or alteration, the building permit, or copy thereof, shall be placed in a conspicuous location on or near the front of the property for the duration of the excavation, filling, construction, moving or alteration and in such a manner that it is protected from the weather. 
15-2.2.  Application for a special use exception. In addition to information required by section 8-3015-2.1, all applications for a special use exception shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The actual dimensions of the lot built upon or to be built upon. 
(b)  The size and location of the building or buildings to be constructed. 
(c)  The size and location of any proposed extension. 
(d)  The names of all streets upon which the property is located. 
(e)  The zoning districts in which the property is located. 
(f)  Such other information as may be necessary to provide for enforcement of this resolution or upon which to base an inspection prior to passing on the application as required by the building inspector. 
15-2.3.  Construction progress. Any building permit shall become invalid unless the work authorized by said permit has been commenced within six months of the date of issue of the permit, or if the work authorized by said permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year or more. 
Section 8-3015-3. - Certificate of occupancy. 
15-3.1.  [When required.] A certificate of occupancy issued by the building inspector is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
(a)  Any building, structure, land or premises. 
(b)  Any building or structure hereinafter erected or moved. 
(c)  Any building hereinafter altered, so as to affect the front, side or rear yards thereof, or its height. 
(d)  Any building, structure or premises in which there is a change in the type of occupancy or use. 
15-3.2.  Application for certificate of occupancy. Within three days after the application for a certificate of occupancy is received on the form provided for the purpose, the building inspector shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the building, structure or land is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance and other ordinances of the City of Sylvania, then in force, and complies with the plans submitted for the building permit. 
15-3.3.  Denial of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of the building, structure or land is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this ordinance and other ordinances of the City of Sylvania, then in force, and complies with the plans submitted for the building permit. The building inspector shall state in writing the reasons for denying such certificates of occupancy. 
Section 8-3015-4. - Records of applications, permits and certificates. 
Records of applications for building permits, building permit approvals and denials, records of plats and plans in connection with said permits, records of applications for certificates of occupancy and certificate of occupancy approvals and denials shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and shall be furnished upon request to any person interested in the building, structure or land involved. 
Section 8-3015-5. - Penalty for violation. 
The violation of any provision of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor, and any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall in any manner violate any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in the discretion of the court. Each day such violation of this ordinance shall continue shall be deemed as a separate offense. 
Section 8-3015-6. - Remedies. 
If any building or structure is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of this ordinance, the building inspector or any other appropriate official of the City of Sylvania or any adjacent or neighboring property owner or resident of the City of Sylvania who would be damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies, under authority of this section and under authority of applicable sections of the Georgia Code Annotated, institute legal action for injunction, mandamus, or take other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use; or to correct or abate the violation, or to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure or land. 
ARTICLE 16. - ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 

Section 8-3016-1. - Establishment, membership and proceedings of the board. 
A zoning board of adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of three members who are residents of the City of Sylvania appointed by the Sylvania city council. The term of office of the members of the board shall be three years; provided, however, that the initial board of adjustment established under this ordinance shall be appointed with terms as follows: One to serve for one year, one to serve for two years and one for three years, and their successors shall serve for three years or until their respective successors are appointed. Members may be removed for cause by the council upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. Members shall not hold any other elected or appointed public office for the government of the City of Sylvania. 
16-1.1.  Proceedings of the board of adjustment. The board shall elect one of its members chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected and qualified. The board shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer of the governing authority. The zoning board of adjustment shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of any ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to this ordinance. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the administrator and shall be public record. 
16-1.2.  Hearings, appeals and notices. 
(a)  Appeals to the board of adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the inspector and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(c)  Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building inspector certifies to the board of adjustment, after notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice to the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
Section 8-3016-2. - Powers and duties of the board of adjustment. 
The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
16-2.1.  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals when it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
16-2.2.  Variances. The board of adjustment may authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variances from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement to the provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until: 
(a)  A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography. 
(2)  The application of the ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship. 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved. 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of the ordinance or the land use plan; provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is set forth as being excluded or prohibited in a given district by this ordinance. 
(b)  Notice of public hearing shall be posted on the property for which the variance is sought and shall be published at least 15 days prior to the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(c)  The hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of section 8-3016-2.2(a) have been met by the applicant for a variance. 
(e)  The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
(f)  The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
(g)  In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of the ordinance. 
(h)  With respect to uses of land, buildings and other structures, this ordinance is declared to be a definition of the public interest by the Sylvania city council and the spirit of this ordinance will not be observed by any variance which permits a use not generally permitted in the district involved or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this ordinance in said district. Therefore, under no circumstances shall the board of adjustment grant a variance to permit a use not generally permitted in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this ordinance in said district. 
16-2.3.  Actions of board concerning appeals. In exercising the powers set forth in sections 8-3016-2.1 to 8-3016-2.2 above, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
Section 8-3016-3. - Appeals from the board of adjustment. 
Any person or persons jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment, or any taxpayer or any officer, department, board or bureau of the City of Sylvania may present to the superior court in and for the county a petition, duly verified, setting forth that a decision of the board of adjustment is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within 30 days after the filing of the decision. 
Section 8-3016-4. - Functions of building inspector, board of adjustment, city council and courts on interpretation, administration and appeal. 
16-4.1.  Building inspector and board of adjustment. It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of administration and enforcement shall first be presented to the building inspector, and that such questions shall be presented to the board of adjustment only upon reference by, or appeal from, the building inspector, and that recourse from the decisions of the board of adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law. 
16-4.2.  City council. It is the intent of this ordinance that the function of the city council under this ordinance shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement which may arise, but that the city council shall have only the responsibility for acting on proposals for amendment or repeal of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 17. - AMENDMENTS 

Section 8-3017-1. - Amendments. 
In amending the text of this ordinance or in amending the zoning map, the procedure shall be as follows. 
Section 8-3017-2. - Initiation of proposals for amendments. 
Any individual, corporation or agency, public or private, may initiate a proposal for amendment. Such request shall be submitted in writing to the building inspector on an application provided by the City of Sylvania. 
Section 8-3017-3. - Relation to the land use plan. 
All amendments to the zoning ordinance and the zoning map adopted pursuant to the zoning ordinance shall be based on and interpreted in relation to the following policies and factors: 
(1)  Existing uses and zoning of nearby property. 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions. 
(3)  The extent to which the destruction of property values of the subject property promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public. 
(4)  Relative gain to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
(5)  The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes. 
(6)  The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property. 
(7)  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area. 
(8)  Conformity with or divergence from the land use plan. 
The application for tentative approval of an amendment shall include a written statement by the landowner setting forth the reasons why, in his opinions, the proposed amendment should be enacted in light of the above policies and factors. 
Section 8-3017-4. - Planning and design commission study and report to city council. 
All proposed amendments shall be submitted to the building inspector, who shall prepare an assessment of the proposed amendment based upon the policies and factors listed in section 8-3017-3. Said assessment will be prepared within five days of receipt of the application to rezone by the building inspector. The proposed amendment and assessment shall then be submitted to the planning and design commission which shall have 30 days within which to submit a report and recommendation to the city council. Failure of the planning and design commission to act within these time limits shall be deemed to constitute amendment approval. Such recommendation shall be advisory only. 
Section 8-3017-5. - Public hearing on proposed amendment. 
Before an amendment to this ordinance is enacted, a public hearing on the amendment shall be held. At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing, the building inspector shall file a notice of public hearing which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Such notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing together with the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
The Sylvania city council shall conduct this public hearing. The mayor shall preside at said hearing and shall observe the following procedures: 
(1)  In order for a person in attendance to speak, the mayor must first recognize such person. Upon rising to speak the person recognized will first identify himself. The mayor may also request that such person furnish a home or business address, [as] appropriate. 
(2)  The person speaking will be allowed two minutes to express opinions and make points on each separate element of the proposed revisions which he wishes to address, with a maximum total of ten minutes allowed per person. 
(3)  When elements that attendees wish to discuss have been addressed and all arguments relative to each element have been made, the clerk will, from notes he has made, restate each point, one at a time, and the attendees will be asked for a show of hands of those who support that same point, thus allowing each person an effective voice. A count of the supporters will be recorded by the clerk. 
The Sylvania city council shall take final action on the passage of said amendment on or before the third regularly scheduled council meeting following the public hearing. A copy of the public hearing procedures as well as a copy of policies and factors to be considered in rezoning procedures shall be made available to all members of the general public. 
Section 8-3017-6. - Posting of property. 
When a proposed amendment affects the district classification of particular pieces of property, the building inspector shall cause to be conspicuously located on or adjacent to the property affected a sign of not less than nine square feet, with not less than three-inch black letters upon a white background which shall read as follows: 
NOTICE TO THE PUBLIC 
A petition for zoning amendment has been filed with city council requesting that this property be changed from zone (insert present zone) to zone (insert zone requested) . A public hearing will be held at (insert place) on (date) at (time) . All those in favor [of] or objecting to this petition should be present to voice their support or objection. 
Such notice shall be posted at least 15 days prior to the hearing. 
Section 8-3017-7. - Newly annexed areas. 
Newly annexed areas shall be considered to be zoned as R-1 (single- family residential) in the interim between date of annexation and city council action. Within 60 days of annexation, the planning and design commission, after public hearing, shall recommend to [the] city council and [a] zone classification for such newly annexed areas which will carry out the objectives of the land use plan and this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 18. - LEGAL STATUS 

Section 8-3018-1. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the provisions of this ordinance impose more restrictive standards than required under any other ordinance, the regulations contained in this ordinance shall prevail, except as provided in section 8-3013-13. Whenever the provisions of any other ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required herein, theregulations shall prevail. 
Section 8-3018-2. - Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be declared unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Section 8-3018-3. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall be ordained effective the 3rd day of November, 1992. 
Section 8-3018-4. - Adoption clause. 
The governing authority hereby enacts [the] foregoing zoning regulations. 

ATTEST: 


APPENDIX C - TRAFFIC SCHEDULE 

Art. I. - Through streets (see section 70-3). 

 
Art. II. - Speed limits (see section 70-4). 
(a)  Generally. 

 
Be it ordained by the mayor and council of Sylvania, Screven County, Georgia that the following speed zones are established based on the attached engineering and traffic investigation. 
(b)  On-system. 

 
Signs to be erected by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(c)  Off-system. 

 
(d)  School zone. 

 
Signs to be erected by the City of Sylvania. 
(Ord. No. 251, 4-16-85; Ord. No. 253, 8-6-85; Ord. No. 263, 6-3-86; Ord. No. 287, 5-17-88; Ord. No. 315, 5-21-91; Ord. No. 359, §§ I, II, 7-7-98) 
Art. III. - Prohibited parking areas (see section 70-6). 

 
(Ord. No. 305, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 483, 10-21-14) 
Art. IV. - Limited parking—12 minutes (see section 70-6.5). 

 
Art. V. - Limited parking—two (2) hours (see section 70-6.5). 
(1)  Main Street. All designated parking spaces on Main Street between Church Street and Telephone Street on both the East and West sides of Main Street. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Parking directly behind the Chamber of Commerce building; 
b.  The center parking around the City Park. 
(2)  W.T. Sharpe Drive. All designated parking spaces on that portion of W. T. Sharpe Drive lying to the East of Main Street on both the North and South sides of W. T. Sharpe Drive. 
(3)  East Ogeechee Street. All designated parking spaces on East Ogeechee Street. 
Exception: The two parking spaces on East Ogeechee Street located beside the green space at the intersection of East Ogeechee Street and Filbert Street. 
(4)  Handicapped owners and employees. The two-hour parking limit shall not apply to the owner or employee of any business having a location where there is one or more designated parking spaces subject to the two-hour parking limit located in front of such business, provided that the owner or employee (as applicable) has a valid handicapped parking permit issued by the state or other governmental entity. This exception shall apply to all parking spaces, and not to just those spaces designated for handicapped parking. 
(Ord. No. 427, §§ 1—4, 1-4-05) 
Art. VI. - Loading and unloading prohibited (see section 70-13). 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1976 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1976 Code, as updated through June 21, 1983, which are included herein. Sections of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1976 Code, as updated through June 21, 1983, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1976 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since June 21, 1983, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 