CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF MORROW, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted: September 14, 1999  Effective: September 14, 1999 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MORROW, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Jeffrey A. DeTar  Mayor 
____________ 
Jeanell Bridges, Mayor Pro Tem  Larry Ferguson  Dorothy Dean  Renee S. Knight  City Council 
____________ Yasmin Julio  City Clerk 
____________ 
Steve Fincher  City Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1987 Code, as reproduced in 1995, and updated through September, 1998, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the City Council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative table appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1987 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The Code contains various titles, chapters and articles which are topically arranged in a logical order. The sections within each title have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The section numbering system used in this Code consists of three parts separated by dashes. The figure before the first dash refers to the title number, the center figure refers to the chapter, and the third figure refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 in title 1 is numbered 1-1-2, and the first section of title 2, chapter 1 is 2-1-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its title and chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 2-1-1 and 2-1-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 2-1-1.5. New titles and chapters may be included in the same way or, in the case of chapters, may be placed at the end of the title embracing the subject. New articles may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject and assigned the next succeeding alphabetical letter designation. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a title of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the (index itself or indexes themselves) which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This republication was under the direct supervision of Wilma W. Reed, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Andrew J. Whalen, III, City Attorney, and Brenda J. Allen, City Clerk; for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Morrow, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: table of contents; section catchlines; pretitle section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Morrow, Georgia. 1999. 
ORDINANCE 99-21 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF MORROW, GEORGIA, ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR MORROW, GEORGIA; ESTABLISHING THE SAME; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN, EXCEPT AS HEREIN EXPRESSLY PROVIDED; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING WHEN THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE; PROVIDING CERTAIN PENALTIES; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
The Mayor and Council of the City of Morrow, Georgia, hereby ordains: 
Section 1. The document entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Morrow, Georgia," a copy of which accompanies this ordinance and is incorporated herein and made a part hereof, is hereby adopted and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance. 
Section 2. All ordinances and resolutions of a general and permanent nature of this city enacted on final passage on or before April 13, 1999, and not in the code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance or resolution of the city promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; nor shall this repeal affect any rights or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the city to any person, firm or corporation; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; nor shall this repeal affect the present annual appropriation of the city; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing charges, fees or taxes now due or accrued; nor shall this repeal affect any zoning ordinance of the city or amendments thereto; nor shall this repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or resolution or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as provisions of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of the effective date of this code, are intended, and shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Section 5. Any and all additions or amendments to the code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into the code so that reference to "The Code of the City of Morrow, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6. The code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, and preserved in loose-leaf form, or in such other form as the city clerk may consider most expedient, and shall be considered the official code of the city. It shall be the express duty of the city clerk or someone authorized by the city clerk, to insert in their designated places all amendments, ordinances or resolutions which indicate the intention of the city governing authority to make those provisions a part of the code, when those provisions have been reprinted in page form, and to extract from the code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed. A copy of the code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it in the office of the city clerk during regular business hours. Copies shall be made available upon request at a charge not to exceed $0.25 per page. 
Section 7. As pages of the code are replaced because the matter contained in them shall have been repealed, amended or otherwise shall have been superseded or rendered obsolete or inoperative, the city clerk shall retain copies of the pages of the code so superseded, rendered obsolete or otherwise rendered inoperative in a file so that the former provisions of the code may be readily available and easily found. The purpose of this section is to permit anyone desiring to do so to ascertain the precise status of any section of the code as of a given date. 
Section 8. In case of the amendment of any section of the code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided by general law shall apply to the section as amended; or in case the amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in the other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless the penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 9. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the official code in any manner whatsoever which may cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
Section 10. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of any conflict, hereby repealed. 
Section 11. This ordinance shall be in force and take effect on September 14, 1999. 
Adopted this 14th day of September 1999. 



ATTEST: 

FIRST READING: 08-24-99 
SECOND READING: 09-14-99 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— House Bill 60, adopted June 3, 2003, amended the Morrow City Charter in its entirety to read as herein set out. Where a section has been amended, superseded or repealed by a later act, a historical note lists the amendatory acts in chronological order. Only the latest amended language has been set out herein and new subsection lettering has been added where necessary. Sections 7.15, Repealer, and 7.16, General repealer, have not been included in this codification. The former Morrow City Charter derived from Ga. L. 1971, p. 3998, as amended. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof are reincorporated by the enactment of this Charter and are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Morrow, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The corporate boundaries of this city shall be as described and set forth in Appendix A attached to this Charter. 
(b)  The city council may provide for changes in Appendix A by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this Charter; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefitting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection, EMS and ambulance service, and emergency communications (911). To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency, EMS and ambulance service, and emergency communications (911); 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortune telling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four councilmembers. The city council established shall be elected at large by the qualified voters of the city and shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this Charter. 
Sec. 2.11. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of election of mayor or members of the council; each shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, Title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment if less than 12 months remain in the unexpired term, otherwise by an election as provided for in Section 5.14 of this Charter and in accordance with Titles 21 and 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which that person is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of that person or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to that person's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which that person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which that person has financial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that person shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(e)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(f)  Ineligibility of elected official. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which that official was elected. 
(g)  Political activities of certain officers and employees. No appointed officer of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to the Morrow City Council. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon election to any public office in this city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the mayor and city council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit an office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
Sec. 2.17. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the second Tuesday in January in even numbered years. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Sec. 2.18. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Code Section 50-14-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.19. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2.20. - Quorum; voting. 
Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. An abstention shall be counted as an affirmative vote. 
Sec. 2.21. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be, "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Morrow," and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided in Section 2.23 of this Charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2.22. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.23. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Code Section 50-14-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 2.24. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.21 of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.25 of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2.25. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Morrow, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 2.26. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation; employment contract. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the manager's compensation. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of that person's executive and administrative qualifications. In lieu of appointment for an indefinite term, the city council is authorized, but not required, to enter into an employment contract with the city manager for a term of no more than four (4) years. Any such contract shall contain as an essential term the express right of the city council to terminate the city manager's employment at any time for any reason not prohibited by law or for no reason whatsoever, but such contract may provide for payment of up to six (6) months' severance pay at the city manager's then current rate of compensation, if termination is not made on the basis of grounds specified in the contract that would void entitlement to such severance. 
(Ord. No. 2011-33, § 1, 8-23-11) 
Sec. 2.27. - Removal of city manager. 
The city manager is employed at will and may be summarily removed from office at any time by the city council; provided that in those instances in which the city council has, in its discretion, entered into an employment contract with the city manager that provides for severance pay under certain conditions, termination may result in payment of severance pay in accordance with contract terms. Under no circumstances shall contractual entitlement to severance pay be deemed a right to continued employment as city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2011-33, § 2, 8-23-11) 
Sec. 2.28. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the city manager shall designate, subject to approval of the city council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during the city manager's temporary absence or physical or mental disability. During such absence or disability, the city council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the city manager shall return or the city manager's disability shall cease. 
Sec. 2.29. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the city manager's charge by or under this Charter. As the chief administrative officer, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint and, when the city manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the city manager appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this Charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law; 
(3)  Attend all city council meetings except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline, or removal of the city manager, and have the right to take part in discussion but not vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the city manager deems desirable; and 
(9)  Perform other such duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 2.30. - Council's interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.15 of this Charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give any orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Sec. 2.31. - Selection of mayor pro tempore. 
By a majority vote of all its members, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore, and the mayor pro tempore shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The mayor pro tempore shall continue to vote and otherwise participate as a councilmember. 
Sec. 2.32. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(2)  Be the chief executive officer of the city; 
(3)  Have a vote only in the case of a tie vote by councilmembers; 
(4)  Sign ordinances and resolutions on their final passage; except that the mayor shall have veto power over ordinances, orders, or resolutions, in which case the mayor shall have five days after meetings of the mayor and council to file with the clerk in writing his or her disapproval, but the councilmembers may, at the same meeting or any subsequent meeting within 60 days, override the veto of such ordinance, order, or resolution by a vote of two-thirds of the total number of councilmembers, to be taken by "ayes" and "nays" and entered upon the minutes; 
(5)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(6)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; and 
(7)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing. 
Sec. 2.33. - Mayor pro tempore. 
During the absence or physical or mental disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tempore, or in the mayor pro tempore's absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmembers chosen by a majority vote of the city council, shall be clothed with all the rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. The mayor pro tempore or selected councilmember shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in Section 2.14 of this Charter. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(e)  All appointed officers and directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the city council. All appointed officers and directors shall be employees at will and subject to removal or suspension at any time by the city manager unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of that person's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All members of boards, commissions, or authorities of the city serve at will and may be removed at any time by a vote of three members of the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the person's position as city attorney. 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city manager shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this Charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
Sec. 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges serve at will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the judge's office to the best of the judge's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.19 of this Charter. 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $300.00 or 20 days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Clayton County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in total the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.11. - Election of the city council and mayor. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election biennially in the odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  There shall be elected the mayor and two councilmembers at one election and at every other election thereafter. The remaining city council seats shall be filled at the election alternating with the first election so that a continuing body is created. 
Sec. 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by majority. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected by a majority of the votes cast for each position. 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant as provided in Section 2.12 of this Charter, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Clayton County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Clayton County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Morrow. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.13. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes and fees. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Sec. 6.24. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. 
Sec. 6.25. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Sec. 6.26. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than June 30 of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.24 of this Charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriations for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable. 
Sec. 6.27. - Tax levies. 
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but no later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.24 of this Charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than June 30 of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
Sec. 6.30. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Sec. 6.31. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; and 
(2)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.19 of this Charter. 
Sec. 6.32. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale and lease of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the city manager to sell and convey said cutoff or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this Charter takes effect for a period of 90 days before or during which the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointed officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Sec. 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Sec. 7.14. - Construction and definitions. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(d)  Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, the term: 
(1)  "City council" means the members of the city council and the mayor. 
(2)  "Councilmember" means a member of the city council other than the mayor. 
APPENDIX A. - CITY OF MORROW LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
The corporate limits of the City of Morrow shall include all that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lots 82, 83, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146 and 147 of the 12th District, and in Land Lots 112, 113, 144 and 145 of the 13th District, Clayton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the original northwesterly corner of the city limits of the City of Morrow, Georgia, as described in the Charter of the City of Morrow as enacted March 2, 1943, wherein said original city limits are described as being in the form of a rectangle, one mile wide and two miles long. The center of the same shall be the depot of the Central of Georgia Railroad across the public road from Mrs. C. L. Murphy's store and said starting point being further described in the city records as the United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey Monument set at the old depot; thence measuring 1 mile North and 1 mile South and ½ mile West and ½ mile East from said depot. From the beginning point thus established, run Westerly and in continuance of the North original line of the city limits of Morrow South 90 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds West 1183.34 feet, to a concrete monument set on the northeasterly side of said Phillips Drive right- of-way; thence southeasterly, Southerly and southwesterly along said right-of-way 1500 feet, more or less, to the South side of the Georgia Power Company transmission line right-of-way; thence Westerly along said Georgia Power Company transmission line right-of-way to the West side of Phillips Drive right-of-way; thence Southerly along said West side of Phillips Drive right-of-way to a point 212 feet Southerly of the South side of Ponderosa Park Drive right-of-way; thence West 648 feet to a point; thence South to a point on the North side of Morrow Road right-of-way; thence Westerly along said North side of Morrow Road right-of-way to a point 153 feet Easterly of Morrow Cove right-of- way; thence South 600 feet, more or less, to a point on Conine Creek; thence southeasterly along said creek 1,200 feet, more or less, to a point on the Northerly line of Land Lot 144 of said 13th District; thence Southerly along said creek to a point on the Southern right-of-way of Interstate 75; thence Westerly along said Southern right-of-way of Interstate 75, 31.9 feet to a point; thence North 77 degrees 30 minutes West along said Southern right-of-way of Interstate 75 a distance of 993.1 feet to a point; thence South 01 degrees 25 minutes 30 seconds East 457.3 feet; thence South 00 degrees 31 minutes 30 seconds West 1,177.6 feet; thence Southerly to a point on the aforementioned Conine Creek and following said creek southwesterly to a point on the South right-of-way of Mt. Zion Road; thence Easterly along said Southern right-of-way of Mt. Zion Road to a point 403.46 feet Westerly of the intersection with the West side of Kelly Avenue right-of-way; thence South 00 degrees 58 minutes 36 seconds East 710.04 feet; thence South 01 degrees 03 minutes 30 seconds East 50.00 feet to a point on the South right-of way of Fred Drive; Thence along the south right-of-way of Fred Drive North 88 degrees 56 minutes 34 seconds East 391.48 feet to a point on the east side of Kelly Avenue right-of-way; thence North 01 degrees 09 minutes 23 seconds East along said east side of Kelly Avenue right-of-way the following calls; North 01 degrees 09 minutes 23 seconds East 381.74 feet; thence North 04 degrees 52 minutes 12 seconds East 102.10 feet; thence North 01 degrees 04 minutes 17 seconds West 226.50 feet to a point on said Southern right-of-way of Mt. Zion Road; thence Easterly following the Southern right-of-way of Mt. Zion Road to a point on said line separating said 12tr and I districts, said line also being the line separating Land Lot 112 of said l2" District and Land Lot 145 of said 13th District; thence leaving said Southern right-of- way of Mt. Zion Road and run along said Land Lot and District line, South 01 degrees 12 minutes 07 seconds East 502.8 feet to a V2 inch rebar found; thence North 89 degrees 13 minutes 51 seconds East 339.3 feet to a ½ inch rebar found; thence North 89 degrees 27 minutes 35 seconds East 406.95 feet to a point on the westerly right-of- way of Green Industrial Drive; thence along said right-of-way the following calls; North 00 degrees 30 minutes 59 seconds West 40.10 feet; thence North 00 degrees 45 minutes West 425.00 feet to the Southern right-of-way of Mt. Zion Road; thence Easterly along said Southern right-of-way of Mt. Zion Road to a point on the original West city limits line; thence Southerly along said original West city limits line to the Southwest corner of the original city limits; thence Easterly along the original South city limits line to a point on the Easterly side of Highway 54 right-of-way; thence Southerly along said Easterly side of Highway 54 right-of-way a distance of 650 feet, more or less, to a point on the Southerly line of Land Lot 112 of said 12th District; thence Easterly along said Southerly line of Land Lot 112 and Southerly line of Land Lot 111 of said l2 District to a point 465 feet Westerly from the southeasterly corner of said Land Lot 111; thence South 00 degrees 20 minutes 35 seconds West 578.27 feet to a point; thence South 52 degrees 39 minutes 54 seconds East 1,915.61 feet to a point on the northwesterly right-of-way line of Mt. Zion Circle; thence South 52 degrees 39 minutes 54 seconds East 10.72 feet; thence South 73 degrees 37 minutes 51 seconds East 49.98 feet to a point on the southeasterly right-of-way line of Mt. Zion Circle; thence northeasterly along the curvature of said southeasterly right-of-way line of Mt. Zion Circle an arc distance of 313.57 feet; thence along said right-of-way line North 37 degrees 00 minutes 44 seconds East 239.07 feet; thence along an arc distance of 94.62 feet; thence North 15 degrees 26 minutes 10 seconds East a distance of 83.37 feet; thence North 15 degrees 26 minutes 10 seconds East a distance of 393.86 feet to a point on the Southwest right-of-way line of Mt. Zion Road; thence crossing Mt. Zion Road perpendicular 80 feet to a point on the Northeast side of Mt. Zion Road; thence southeasterly along said right-of-way 20 feet, more or less, to a point; thence South 42 degrees 20 minutes 03 seconds East 183.37 feet; thence South 44 degrees 38 minutes 10 seconds East 20.10 feet to a point; thence leaving said northeasterly right-of-way of Mt. Zion Road, North 45 degrees 25 minutes 20 seconds East 152.16 feet; thence North 37 degrees 47 minutes 44 seconds East 70.78 feet; thence North 61 degrees 31 minutes 55 seconds East 388.41 feet; thence North 28 degrees 28 minutes 05 seconds West 36.29 feet; thence North 16 degrees 10 minutes 18 seconds East 62.13 feet; thence North 61 degrees 31 minutes 55 seconds East 174.92 feet; thence North 13 degrees 51 minutes 34 seconds East 54.10 feet; thence North 61 degrees 31 minutes 55 seconds East 44.23 feet; thence North 28 degrees 28 minutes 05 seconds West 79.41 feet; thence North 61 degrees 31 minutes 55 seconds West 75 feet to a point on the southwesterly right-of-way of Interstate 75; thence North 52 degrees 26 minutes 35 seconds West along said southwesterly right-of-way of Interstate 75 390.06 feet to a concrete monument found; thence North 48 degrees 38 minutes 13 seconds West 280.4 feet to a 1A" rebar found, said point being the intersection of the Southerly right-of-way line of Alma Court and said southwesterly right-of-way of Interstate 75; thence North 37 degrees 45 minutes 09 seconds East across Interstate 75 a distance of 316.4 feet to a point located on the northeasterly right-of-way of Interstate 75; thence northwesterly along said northeasterly right-of-way of Interstate 75 to a point 280 feet, more or less, southeasterly of the intersection of said northeasterly right-of-way of Interstate 75 and the center line of Panther Creek; thence North 46 degrees 16 minutes 45 seconds East 74.59 feet to a ½ inch rebar found; thence North 53 degrees 58 minutes 33 seconds West 172.3 feet to a 1 inch open top pipe found; thence North 16 degrees 54 minutes 34 seconds West 1,811.11 feet to an iron pin axle found on the line between Land Lots 110 and 115 of said 12thi District; thence South 89 degrees 46 minutes 00 seconds West 730 feet, more or less, to a point on the original East city limits line; thence Northerly along said original East city limits line to a point 208.14 feet South of the point where the Easterly right-of-way of Meadowbrook Lane intersects with the Northerly right-of-way of Pershing Way; thence South 56 degrees 55 minutes 54 seconds East a distance of 66.48 feet to a point on the west line of Lot 3, Block C, Belfort Hills Subdivision, Unit 1; thence around said Lot 3, the following calls; South 12 degrees 26 minutes 12 seconds West a distance of 40.51 feet to a point; thence North 89 degrees 59 minutes 06 seconds East a distance of 123.11 feet to a point; thence North 04 degrees 25 minutes 34 seconds East a distance of 178.08 feet to a point on the southerly right-of-way of Pershing Way (50' R)W); thence along said right-of-way; South 83 degrees 47 minutes 51 seconds East a distance of 70.84 feet to a point; thence across Pershing Way and around Lot 10, Block B, Belfort Hills Subdivision, Unit I the following calls; North 05 degrees 33 minutes 05 seconds East a distance of 266.89 feet to a point; thence South 87 degrees 18 minutes 11 seconds East a distance of 47.53 feet to a point; thence South 23 degrees 19 minutes 54 seconds East a distance of 108.92 feet to a point; thence South 05 degrees 33 minutes 05 seconds West a distance of 175.02 feet to a point on the southerly right-of-way of Pershing Way (50' RAN); thence along said right-of-way; South 83 degrees 47 minutes 51 seconds East a distance of 34.09 feet to a point; thence the following calls around Lot 6, Block C, Belfort Hills Subdivision, Unit 1; South 04 degrees 36 minutes 12 seconds West a distance of 155.85 feet to a point; thence North 89 degrees 59 minutes 06 seconds East a distance of 132.99 feet to a point on the right-of-way of Argonne Drive (50' RIVV); thence along said right-of-way the following calls; South 00 degrees 56 minutes 47 seconds West a distance of 5.58 feet to a point; thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 691.33 feet and a length of 72.36 feet, said curve having a chord bearing of South 02 degrees 17 minutes 00 seconds East and a chord distance of 72.33 feet to a point; thence around Lot 18, Meadowbrook Subdivision, the following calls; South 86 degrees 03 minutes 56 seconds West a distance of 159.63 feet to a point; thence South 09 degrees 21 minutes 52 seconds East a distance of 89.98 feet to a point; thence North 84 degrees 20 minutes 24 seconds East a distance of 155.00 feet to a point on the westerly right-of-way of Argonne Drive; thence across Argonne Drive; South 85 degrees 48 minutes 28 seconds East a distance of 50.89 feet to a point on the easterly right-of-way of Argonne Drive; thence North 89 degrees 56 minutes 22 seconds East a distance of 160.10 feet along the south line of Lot 2, Meadowbrook Subdivision to a point; thence North 00 degrees 28 minutes 22 seconds East a distance of 62.98 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 10, Block B, Pinecrest Forest Subdivision; thence South 89 degrees 58 minutes 19 seconds East a distance of 249.24 feet to a point on the easterly right-of-way of Pleasant Valley Drive (50' RIW); thence along said right-of-way; North 00 degrees 35 minutes 20 seconds East a distance of 23.05 feet to a point, being the southwest corner of Lot 3, Block D, Pinecrest Forest Subdivision; thence North 89 degrees 50 minutes 49 seconds East a distance of 119.13 feet to a point; thence South 00 degrees 32 minutes 38 seconds West a distance of 269.87 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 6, Block E, Pinecrest Forest Subdivision a point; thence South 47 degrees 50 minutes 12 seconds East a distance of 133.67 feet to a point; thence South 89 degrees 46 minutes 45 seconds East a distance of 101.33 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 7, Block E, Pinecrest Forest Subdivision; thence North 00 degrees 35 minutes 20 seconds East a distance of 200.64 feet to a point on the southerly right-of-way of Randall Mark Drive (50' RIW); thence along said right-of-way; North 89 degrees 50 minutes 49 seconds East a distance of 170.15 feet to a point; thence North 00 degrees 28 minutes 22 seconds East a distance of 159.49 feet to a point on the easterly right-of-way of Debbie Sue Lane (50' RAN), said point being the southwest corner of Lot 3, Block F, Pinecrest Forest Subdivision; thence North 89 degrees 58 minutes 26 seconds East a distance of 124.53 feet to a point; thence South 00 degrees 36 minutes 27 seconds West a distance of 132.22 feet along the west lot line of Lot 5, Block F, Pinecrest Forest Subdivision to a point on the northerly right-of-way of Randall Mark Drive (50' RN'I); thence along said RAN along a curve to the right having a radius of 219.56 feet and a length of 98.89 feet, said curve having a chord bearing of South 50 degrees 55 minutes 15 seconds East and a chord distance of 98.05 feet to the southerly corner of Lot 5, Block F, Pinecrest Forest Subdivision; thence North 51 degrees 33 minutes 44 seconds East a distance of 238.04 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 5, Block F, Pinecrest Forest Subdivision; thence North 14 degrees 48 minutes 14 seconds West a distance of 183.90 feet to the southwest corner of Lot 39, Section 3, Block F, Pinecrest Subdivision; thence along the rear of Section 3, Block F, Pinecrest Subdivision the following calls; South 78 degrees 44 minutes 04 seconds East a distance of 236.23 feet to a point; thence South 60 degrees 46 minutes 18 seconds East a distance of 310.40 feet to a point; thence South 18 degrees 02 minutes 35 seconds East a distance of 62.81 feet to a point; thence South 88 degrees 52 minutes 49 seconds East a distance of 170.00 feet to a point on the westerly right-of-way of Peacock Boulevard; thence along said RAN; South 00 degrees 31 minutes 18 seconds West a distance of 371.84 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 29, Section 4, Block F, Pinecrest Subdivision; thence around lot 29 the following calls; South 89 degrees 55 minutes 22 seconds West a distance of 124.90 feet to a point; thence South 03 degrees 54 minutes 08 seconds East a distance of 172.70 feet to a point; thence North 89 degrees 48 minutes 26 seconds East a distance of 111.54 feet to a point on the easterly right-of-way of Peacock Boulevard; thence along said RAN; South 00 degrees 32 minutes 05 seconds West a distance of 16.09 feet to a point; thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 166.28 feet and a length of 34.40 feet, said curve having a chord bearing of South 06 degrees 40 minutes 22 seconds West and a chord distance of 34.34 feet to a point; thence across Peacock Boulevard; South 76 degrees 25 minutes 25 seconds East a distance of 256.55 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 4, Section 4, Block I, Pinecrest Subdivision and the line common to Land Lots 109 and 110; thence along said land lot line; North 00 degrees 32 minutes 58 seconds East a distance of 233.30 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 5; thence around Lot 6 the following calls; South 88 degrees 06 minutes 20 seconds East a distance of 257.30 feet to a point; thence North 13 degrees 29 minutes 27 seconds West a distance of 235.95 feet to the Northeast corner of Lot 6; thence around Lot 8 the following calls; South 88 degrees 52 minutes 49 seconds East a distance of 104.19 feet to a point; thence North 27 degrees 56 minutes 46 seconds West a distance of 113.57 feet to a point; thence North 88 degrees 44 minutes 09 seconds West a distance of 250.00 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 9; thence North 00 degrees 32 minutes 58 seconds East a distance of 229.57 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 11, Section 3, Block I, Pinecrest Subdivision; thence North 79 degrees 17 minutes 28 seconds East a distance of 88.54 feet to a point; thence North 20 degrees 14 minutes 11 seconds West a distance of 244.71 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 14; thence around Lot 14 the following calls; North 77 degrees 23 minutes 24 seconds West a distance of 205.37 feet to a point; thence along a curve to the right having a radius of 206.14 feet and a length of 32.74 feet, said curve having a chord bearing of North 05 degrees 30 minutes 44 seconds East and a chord distance of 32.71 feet to a point; thence North 00 degrees 08 minutes 53 seconds East a distance of 48.77 feet to a point; thence South 89 degrees 42 minutes 08 seconds East a distance of 198.35 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 15; thence around Lot 15 the following calls; North 00 degrees 32 minutes 58 seconds East a distance of 99.77 feet to a point; thence North 89 degrees 42 minutes 08 seconds West a distance of 198.66 feet to a point; thence around Lot 16 the following calls; North 00 degrees 36 minutes 26 seconds East a distance of 99.42 feet to a point; thence South 89 degrees 42 minutes 08 seconds East a distance of 198.56 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 17, thence around lot 17 the following calls; thence North 00 degrees 32 minutes 58 seconds East a distance of 100.00 feet to a point; thence North 89 degrees 42 minutes 08 seconds West a distance of 248.78 feet to a point on the westerly R/W of Lynn Dale Lane (50' RAN); thence along said RIW; North 00 degrees 25 minutes 17 seconds East a distance of 64.57 feet to a point at the intersection of the westerly right-of-way of Lynn Dale Lane and the southerly right-of-way of Pinecrest Drive; thence along said Pinecrest R/VV; South 89 degrees 49 minutes 52 seconds West a distance of 236.22 feet to the northeast corner of Lot 9, Section 3, Block J, Pinecrest Subdivision; thence South 00 degrees 10 minutes 08 seconds East a distance of 225.80 feet to a point; thence North 82 degrees 14 minutes 53 seconds West a distance of 51.94 feet to a point; thence South 24 degrees 00 minutes 10 seconds West a distance of 235.48 feet to a point on the Northerly right-of-way of Peacock Boulevard; thence across Peacock Boulevard South 11 degrees 19 minutes 35 seconds West a distance of 50.41 feet to a point; thence along the southerly right-of-way of Peacock Boulevard along a curve to the right having a radius of 313.15 feet and a length of 273.92 feet, said curve having a chord bearing of North 43 degrees 18 minutes 15 seconds West and a chord distance of 265.27 feet to the southeast corner of Lot 41, Section 3, Block F, Pinecrest Subdivision; thence South 71 degrees 46 minutes 03 seconds West a distance of 201.23 feet to a point; thence South 14 degrees 33 minutes 11 seconds East a distance of 97.77 feet to a point; thence South 89 degrees 55 minutes 01 seconds West a distance of 294.48 feet to the intersection of the easterly right-of-way of Debbie Sue Lane (50' RAN) and the southerly right-of-way of Pine Valley Drive (50' RIVV); thence along said RIVV of Debbie Sue Lane; South 00 degrees 34 minutes 40 seconds West a distance of 110.00 feet to a point; thence around Lot 2, Block F Pinecrest Forest Subdivision the following calls; North 89 degrees 55 minutes 01 seconds East a distance of 119.01 feet to a point; thence South 48 degrees 11 minutes 46 seconds East a distance of 134.44 feet to a point; thence following the common south property line of Lot 2, Block F and Lot 2 and 9, Block D South 89 degrees 57 minutes 40 seconds West a distance of 710.35 feet to a point on the easterly right-of- way of Pleasant Valley Drive (50' RAN); thence across Pleasant Valley Road; South 74 degrees 40 minutes 15 seconds West a distance of 51.89 feet to a point on the westerly right-of-way; thence along the westerly right-of-way North 00 degrees 25 minutes 43 seconds East a distance of 100.11 feet to a point; thence around Lot 8, Section B, Pinecrest Subdivision the following calls; North 89 degrees 58 minutes 19 seconds West a distance of 199.46 feet to a point; thence North 00 degrees 28 minutes 22 seconds East a distance of 100.00 feet to a point; thence South 89 degrees 58 minutes 19 seconds East a distance of 199.34 feet to a point on the westerly right-of-way of Pleasant Valley Road; thence along said right-of-way; North 00 degrees 24 minutes 18 seconds East a distance of 63.32 feet to a point; thence South 89 degrees 55 minutes 41 seconds East a distance of 169.69 feet to a point on the northerly right-of-way of Pine Valley Drive, said point being the southeast corner of Lot 4, Section 2, Block C, Pinecrest Subdivision; thence North 00 degrees 35 minutes 20 seconds East a distance of 109.32 feet to a point; thence North 47 degrees 57 minutes 27 seconds East a distance of 135.82 feet to a point; thence North 00 degrees 36 minutes 33 seconds East a distance of 199.50 feet to a point on the southerly right-of-way of Pinecrest Drive (50' RAN); thence North 01 degrees 47 minutes 10 seconds East a distance of 49.75 feet to a point; thence North 00 degrees 35 minutes 20 seconds East a distance of 187.60 feet to a point; thence South 89 degrees 58 minutes 27 seconds East a distance of 365.33 feet to a point; thence South 16 degrees 10 minutes 20 seconds East a distance of 192.42 feet to a point on the Northerly right-of-way of Pinecrest Drive (50' RAN); thence along said RAN; South 89 degrees 50 minutes 49 seconds West a distance of 210.58 feet to a point; thence South 00 degrees 28 minutes 22 seconds West a distance of 204.78 feet to a point on the westerly right-of-way of Debbie Sue Lane; thence North 89 degrees 59 minutes 29 seconds East a distance of 265.78 feet to a point; thence North 14 degrees 34 minutes 29 seconds West a distance of 5.90 feet to a point; thence North 75 degrees 34 minutes 53 seconds East a distance of 249.84 feet to a point on the easterly right-of-way of Peacock Boulevard (50' RAN); thence North 14 degrees 35 minutes 28 seconds West a distance of 90.14 feet to the intersection of the easterly right-of-way of Peacock Boulevard and the southerly right-of-way of Pinecrest Drive (50' RAN); thence along said RAN of Pinecrest Drive; South 89 degrees 58 minutes 29 seconds East a distance of 74.69 feet to a point; thence across Pinecrest Drive; North 00 degrees 28 minutes 06 seconds West a distance of 50.00 feet to a point on the northerly right-of-way of Pinecrest Drive; thence North 00 degrees 00 minutes 09 seconds East a distance of 33.21 feet to a point; thence North 16 degrees 13 minutes 18 seconds West a distance of 344.06 feet to a point on the lot line between Lots 5 and 6, Section L, Pinecrest Subdivision; thence along said lot line; North 73 degrees 49 minutes 20 seconds East a distance of 38.54; thence along the rear of said subdivision; North 17 degrees 02 minutes 00 seconds West a distance of 511.30 feet to a point on the Southerly right-of-way of Lake Harbin Road; thence Northerly across said Lake Harbin Road right-of-way to the southeasterly corner of Section A, Unit 4, Morrow Woods Subdivision; thence Northerly along the East line of said Section A, Unit 4, Morrow Woods Subdivision 1,470 feet, more or less, to a point; thence North 85 degrees 47 minutes 00 seconds East for a distance of 178.93 feet along the Southern line of the open space and Lot 75, College Walk Unit VI, to a point; thence North 30 degrees 32 minutes 07 seconds West for a distance of 155.83 feet along the southwesterly line of Lot 21, College Walk, Unit VII, to the most Westerly corner of said Lot 21; thence North 12 degrees 16 minutes 44 seconds West for a distance of 48.00 feet along the Westerly line of Lot 22 to the most Westerly corner of said Lot 22; thence North 75 degrees 21 minutes 32 seconds East for a distance of 155.53 feet along the Northerly line of said Lot 22 to the northeasterly corner of said lot 22; thence South 15 degrees 42 minutes 21 seconds East for a distance of 24.29 feet along the Westerly side of Reagan Chase right-of-way to a point; thence Southerly along a curve to the right having a radius of 25.00 feet and an arc length of 21.02 feet, being subtended by a chord of South 08 degrees 23 minutes 21 seconds West for a distance of 20.41 feet, along said Westerly side of Reagan Chase right-of-way to a point; thence Southerly, southeasterly and Easterly along a curve to the left having a radius of 50.00 feet and an arc length of 107.41 feet, being subtended by a chord of South 29 degrees 03 minutes 31 seconds East for a distance of 87.92 feet, along the Westerly, southwesterly and Southerly side of Reagan Chase right-of-way to a point; thence South 00 degrees 36 minutes 29 seconds East for a distance of 92.16 feet along the Westerly line of Lot 19, College Walk, Unit VII, to the southwesterly corner of said Lot 19; thence North 85 degrees 43 minutes 06 seconds East for a distance of 217.20 feet along the Southerly line of said Lot 18 and Lot 19, College Walk, Unit VII, to the southeasterly corner of said Lot 18; thence South 37 degrees 02 minutes 56 seconds East for a distance of 48.01 feet to a point; thence South 52 degrees 48 minutes 46 seconds East for a distance of 57.00 feet to a point; thence South 25 degrees 48 minutes 44 seconds East for a distance of 90.00 feet to a point; thence South 24 degrees 34 minutes 07 seconds East for a distance of 99.24 feet to a point; thence South 28 degrees 00 minutes 44 seconds East for a distance of 99.00 feet to a point; thence North 68 degrees 11 minutes 32 seconds East for a distance of 394.75 feet to a point on the line separating Land Lots 141 and 142 of said district; thence South 00 degrees 14 minutes 52 seconds West for a distance of 23.65 feet along said line separating Land Lots 141 and 142, district, to a point; thence North 88 degrees 00 minutes 32 seconds East for a distance of 25.52 feet to a point on the shoreline of Lake Louise; thence North 01 degrees 59 minutes 28 seconds West for a distance of 44.80 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 22 degrees 50 minutes 56 seconds East for a distance of 82.38 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 33 degrees 32 minutes 29 seconds East for a distance of 63.04 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 19 degrees 15 minutes 57 seconds East for a distance of 59.52 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 02 degrees 23 minutes 30 seconds East for a distance of 46.73 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 14 degrees 38 minutes 00 seconds East for a distance of 64.48 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 68 degrees 03 minutes 39 seconds East for a distance of 62.60 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 82 degrees 29 minutes 05 seconds East for a distance of 75.92 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 87 degrees 34 minutes 59 seconds East for a distance of 81.10 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 76 degrees 35 minutes 08 seconds East for a distance of 24.14 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 85 degrees 05 minutes 34 seconds East for a distance of 44.77 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 55 degrees 16 minutes 41 seconds East for a distance of 52.99 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 68 degrees 05 minutes 02 seconds East for a distance of 51.92 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 08 degrees 29 minutes 29 seconds East for a distance of 53.36 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 06 degrees 15 minutes 38 seconds East for a distance of 45.30 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 73 degrees 59 minutes 51 seconds East for a distance of 23.23 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 35 degrees 10 minutes 19 seconds East for a distance of 60.48 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 42 degrees 40 minutes 14 seconds East for a distance of 53.23 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 88 degrees 07 minutes 43 seconds East for a distance of 61.24 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 79 degrees 36 minutes 51 seconds East for a distance of 84.26 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 87 degrees 24 minutes 44 seconds East for a distance of 61.30 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 88 degrees 09 minutes 03 seconds East for a distance of 58.57 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 74 degrees 21 minutes 29 seconds East for a distance of 56.00 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence North 75 degrees 52 minutes 34 seconds East for a distance of 74.58 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 41 degrees 23 minutes 19 seconds East for a distance of 75.55 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 69 degrees 23 minutes 44 seconds West for a distance of 68.09 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 65 degrees 06 minutes 14 seconds West for a distance of 82.45 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 67 degrees 16 minutes 22 seconds West for a distance of 61.94 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 20 degrees 21 minutes 00 seconds West for a distance of 57.91 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 28 degrees 09 minutes 08 seconds West for a distance of 79.44 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 41 degrees 46 minutes 35 seconds West for a distance of 65.26 feet along said shoreline to a point; thence South 01 degrees 28 minutes 34 seconds West for a distance of 417.46 feet to a point; thence South 88 degrees 20 minutes 19 seconds East for a distance of 136.28 feet to a point; thence South 01 degrees 48 minutes 13 seconds West for a distance of 218.19 feet to a point on said Northerly side of Lake Harbin Road right-of-way; thence Easterly along a curve to the right having a radius of 746.68 feet and an arc length of 214.44 feet, being subtended by a chord of North 74 degrees 42 minutes 42 seconds East for a distance of 213.70 feet, along said Northerly side of Lake Harbin Road right-of-way to a point; thence North 00 degrees 56 minutes 31 seconds East for a distance of 307.47 feet to a point; thence South 89 degrees 20 minutes 40 seconds East for a distance of 120.05 feet to a point; thence South 00 degrees 37 minutes 15 seconds West for a distance of 49.91 feet to a point; thence South 89 degrees 37 minutes 29 seconds East for a distance of 200.64 feet to a point; thence North 00 degrees 48 minutes 23 seconds East for a distance of 12.58 feet to a point; thence South 89 degrees 11 minutes 37 seconds East for a distance of 200.00 feet to a point; thence North 00 degrees 39 minutes 25 seconds East for a distance of 356.94 feet to a point; thence South 89 degrees 55 minutes 46 seconds East for a distance of 485.80 feet to a point; thence North 01 degrees 30 minutes 09 seconds East for a distance of 163.39 feet to a point; thence North 89 degrees 54 minutes 59 seconds East for a distance of 244.07 feet to a point on the Westerly side of Maddox Road right-of-way; thence North 20 degrees 21 minutes 20 seconds West for a distance of 613.07 feet along said Westerly side of Maddox Road right-of-way to a point; thence South 87 degrees 20 minutes 03 seconds West for a distance of 311.28 feet to a point; thence North 05 degrees 56 minutes 29 seconds West for a distance of 71.52 feet to a point; thence South 87 degrees 44 minutes 30 seconds West for a distance of 200.06 feet to a point; thence North 76 degrees 21 minutes 31 seconds West for a distance of 284.11 feet to a point; thence North 19 degrees 26 minutes 29 seconds East for a distance of 262.41 feet to a point on the southwesterly side of Marion Lane right-of-way; thence North 66 degrees 41 minutes 50 seconds West for a distance of 240.68 feet along said southwesterly side of Marion Lane right-of-way to a point; thence northwesterly and Westerly along a curve to the left having a radius of 332.07 feet and an arc length of 177.85 feet, being subtended by a chord of North 82 degrees 08 minutes 02 seconds West for a distance of 175.73 feet, along said southwesterly side and the Southerly side of Marion Lane right-of-way to a point; thence South 82 degrees 38 minutes 16 seconds West for a distance of 76.86 feet along said Southerly side of Marion Lane right-of-way to a point; thence Westerly, southwesterly, Southerly and southeasterly along a curve to the left having a radius of 194.07 feet and an arc length of 416.41 feet, being subtended by a chord of South 20 degrees 25 minutes 39 seconds West for a distance of 341.00 feet, along the Southerly, southeasterly and northeasterly side of Marion Lane right-of- way to a point; thence South 48 degrees 31 minutes 50 seconds West for a distance of 60.00 feet to a point on the southwesterly side of said Marion Lane right-of-way, said point being the most Easterly corner of Lot 9, Idlewood Estates, Unit One; thence South 72 degrees 04 minutes 16 seconds West for a distance of 421.51 feet along the Southerly line of said Lot 9 to the most Southerly corner of said Lot 9; thence South 00 degrees 17 minutes 33 seconds West for a distance of 250.26 feet to a point; thence North 89 degrees 45 minutes 21 seconds West for a distance of 185.02 feet to a point; thence South 00 degrees 07 minutes 32 seconds West for a distance of 115.93 feet to a point; thence South 84 degrees 57 minutes 45 seconds West for a distance of 199.19 feet to a point on said line separating Land Lots 141 and 142; thence North 00 degrees 55 minutes 16 seconds East for a distance of 236.53 feet along said line separating Land Lots 141 and 142 to a point; thence South 87 degrees 20 minutes 28 seconds West for a distance of 190.09 feet to a point; thence North 10 degrees 29 minutes 58 seconds West for a distance of 169.28 feet to a point; thence North 66 degrees 10 minutes 01 seconds East for a distance of 236.85 feet to the intersection of said line separating Land Lots 141 and 142 and the northwesterly side of Carriage Drive right-of-way; thence North 00 degrees 55 minutes 16 seconds West for a distance of 664.59 feet along said line separating Land Lots 141 and 142 to a point on the Southerly side of Old Rex Morrow Road right-of-way, said point also being the most Northerly corner of Lot 10, Block "B", Idlewood West Subdivision; thence Westerly along a curve to the right having a radius of 2184.92 feet and an arc length of 118.67 feet being subtended by a chord of South 69 degrees 32 minutes 44 seconds West for a distance of 118.65 feet along said Southerly side of Old Rex Morrow Road right-of-way to a point; thence South 71 degrees 06 minutes 06 seconds West for a distance of 410.29 feet along said Southerly side of Old Rex Morrow Road right-of-way to a point; thence Westerly along a curve to the right having a radius of 1336.31 feet and an arc length of 385.18 feet, being subtended by a chord of South 79 degrees 21 minutes 33 seconds West for a distance of 383.85 feet, along said Southerly side of Old Rex Morrow Road right-of-way to the northeasterly corner of Lot 1, College Walk, Unit VII; thence South 11 degrees 31 minutes 45 seconds East for a distance of 847.05 feet along the Easterly line of Lots 1- 13, College Walk, Unit VII, to the southeasterly corner of said Lot 13; thence South 79 degrees 37 minutes 26 seconds West for a distance of 91.83 feet along the Southerly line of said Lot 13 to the southwesterly corner of said Lot 13 on the Easterly side of Reagan Chase right-of-way; thence South 84 degrees 02 minutes 38 seconds West for a distance of 50.28 feet across said Reagan Chase right-of-way to the southeasterly corner of Lot 25, College Walk, Unit VII on said Westerly side of Reagan Chase right-of-way; thence South 74 degrees 28 minutes 09 seconds West for a distance of 150.39 feet along the Southerly line of said Lot 25 to the southwesterly corner of said Lot 25; thence North 12 degrees 16 minutes 44 seconds West for a distance of 14.96 feet along the Westerly line of said Lot 25 to a point; thence North 23 degrees 19 minutes 56 seconds West for a distance of 59.81 feet along said Westerly line of Lot 25 to the northwesterly corner of said Lot 25; thence North 79 degrees 37 minutes 26 seconds East for a distance of 53.34 feet along the northwesterly line of said Lot 25 to the southwesterly corner of Lot 26, College Walk, Unit VII; thence North 10 degrees 22 minutes 34 seconds West for a distance of 300.00 feet along the Westerly line of Lots 26-30, College Walk, Unit VII, to the northwesterly corner of said Lot 30; thence North 79 degrees 37 minutes 26 seconds East for a distance of 110.00 feet to the northeasterly corner of said Lot 30 on said Westerly side of Reagan Chase right-of-way; thence North 10 degrees 22 minutes 34 seconds West for a distance of 378.10 feet along said Northerly side of Reagan Chase right-of-way to a point; thence northeasterly along a curve to the right having a radius of 469.14 feet and an arc length of 84.14 feet, being subtended by a chord of North 05 degrees 14 minutes 18 seconds West for a distance of 84.03 feet, along said Westerly side of Reagan Chase right-of-way to a point; thence North 00 degrees 05 minutes 35 seconds West for a distance of 45.34 feet along said Westerly side of Reagan Chase right-of-way to a point on said Southerly side of Old Rex Morrow Road right-of-way; thence South 89 degrees 53 minutes 44 seconds West for a distance of 38.04 feet along said Southerly side of Old Rex Morrow Road right-of-way to the northeasterly corner of Lot 1, College Walk, Unit V; thence South 08 degrees 32 minutes 49 seconds West for a distance of 154.87 feet along the Easterly line of Lots 1, 2 and 3, College Walk, Unit V, to a point; thence South 00 degrees 34 minutes 15 seconds West for a distance of 125.23 feet along the Easterly line of Lots 3 and 4, College Walk, Unit V, to a point; thence South 28 degrees 31 minutes 03 seconds West for a distance of 227.68 feet along the southeasterly line of Lots 4 and 5, College Walk, Unit V, to the most Southerly corner of said Lot 5; thence North 37 degrees 09 minutes 18 seconds West for a distance of 168.90 feet along the southwesterly line of said Lot 5 to the northeasterly corner of Lot 62, College Walk, Unit VI; thence South 03 degrees 18 minutes 00 seconds East for a distance of 61.29 feet along the Easterly line of said Lot 62 to the southeasterly corner of said Lot 62; thence South 05 degrees 42 minutes 08 seconds East for a distance of 60.81 feet along the Easterly line of Lot 63, College Walk, Unit VI, to the southeasterly corner of said Lot 63; thence South 01 degrees 07 minutes 13 seconds East for a distance of 61.83 feet along the Easterly line of said Lot 64 to the southeasterly corner of said Lot 64; thence South 02 degrees 56 minutes 02 seconds East for a distance of 61.38 feet along the Easterly line of Lot 65, College Walk, Unit VI, to the Southerly corner of said Lot 65; thence South 22 degrees 45 minutes 15 seconds East for a distance of 60.54 feet along the northeasterly line of Lot 66, College Walk, Unit VI, to the southeasterly corner of said Lot 66; thence South 22 degrees 49 minutes 27 seconds East for a distance of 60.47 feet along the northeasterly line of Lot 67, College Walk, Unit VI, to the southeasterly corner of said Lot 67; thence South 25 degrees 38 minutes 34 seconds East for a distance of 60.39 feet along the northeasterly line of Lot 68, College Walk, Unit VI, to the southeasterly corner of said Lot 68; thence South 06 degrees 57 minutes 30 seconds East for a distance of 79.75 feet along the Easterly line of Lot 69, College Walk, Unit VI, to the southeasterly corner of said Lot 69; thence South 56 degrees 37 minutes 23 seconds East for a distance of 64.46 feet along the northeasterly line of Lot 72, College Walk, Unit VI, to the northeasterly corner of said Lot 72; thence South 41 degrees 50 minutes 51 seconds East for a distance of 113.88 feet along the northeasterly line of Lot 73, College Walk, Unit VI, to the most Easterly corner of said Lot 73; thence South 07 degrees 57 minutes 53 seconds East for a distance of 150.13 feet along the Easterly line of Lot 74, College Walk, Unit VI, to the Southerly corner of said Lot 74; thence North 56 degrees 30 minutes 26 seconds West for a distance of 125.00 feet along the southwesterly line of said Lot 74 to the southwesterly corner of said Lot 74 on the southeasterly side of Harvard Court right-of-way; thence southwesterly and Westerly along a curve to the right having a radius of 50.00 feet and an arc length of 50.94 feet, being subtended by a chord of South 55 degrees 17 minutes 11 seconds West for a distance of 48.76 feet, along the southeasterly and Southerly side of Harvard Court right-of-way to the northeasterly corner of Lot 76, College Walk, Unit VI; thence South 19 degrees 51 minutes 37 seconds East for a distance of 188.17 feet along the Easterly line of said Lot 76 to the southeasterly corner of said Lot 76 on the Northerly line of Morrow Woods subdivision; thence Westerly along said Northerly line of Morrow Woods Subdivision 1,200 feet, more or less, to the Easterly line of Candlelight Estates; thence North 01 degrees 09 minutes 00 seconds East a distance of 1,035 feet along said Easterly line of Candlelight Estates to a point; thence North 56 degrees 08 minutes 04 seconds West a distance of 93.90 feet along said Easterly line of Candlelight Estates to a point; thence North 00 degrees 42 minutes 04 seconds West a distance of 127 feet to a point on said Southerly side of Old Rex Morrow Road right- of-way; thence North 01 degrees 09 minutes 01 second East a distance of 80 feet across said Old Rex Morrow Road right-of-way to a point on the Northerly side of said Old Rex Morrow Road right-of-way; thence North 89 degrees 10 minutes 30 seconds West a distance of 388.8 feet, more or less, along said Northerly side of Old Rex Morrow Road right-of-way to a point on the Easterly original city limit line; thence North along the East original city limit line 2,511 feet, more or less, to a point on the Southerly line of property conveyed to Clayton County Board of Education by Dallas P. Williams as recorded in Deed Book 453, Page 664, Clayton County records; thence Easterly along the Southerly line of said tract 1,200 feet to the southeasterly corner of said tract; thence Northerly along the Easterly line of said tract 525 feet to the Northerly corner of said tract; thence Westerly along the Northerly line of said tract 1,100 feet, more or less, to a point on said Easterly original city limit line; thence Northerly 400 feet, more or less, along said Easterly original city limit line to the Northerly original corner of the City of Morrow; thence Westerly along the Northerly original city limit line one (1) mile to said original northwesterly corner and the Point of Beginning. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, 4-14-09) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 

 
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
CHAPTER 1. - USE OF THE CODE AND PENALTIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1-1-1. - How code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Morrow, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1977, § 11-1001) 
Sec. 1-1-2. - Rules of construction. 
Unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council, in the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed: 
City. The word "city" shall mean the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege, or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the part having that privilege or duty, shall have through the following Monday to exercise that privilege or to discharge such duty. 
Council. The word "council" shall mean the mayor and council of the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
County. The word "county" shall mean the County of Clayton, Georgia unless otherwise indicated. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision or section of this Code appears requiring the head of a department or other appointed officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection, unless the terms of the provision of section expressly designate otherwise. 
Gender. A work importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be appointed to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving that authority to a majority of those persons or officers. 
May. The word "may" is always discretionary and not mandatory. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words used in the plural shall include the singular number. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Other officials or officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "city clerk," "chief of police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commission, departments, etc., of the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next and next after, respectively. 
Shall. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. 
Signature and subscription. Signature and subscription shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The word "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated rights-of-way. 
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days, unless otherwise specified. 
Written, in writing. "Written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year, except as may pertain to fiscal year which may be different than a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The underlined [or boldface] catchlines of sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of the sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so deemed when any of the sections including the catchlines are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1977, § 11-1003) 
Sec. 1-1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1977, § 11-1004) 
Sec. 1-1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code. 
(Code 1977, § 11-1005) 
Sec. 1-1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein.When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, the repealed portion may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: 
"That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Morrow, Georgia is hereby amended to read as follows:  (Set out new provisions in full)." 
(c)  When the mayor and council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the mayor and council desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance: 
"Section _____. It is the intention of the mayor and council and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Morrow, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish that intention." 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(e)  When necessary, sections and subsections to the Code may be renumbered by the official codifier for the city to fulfill the intent of the governing body but all such changes shall be approved in advance by the city attorney. 
Sec. 1-1-7. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change, or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1977, § 11-1007) 
Sec. 1-1-8. - General penalty. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance, rule, regulation or order of the city any act is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in the Code or any ordinance, rule, regulation or order the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished at the discretion of the municipal court judge up to the maximum allowed by the City Charter. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1-8) 
Note— See the editor's footnote to Art. VII of the Charter. 
Charter reference— Fines, imprisonment or sentencing to public labor, § 7.03. 
State Law reference— Alternative sentencing, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8. 
Sec. 1-1-9. - Continuing violations. 
A violation of the City Code of Ordinances or City Regulations to any extent whatsoever for which a citation may be, is or has been issued shall be considered a new violation and a separate violation for each date of continuance of such violation from the first date of written notification or citation by the city code enforcement personnel or police department personnel and may be treated as such by the recorder's [municipal] court by utilizing the general provisions for penalties ascribed in section 7.03 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 89-10, § 1, 7-11-89) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-10, § 1, adopted July 11, 1989, pertaining to continuing violations, did not specify manner of codification; hence, such provisions have been designated by the editor as § 1-1-9. 
Title 2 - GENERAL GOVERNMENT 
CHAPTER 1. - GOVERNING BODY 

Sec. 2-1-1. - Regular meetings; special meetings. 
(a)  Regular meetings of the mayor and council shall be held at the Morrow Municipal Complex on the second and fourth Tuesday of each month at 7:30 p.m. Work sessions shall begin at 6:30 p.m. preceding the regular meetings, except on the second Tuesday of each month when the work session may begin at 5:30 p.m. 
(b)  Where the day for a regular meeting falls upon a day which is a legal holiday in this state, the meeting may be held upon a day and at an hour to be designated by the mayor at least four days before the legal holiday, at which meeting all matters shall be taken up which might have come before the meeting as regularly set. 
(c)  Special meetings of the mayor and council may be held on call as provided in the city charter. 
(d)  Only business stated in the call may be transacted at a special meeting. 
(e)  Notice of any special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after a special meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in the council member's presence. 
(f)  Any meeting of the mayor and council may be continued or adjourned from day to day, or for more than one day, but no adjournment shall be for a longer period than until the next regular meeting thereafter. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1001; Ord. No. 2014-09 , § 1, 9-9-14) 
Cross reference— Meetings of governing body, City Charter, § 2.05(a). 
State Law reference— Notice of special and called meetings (Ga. Sunshine Law), O.C.G.A., § 50-14-1; exceptions to open meeting requirements: certain personnel matters, complaints or charges against public officers, investigative sessions, and real estate acquisition discussions, O.C.G.A., § 50-14-4; all meetings of governing body to be open to public, O.C.G.A., § 36-80-1. 
Sec. 2-1-2. - Rules of procedure; order of business. 
Rules of procedure for meetings of the mayor and council shall be Robert's Rules of Order and all matters to be discussed at a meeting shall appear in the meeting agenda, which agenda shall be in such form as approved from time to time by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 2-1-3. - Public meetings; executive sessions; minutes. 
(a)  All meetings of the mayor and council shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible 24 hours prior to each meeting. 
(b)  Executive sessions of the mayor and council may be held only as authorized by Ga. Laws 1972, p. 575 (O.C.G.A., title 50, chapter 14) and as it now or hereafter may be amended. Attendance at executive sessions shall be limited to the mayor and council; provided, however, that the mayor and council shall invite any person as may be required for advice, information and the recording of minutes. 
(c)  The minutes of all meetings of the mayor and council including executive sessions, shall be promptly recorded and the minutes of all public meetings shall be available to the public. 
Cross reference— The city clerk is required to record the minutes and do so in a prescribed manner, City Charter, § 2.10. 
State Law reference— Minutes and public meetings are required by O.C.G.A., § 50-14-1. 
Sec. 2-1-4. - Rules of order and decorum for city council meetings. 
(a)  Rules of decorum. In legislative debate, the mayor and councilmembers shall, to the maximum extent possible, keep their remarks germane to the matter before the city council at that time. Councilmembers shall refrain from attacking the motives and character of the mayor or other councilmembers participating in a debate. 
The mayor and all councilmembers must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. The presiding officer of the council, who shall be the mayor, or in his absence the mayor pro tempore, shall be responsible for maintaining the order and decorum of meetings. All remarks should be directed to the presiding officer and not to individual councilmembers, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate and may be ruled out of order. If the presiding officer fails to enforce order and decorum, another member may raise a point of order, obtain a second, and with support of the majority present, act to enforce said order and decorum. 
(b)  Rules of order. 
(1)  Councilmembers. Members of the city council desiring to speak shall first address the chair, gain recognition by the presiding officer, and confine himself or herself to the question under debate, avoiding personal attacks and indecorous language. 
(2)  Limitation of debate. 
a.  Under the "comments" section of the agenda, each councilmember shall confine his or her remarks to a total of three minutes. 
b.  During other portions of the agenda, general debate, or debate on any particular agenda item, a councilmember shall confine his or her remarks to five minutes. After all who desire to speak on an item have spoken, members wishing to speak a second time shall be given two minutes by the presiding officer. 
(3)  Interruptions. A councilmember, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking except for a point of order and shall hold the floor until completion of his or her remarks or until the allotted time for speaking has elapsed. 
(c)  Purpose. It is not the intent of this section to, in any way, hinder or impair the full and free expression of the competing viewpoints in city council debate. Instead, it is the intent of this section to foster citizen confidence in government through encouraging civil, respectful meetings. The failure to strictly observe these procedures shall not affect the jurisdiction of the city council or invalidate any action taken at a meeting that is otherwise held in conformity with law. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the city council, by majority vote, may grant additional time as requested for comments by either party. 
(Ord. No. 2010-17, §§ 1—3, 6-8-10) 
CHAPTER 2. - REMOVAL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of Ch. 2 by Ord. No. 2011-27, Ord. No. 2001-09, § 1, adopted May 8, 2001, deleted Ch. 2 of Title 2 in its entirety. Formerly, Ch. 2 pertained to elections, and derived from Code 1977, §§ 1-2001, 1-2003, and 1-2004. 

Sec. 2-2-1. - Authority; applicability. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of section 5.16 of the city charter and shall apply to all removal proceedings conducted under section 5.16(b)(1) of the city charter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-27, § 1, 1-18-11) 
Sec. 2-2-2. - Consideration of dismissal hearing; finding of probable cause; notice of charges. 
(a)  When information comes to the mayor and council, pursuant to its investigatory powers under the city charter or by other means, that an elected official or other official appointed under the charter has engaged in conduct that would be grounds for removal under Title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or under such other laws as exist or may hereafter be enacted, the mayor and council shall make an initial determination as to whether probable cause for removal exists. The mayor and council may make such a determination based on live testimony taken by it in open session, through acceptance of a report conducted under its auspices by persons designated to make such an investigation on its behalf, or by other reliable means. To the extent information comes to the mayor and council suggesting grounds for removal exists, the mayor and council retains investigative powers under section 2.15 of the charter and may utilize such powers in any manner it deems appropriate to reach a decision as to whether probable cause exists. The city attorney shall serve as a legal advisor to the mayor and council in making its determination. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall conduct a vote on the probable cause determination. Such determination may be made by adoption of a resolution finding probable cause to exist. Alternatively, a voice motion and vote may be used to make a finding of probable cause. 
(c)  Once probable cause has been found to exist, a written notice shall be prepared detailing the grounds for removal. In addition to detailing grounds for removal, the notice shall provide the time, place and date for hearing of the charges and reference the procedures adopted by the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. A copy of the notice shall be served on the officer against whom removal is sought no less than ten days before any scheduled hearing. The notice may be served by hand delivery or by certified mail. The mayor and council shall convene a hearing as provided for in section 2-2-4 or may appoint a hearing board as provided for in section 2-2-3 to conduct the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2011-27, § 1, 1-18-11) 
Sec. 2-2-3. - Hearing board. 
(a)  The mayor and council, in lieu of conducting a hearing directly, may appoint a hearing board to hear evidence and make a final determination as to whether the official shall be removed from office. The hearing board shall be composed of three impartial persons, each of whom shall (1) be either an attorney licensed to practice law in Georgia or a city manager, (2) possess no less than ten years' experience in local government, and (3) not be involved in any current official capacity with the City of Morrow. 
(b)  Members of the hearing board shall be compensated from time to time at an amount to be set by the mayor and council. 
(c)  In the event a hearing board is constituted, any action taken by a majority of the hearing board shall be considered final action of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2011-27, § 1, 1-18-11) 
Sec. 2-2-4. - Hearing on charges. 
(a)  Hearing on the charges shall be convened at such time, day and place as described in the notice of hearing. The hearing board, if such a board is conducting the hearing, shall designate one of its members as a chairperson to preside over the hearing. The hearing of evidence shall be open to the public. 
(b)  At the public hearing, the official charged shall be entitled to: 
(1)  Be represented by privately retained counsel of his or her choice, 
(2)  Present his or her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence, to be given under oath or by affirmation; 
(3)  Submit rebuttal evidence; and 
(4)  Conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. 
(c)  Any oral or documentary evidence may be received, but the hearing body as a matter of policy shall provide for the exclusion of irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence. The hearing body shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence prevailing in the courts of law or equity. 
(d)  A full record of the hearing shall be prepared and maintained by the city, which record shall be open to the public and available for inspection. Any person may request a copy of the record upon payment of the full cost thereof. 
(e)  The city attorney may serve as legal advisor to the hearing body. 
(f)  Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing body shall deliberate upon the evidence presented. Deliberations shall be closed to the public. The hearing body shall make findings of fact based on the evidence presented. Where the hearing body determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the official has committed the conduct as alleged in the notice, the decision shall be for removal. Where the hearing body determines the official has not committed the alleged actions by a preponderance of the evidence, the action shall be dismissed. 
(g)  The hearing body shall prepare a written decision, including findings of fact, its conclusions and its final decision. A copy of the notice shall be provided to the official upon its completion by either hand delivery or certified mail. The hearing body's notice shall be a final action of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-27, § 1, 1-18-11) 
Sec. 2-2-5. - Appeals. 
An official disputing the action of the hearing body shall have 30 days to appeal the decision to Superior Court of Clayton County by writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2011-27, § 1, 1-18-11) 
Sec. 2-2-6. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
(1)  "Hearing body" shall mean either the mayor and council or a hearing board designated pursuant to section 2-2-3 by the mayor and council and designated to act in the mayor and council's stead. 
(2)  "Official" shall mean the elected official or officer appointed pursuant to the city charter against whom removal is sought prior to the expiration of that official's term of office. 
(Ord. No. 2011-27, § 1, 1-18-11) 
CHAPTER 3. - ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION 
ARTICLE A. - CITY MANAGER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to employ city manager, § 3.04. 

Sec. 2-3-1. - City manager. 
There is hereby created a position of city manager of the City of Morrow. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3001) 
Sec. 2-3-2. - Responsibility, generally. 
The city manager shall devote his time and attention to the affairs of the city and shall be responsible to the mayor and council for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city over which he has jurisdiction. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3002) 
Sec. 2-3-3. - Powers and duties. 
Subject to the control, direction and supervision of the mayor and council, the city manager shall have power and it shall be his duty: 
(1)  To see that all laws and ordinances and the provisions of the city charter are enforced; 
(2)  To see that the business and affairs of the city are efficiently organized and handled; 
(3)  To exercise administrative control over all regular departments and divisions of the city, provided that the city manager shall not have or exercise any control over the planning and zoning commission, or other special board, commission, committee, authority or body set up under any general law or any ordinance of the mayor and council; 
(4)  To serve as personnel director under the guidance of the city personnel management system, provided that nothing herein shall prevent the mayor and council from creating, abolishing, consolidating, altering or modifying departments; 
(5)  To attend the meetings of the mayor and council, with the right to take part in all discussions, but have no vote; 
(6)  To recommend to the mayor and council for adoption any measures he may deem necessary or expedient; 
(7)  To prepare and submit to the mayor and council an annual budget; 
(8)  To keep the mayor and council fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(9)  To make and execute all lawful contracts on behalf of the city as to matters within his jurisdiction, except as may be otherwise provided by law or by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council; provided that no contract, purchase or obligation involving more than $2,500.00 shall be valid or binding until approved by the mayor and council; 
(10)  To submit to the mayor and council any reports he may deem necessary or as may be required of him by the mayor and council; 
(11)  To perform any other lawful duties as may be required by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council; and 
(12)  To give bond in the penal sum fixed by the mayor and council, not less than $20,000.00, payable to the city and its successors and assigns, for the benefit of the city and for the use and benefit of the public to secure and indemnify the city and each and all of the public, by reason of his corruption, malfeasance and/or nonfeasance in the performance of his duties. The bond premium shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3003) 
Charter reference— Service as purchasing agent, Char. § 3.04(b). 
Sec. 2-3-4. - Tenure. 
The city manager, as employed from time to time, shall serve at the pleasure of the governing body and shall be subject to the provisions of the city charter which provide for a city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3004) 
Charter reference— City manager, Char. § 3.04. 
Secs. 2-3-5—2-3-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - CITY CLERK[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— City clerk, Char. § 2.10. 

Sec. 2-3-11. - City clerk; duties. 
In addition to the duties of the city clerk under the City Charter, the city clerk shall be responsible for performance of the following duties: 
(1)  To receive all applications or petitions made to the city and transmit them to the city manager for presentation to the mayor and council at the meeting of council next succeeding the receipt thereof; 
(2)  To be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; 
(3)  To carefully preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of some other office, and to maintain a proper index to all records and documents so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had; and 
(4)  To perform any other duties as may be assigned to the city clerk by the city manager or the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 1, 4-25-17) 
Secs. 2-3-12—2-3-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - CITY ATTORNEY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— City attorney, Char. § 3.03. 

Sec. 2-3-21. - City attorney; appointment. 
The city attorney shall be appointed by a majority vote of the mayor and council and shall serve at their pleasure. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3021) 
Sec. 2-3-22. - Powers and duties. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in that capacity shall: 
(1)  Advise the mayor, council, its committees or any city officer, when thereto requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of city business; 
(2)  Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by the mayor and council or any committee thereof; 
(3)  Give his opinion upon any legal matter or question submitted to him by the city manager or a majority vote of the mayor and council; 
(4)  Attend any council meetings in their entirety upon request of any member for the purpose of giving the mayor and council any legal advice requested of its members; 
(5)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested; and approve, as to form, all bonds and city contracts; 
(6)  Prepare, when authorized by the mayor and council, charges and complaints against, and appear in the recorder's court in the prosecution of persons charged with a violation of this Code or of any regulations and see to the full enforcement of all civil judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the city; 
(7)  Defend any and all suits and actions at law or equity brought against the city, unless otherwise directed by mayor and council; 
(8)  Make immediate report to the mayor and council of the outcome of any litigation in which the city has an interest; 
(9)  Keep complete and accurate records of the following, which records shall forever remain the property of the city: 
a.  All suits in which the city had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties, the nature of the action, the disposition of the case or its status, if pending, and the briefs of counsel; and 
b.  All written opinions prepared by the city attorney and all certificates or abstracts of title furnished by the city attorney to the city or any department or official thereof; and 
(10)  Render any other legal services as may be required by the mayor and council. 
Secs. 2-3-23—2-3-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The city participates in the joint municipal employees benefit system pursuant to Ord. No. 77-08, adopted June 28, 1977, as amended, and provides insurance to city employees pursuant to a plan adopted by Ord. No. 76-28, adopted Dec. 14, 1976. 

Sec. 2-3-30. - Compensation for appointed department officers and directors. 
All salaries for appointed department officers and directors shall be established by vote of mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-04 , § 1, 6-9-15) 
Sec. 2-3-31. - Departments established. 
(a)  The following departments of the city are hereby established: 
(1)  Administration. 
(2)  Police. 
(3)  Fire. 
(4)  Public works and services. 
(5)  Finance. 
(6)  Planning and economic development. 
(b)  The supervision and control of each department is vested in an administrative head that is subject to the direction of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 98-01, § 1, 4-14-98; Ord. No. 2011-35, § 1, 12-13-11; Ord. No. 2018-11 , § 1, 6-26-18) 
Charter reference— City manager as purchasing agent, Char. § 3.04(b); city manager as personnel officer, Char. § 3.04(a). 
Sec. 2-3-32. - Rules and regulations adopted. 
The personnel rules and regulations and classification and pay plan of June, 1986, adopted by Ordinance No. 86-10, August 12, 1986, as now or hereafter amended, is incorporated into this Code by reference as fully as though set out at length. A current copy of the personnel regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk where it shall be available for inspection by the public. 
Sec. 2-3-33. - Safety and loss prevention control. 
The "comprehensive safety and loss prevention control program," adopted by Ordinance No. 91-03, is incorporated into this Code by reference as fully as though set out at length. Copies of such program are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 91-03, § 1, 5-28-91) 
Editor's note— At the instruction of the city the comprehensive safety and loss prevention program referenced above has not been set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection as indicated. Inasmuch as provisions of Ord. No. 91-03, § 1, adopted May 28, 1991, did not specify manner of codification, designation as § 2-3-33 has been at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 2-3-34. - Power to cite for violations. 
Each of the following persons is hereby empowered by the mayor and city council to issue citations for violations of city laws and ordinances to be heard in municipal court: 
(1)  Chief of police and all police officers; 
(2)  Code enforcement officer; 
(3)  Director of public works; 
(4)  Fire chief; and 
(5)  Fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 96-06, § 1, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 2-3-35. - Open Records Act, defense of officers and employees. 
It shall be the policy of the city to provide a defense to its public officers and employees in any civil, criminal, or administrative proceeding brought or maintained against them as a result of a violation or alleged violation of the Georgia Open Records Law, including payment of all fines and penalties assessed or imposed therein. Such defense shall include payment of all reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, discovery costs, witness fees and compensation, and all other like costs, expenses, and fees incurred, directly or indirectly, as a result of or arising from said proceeding. Said costs shall be deemed and considered as additional compensation to and a term of employment of the public officer or employee. Upon any officer or employee being served with legal process challenging their compliance with said law, the officer or employee shall immediately notify the city attorney, who shall provide competent counsel for the defense of the action. 
(Ord. No. 2000-06, § 1, 4-11-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2000-06, § 1, adopted Apr. 11, 2000, pertained to defense of officers and employees in cases relating to the Open Records Act. Such ordinance did not specify manner of codification, but has been included herein by the editor as § 2-3-35. 
CHAPTER 4. - MUNICIPAL COURT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Note— See the editor's footnote to Art. VII of the Charter. 
Charter reference— Municipal court established, Char., Art. VII. 
State Law reference— Criminal jurisdiction of magistrates, O.C.G.A., § 15-10-50; cash bonds, O.C.G.A., § 17-6-10; municipal courts, O.C.G.A., § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-4-1. - Sessions of court; when held, generally; opening announcement. 
(a)  Regular sessions of the municipal court shall be held at such hours and days as fixed from time to time by the municipal court judge, provided any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court or no cases are ready for trial. 
(b)  The general form of opening announcement may contain the following: 
(1)  A command that attention by all is required; 
(2)  The name of the court; 
(3)  A declaration that court is in session; 
(4)  Name of municipal court judge presiding. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5001) 
Sec. 2-4-2. - Special sessions of court. 
The municipal court judge may hold special sessions when, in his or her judgment, it is necessary or there is urgent cause for the trial of accused persons, before the next regular sitting of the court. The necessity or urgency of the cause shall be presumed from the fact of a session being held. All defendants shall have at least 48 hours' notice of the session. 
Sec. 2-4-3. - Police attendance. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or some member of the police force designated by the municipal court judge, to attend each session of the court to act as bailiff. The chief shall be responsible for seeing that each police officer making the arrest or having knowledge of the case for or against the defendant attends the trial of any person brought before the municipal court judge. 
Sec. 2-4-4. - Clerk of court; subpoenas; dockets. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk, or an appropriate designee, to attend each session of the municipal court and serve as clerk of court. 
(b)  The clerk of court shall prepare all subpoenas and warrants and maintain a docket thereof that will show the name of the person for whom the subpoena or warrant was issued, its date, at whose instance it was issued, and to whom delivered. 
(c)  The municipal court judge may require that the clerk maintain a duplicate court docket and use the signed duplicate copy of the docket to make necessary entries in the master docket after each session of court. If a duplicate docket is kept, the master or original shall be retained by the municipal court judge and the duplicate shall be examined for completeness and signed by the recorder. 
Cross reference— Authority to grant continuance, § 2-4-7. 
Sec. 2-4-5. - Jury trial; bind over. 
(a)  All charges cognizable as violations of state laws shall be handled by a commitment hearing, provided however, that they may be adjudicated in the municipal court whenever the court would have jurisdiction over the offense, and the defendant, in writing, waives any right to trial by jury. 
(b)  When a defendant is bound over to the appropriate state court, he or she may be released under any of the following methods: 
(1)  If the defendant has made bond to the city he or she may be released on the same bond. 
(2)  If the defendant has not made bond before being bound over, he or she shall make bond at the county jail book-in and an arraignment notice will then be given to the defendant and the defendant must be delivered, in person, by the city police, to the county authorities. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5005) 
Sec. 2-4-6. - Appearance bond; procedure for accepting. 
Offenses against the ordinances of the city shall be bailable as follows: 
(1)  The arresting officer, chief of police, municipal court judge or any other officer designated by the chief of police, may accept bond of the accused payable to the city conditioned upon the appearance of the accused at the next session or any subsequent session of the municipal court as stated in the bond, to answer the charge. 
(2)  The bond shall be in writing in an amount established in a schedule approved by the mayor and council. 
(3)  A person arrested for violations of a city ordinance may be released on his own recognizance or may deposit, in lieu of an appearance bond, his or her driver's license with the arresting officer, the police chief or the municipal court judge if, in any of these officials' determination, the person will appear at the time set for the court appearance. 
(4)  Any person released under subsection (3) above shall receive a receipt for any driver's license deposited or, if released on the person's own recognizance, shall sign and receive a copy of the citation or ticket describing the violation for which the person was arrested. 
(5)  All persons arrested or notified by citation or ticket of parking violations shall be released on their own recognizance. 
Sec. 2-4-7. - Continuance of cases. 
Continuances shall be made only for good cause shown. Prior to the scheduled court appearance the clerk of court or a designee of the municipal court judge may grant continuations of a case. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5007) 
Sec. 2-4-8. - Forfeiture of appearance bonds. 
(a)  The municipal court judge shall call the case in its regular order, and, if the accused is not in court and does not answer the call, and, if no good and sufficient reason is given for nonappearance, the recorder shall enter on the docket where the case is stated "bond forfeited," or similar words. 
(b)  Upon forfeiture of any bond, the cash deposited as security shall be paid to the city clerk, and it shall become the property of the city. 
(c)  Upon the forfeiture of any bond signed by a person as surety, the city clerk shall issue an execution against the principal and surety on the bond for the amount thereof which shall be collected as tax executions are collected. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5008) 
State Law reference— Offenses against municipalities; forfeiture of bond as no bar to prosecution, O.C.G.A., § 17-6-10. 
Sec. 2-4-9. - Acceptance of pleas. 
Before accepting a plea to an offense charged, the municipal court judge shall in all cases, in language which the defendant can understand, inform the defendant of the nature of the charge and the penalty which may be imposed upon conviction, and shall inform the defendant of his or her fundamental constitutional rights. The fundamental constitutional rights should include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  That the defendant is not required to make any statement and that anything said by the defendant may be used against him; 
(2)  That the defendant may have a lawyer; 
(3)  That the defendant may have the case delayed to give sufficient time to be advised by a lawyer; 
(4)  That the defendant may have a lawyer present during any questioning and proceeding; 
(5)  That the defendant may testify in his or her own behalf; 
(6)  That the defendant may appeal any final decision rendered by the court; 
(7)  That a record of any conviction will become a part of the defendant's record; 
(8)  That the defendant may be admitted to bail in appropriate cases; 
(9)  That the defendant is innocent until proven guilty; 
(10)  That the defendant may have the complaining or material witness present and right to cross-examine; and 
(11)  That the defendant may bring witnesses in his or her own behalf. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5009) 
Sec. 2-4-10. - Pleas. 
(a)  The defendant shall enter one of the following pleas: 
(1)  Guilty; 
(2)  Not guilty; 
(3)  Nolo contendere (with the permission of the court); or 
(4)  A former judgment of conviction or acquittal of the offense charged. 
(b)  If the defendant refuses to enter a plea, the municipal court judge shall enter a plea of not guilty and set the case down for trial. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5010) 
Sec. 2-4-11. - Fines; enforcement by levy and execution; payment in advance of court date. 
(a)  For fines that may be due by any defendant, execution may be issued by the city clerk and collected as tax executions are collected. 
(b)  Persons charged with traffic violations may, prior to the time for their court appearance, plead guilty in writing and pay to the city as their fine the amount set as the appearance bond for the offense charged; except that those persons charged with driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs and those charged with an offense in connection with an automobile collision shall be required in all cases to appear before the court for disposition of the case. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5011) 
Sec. 2-4-12. - Appearance of complaining witnesses. 
A material or complaining witness in any contested prosecution shall appear at the session at which the prosecution is docketed. The prosecution may be dismissed if the material witness fails to appear. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5012) 
Sec. 2-4-13. - Rules of evidence. 
The general rules of evidence shall be applicable in the trial of all cases. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5013) 
Sec. 2-4-14. - Judgment and sentences. 
Upon a judgment or plea of guilty the municipal court judge shall impose sentence. The municipal court judge may: 
(1)  Impose a fine, with or without a commitment for confinement, compulsory work or both; 
(2)  Commit the defendant to confinement, compulsory work or both; 
(3)  Suspend the execution of the sentence in whole or in part; or 
(4)  Defer the execution of the sentence or any portion or portions thereof to one or more fixed dates in the future. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5014) 
Sec. 2-4-15. - Chief judge. 
(a)  The mayor and council may appoint an individual to serve as chief judge to preside over the city's municipal court. The chief judge shall be responsible for the general supervision of the municipal court and shall promulgate all rules necessary for the supervision, conduct, and administration of the court. 
(b)  Any individual appointed as a chief judge under this Code section shall possess such qualifications as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1.1 and shall receive compensation in the amount of $408.67 per session worked to be paid monthly. 
(c)  The chief judge shall serve a term of no less than one year, which will be established in a written agreement between the mayor and council and such judge. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the duration of the term of the chief judge, he or she may be removed from office. Such removal can occur only as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2.1. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the duration of the term of the chief judge, unless the he or she is removed from office, he or she shall serve until his or her successor is appointed. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5015; Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 1, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 2-4-15.1. - Municipal court judge pro tem. 
(a)  The mayor and council may appoint a municipal court judge pro tem, who shall be acting municipal court judge in the absence, disability or disqualification of the chief municipal court judge. The acting municipal court judge shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of the chief municipal court judge when necessary. 
(b)  The municipal court judge pro tem shall possess such qualifications as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1.1 and shall receive compensation in the amount of $408.67 per session worked to be paid monthly 
(c)  The municipal court judge pro tem shall serve a term of no less than one year, which will be established in a written agreement between the mayor and council and such judge. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the duration of the term of the municipal court judge pro tem, he or she may be removed from office. Such removal can occur only as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2.1. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the duration of the term of the municipal court judge pro tem, unless the he or she is removed from office, he or she shall serve until his or her successor is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01 , § 2, 1-10-17) 
Sec. 2-4-16. - Court dates; contempt warrants. 
(a)  Court date will be made known to the defendant at the time of the arrest process and shall be properly indicated on the copy of charges given to the defendant by the arresting officer. 
(b)  Warrants for contempt of court charges may be issued following each session of court. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5016) 
CHAPTER 5. - CODE OF ETHICS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, adopted Aug. 24, 2010, has been included herein as superseding the former Ch. 5, §§ 2-5-1—2-5-7, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2000-08, Arts. I—VI and VIII, adopted May 9, 2000. 

Sec. 2-5-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the policy of the City of Morrow that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all city officials is adopted. 
(b)  This chapter has the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; 
(3)  To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interests in matters coming before the city; and 
(4)  To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(c)  It is the intent of this chapter that city officials shall avoid any action, whether or not specifically prohibited by section 2-5-5 of this chapter, which might result in, or create the appearance of the following: 
(1)  Using public office for private gain; 
(2)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; or 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-5-2. - Political campaigns not covered. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to political contributions; loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns; or the conduct of candidates in such campaigns. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-5-3. - Scope of persons covered. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to the mayor and all members of the city council, as well as to all members of the Morrow Planning and Zoning Board, Morrow Downtown Development Authority, the Morrow Urban Redevelopment Agency, Morrow Housing Authority, and to members appointed to any boards, authorities, commissions, or agencies of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-5-4. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  City official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined, means the mayor and all members of the city council, as well as to all members of the Morrow Planning and Zoning Board, Morrow Downtown Development Authority, the Morrow Urban Redevelopment Agency, Morrow Housing Authority, and to members appointed to any boards, commissions or authorities of the city. 
(2)  Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the mayor and council or other city board, authority, commission or agency, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, authority, commission or agency which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
(3)  Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son, daughter, grandchild of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
(4)  Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matter is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
(5)  Financial interest means any an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
a.  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
b.  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed (i) $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or (ii) ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
c.  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
d.  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(6)  Thing of value means any item, consideration, or benefit other than those exempted under O.C.G.A. Section 16-10-2(a)(2). "Thing of value" shall not include the following: 
a.  Food or beverage consumed at a single meal or event; 
b.  Legitimate salary, benefits, fees, commissions, or expenses associated with a recipient's non-public business, employment, trade, or profession; 
c.  An award, plaque, certificate, memento, or similar item given in recognition of the recipient's civic, charitable, political, professional, or public service; 
d.  Food, beverages, and registration at group events to which all members of the council, board, authority, commission or agency is invited; 
e.  Actual and reasonable expenses for food, beverages, travel, lodging, and registration for a meeting which are provided to permit participation or speaking at the meeting; 
f.  A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business; 
g.  Any gift with a value less than $100.00; 
h.  Promotional items generally distributed to the general public or to city officials; 
i.  A gift from a member of the city official's immediate family; or 
j.  Food, beverage, or expenses afforded city officials, members of their immediate families, or others that are associated with normal and customary business or social functions or activities. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-5-5. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest or from whom the official has received a thing of value, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest or receipt of such thing of value prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself or herself from such discussion or vote, as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any thing of value in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided or exempted by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself or herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  No city official shall use his position in such a manner as to threaten, intimidate or humiliate the public or city workforce. 
(m)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(o)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such expenditure. no city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(p)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other education events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. 
(q)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Morrow. 
(r)  No city official shall use the attorney or attorneys who are employed by or appointed by the city for personal or private business without paying just compensation therefor. 
(s)  No city official shall use his superior position to request or require an employee of the city to: 
(1)  Do clerical or other work on behalf of his or her family, business, social, church, or charitable or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; or 
(3)  Work for him or her personally without offering just compensation. 
(t)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person or entity any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. No city official shall ask or require any city employee to grant or make available to any person or entity any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large, or to exercise any discretionary authority except in accordance with established law. 
(u)  No city official may participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(v)  No city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity shall fail to disclose that interest to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of that entity by or through the city. 
(w)  No city official shall violate any provision of the City Charter or ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-5-6. - Remote interests need not be disclosed. 
Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-5-7. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  The board of ethics of the city shall consist of three residents of the city, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the city council members and a third appointed by the mayor and approved by a majority of the city council. The members of the board of ethics shall designate one of their members as chairperson and another member as recording secretary. 
(b)  All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a city resident while serving on the board. No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the city. No person shall be eligible for membership on the board of ethics who, within the preceding one-year period, has had any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. 
(c)  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualifications to serve as a member of the board. 
(d)  Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternative member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual for that particular complaint. 
(e)  All members of the board of ethics shall serve a term of two years. 
(f)  Members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies, equipment and staff assistance as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(g)  Members of the board of ethics may be removed by affirmative vote of the city governing authority for cause, including, but not limited to, failure to maintain any requirement for qualification to serve on the board of ethics, failure to meet or participate in hearing of complaints pursuant to the procedure adopted by this chapter, or the commission of conduct prohibited by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-5-8. - Complaints. 
(a)  Standing and time for filing complaints. Any complaint alleging a violation of this chapter shall be filed within 90 days of the occurrence of the violation alleged. A complaint alleging a violation of this chapter may be filed only by: 
(1)  An individual who is a resident registered to vote in the city at the time of filing; or 
(2)  An applicant who has sought any decision or exercise of discretionary authority by the city within the 90 days immediately preceding filing of the complaint. 
(b)  Form of complaints; representation. All complaints against city officials shall be typewritten and signed and verified by the complainant and filed with the city clerk. All complaints shall be filed and signed by an attorney licensed to practice law in Georgia and representing the complainant. All complaints shall state, clearly and with particularity, the sections and subsections of this chapter alleged to have been violated, the name of the city official alleged to have violated this chapter, and substantially all facts and sources of information pertinent to the allegations. Upon receipt of a complete complaint, the city clerk shall formally serve the official against whom complaint was made with a complete copy of the complaint. The complainant shall be represented by a licensed Georgia attorney, at his own cost, at all stages of the complaint process; where the complainant's attorney withdraws from representation of the complainant, the complainant shall cause a replacement attorney to file a written notice of representation for the complainant within five business days after withdrawal; failure to comply with this requirement shall be grounds for dismissal of the complaint. The respondent city official may be represented by an attorney at law, but may not be represented by the city attorney nor any attorney employed by the city. 
(c)  Probable cause to proceed with complaint. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro tem, shall appoint one non-interested member of council along with the city attorney, which shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous, or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, a copy of the complaint shall be provided to each member of the board of ethics within seven days of such determination. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-5-9. - Hearings before ethics board. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a complaint found sufficient to establish a charge of ethics violation, the board of ethics shall establish a hearing date. Such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days of receipt of the ethics complaint by the board of ethics. The complainant and respondent city official shall each be given no less than ten days' notice of the hearing date. 
(b)  All meetings of the board of ethics other than deliberations shall be subject to the provisions of the Open Meetings Act, and the city clerk shall facilitate the board of ethics in perfecting all necessary notices and postings for such purpose. 
(c)  The board of ethics shall review the complaint and hold a hearing and such deliberations as are necessary and advisable to investigate the matter and to render a finding. The board of ethics has the power to compel attendance of city officers and employees. The complainant and respondent official each have the right to be present at any hearing, but not at deliberations of the board. Both the complainant, through counsel, and the respondent city official, with or without counsel, shall have the right to present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses. The board of ethics shall disregard hearsay evidence, except as permitted by law, and witnesses shall give testimony under oath, subject to penalties for perjury. 
(d)  Upon completion of hearing and its deliberations, the board of ethics shall render its decision. The decision shall be in writing, signed by all members, and delivered to the city clerk. In no event shall the written decision of the board of ethics be rendered later than 20 calendar days following the hearing date. If the board finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the allegations of the complaint have been sustained and that a violation of the standards of conduct of this chapter has occurred, the board shall forward to the mayor and council a written "finding of violation," which shall specify the section and subsection of this chapter violated and the conduct of the respondent city official which caused the violation, and shall include a recommendation for any appropriate sanctions against the city official found to be in violation. If the board finds that the complainant has failed to meet his or her burden, it shall forward to the mayor and council a "finding of no violation" and the matter shall be dismissed. Provided, however, that a "finding of no violation" on any complaint by the ethics board shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent city official. The city clerk shall notify the mayor, all council members and the respondent city official of any decision of the ethics board. 
(e)  Upon receipt by the city clerk of a written "finding of violation," the mayor and council shall schedule the matter for public hearing upon the issue of sanctions. The mayor and council may, in their sole discretion, make such inquiry and take such evidence upon the matter as they deem relevant to the issue of an appropriate sanction, and thereafter shall either impose a penalty authorized by this article or make a finding that, notwithstanding the "finding of violation" by the ethics board, no penalty is appropriate. Any respondent city official may make a statement or offer evidence to the mayor and council relevant to the issue of an appropriate penalty. The mayor shall have no vote, except in the case of a tie vote by the council. No respondent city official shall vote or participate in the process for imposition of sanctions with regard to any "finding of violation" for which he or she has been found to be in violation. 
(f)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter is subject to the following range of penalties: 
(1)  Censure; 
(2)  Written or oral reprimand; 
(3)  A fine greater than $100.00 but less than $1,000.00; 
(4)  Request for resignation; 
(5)  Removal from office for appointed positions to city boards, commissions, authorities and agencies; 
(6)  Removal from elected office pursuant to the procedure established by Section 5.16 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-5-10. - Appeals. 
Any final decision by the mayor and council shall be reviewable by the Superior Court of Clayton County by writ of certiorari; provided that no failure or refusal of the ethics board or the mayor and council to take action pursuant to this chapter shall be reviewable by superior court. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-5-11. - Bar against subsequent complaint. 
Where a complainant files a complaint for which the ethics board fails to make a "finding of violation" or for which the mayor and council fails to determine that any penalty is appropriate, the complainant shall be barred from filing any subsequent complaint against the same respondent official for a period of 12 months after termination of the original complaint proceeding. Where a complainant files a complaint for which the ethics board fails to make a "finding of violation" or for which the mayor and council fail to determine that any penalty is appropriate, the complainant shall be barred from filing any subsequent complaint against the same respondent city official alleging substantially the same facts and circumstances as the basis for the subsequent complaint. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-5-12. - Respondent's attorneys fees. 
For any complaint which the city does not determine, on its face, to be unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded, or failing to allege facts sufficient to invoke the jurisdiction of the ethics board, the city shall pay reasonable attorney fees not to exceed $5,000.00 for representation and defense of the respondent city official before the ethics board and before the mayor and council. Defense attorney fees up to $5,000.00 shall be approved or disapproved as to reasonableness by the city attorney; reasonable defense attorney fees in excess of $5,000.00 may be approved only by the mayor and council, in their sole discretion, upon request of the respondent city official. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Sec. 2-5-13. - Cumulative nature of provisions. 
This chapter shall be cumulative to any other ordinance, resolution or act now existing. Specifically, this chapter is in addition to Section 2.14 of the City Charter regulating conflicts of interest. 
(Ord. No. 2010-21, § 1, 8-24-10) 
Title 3 - FINANCE 
CHAPTER 1. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fiscal year, char. § 5.01; budget and appropriations, city charter, Sec. 5.02 et seq.; annual audit, publication of financial statement, char. §§ 5.07, 5.08. 
State Law reference— Sale of municipal property, O.C.G.A., § 36-37-6; bonds, O.C.G.A., § 36-38-1 et seq., 36-82-1 et seq.; local government investment pools, O.C.G.A., Sec. 36-83-1 et seq. 

Sec. 3-1-1. - Disbursements. 
All city disbursements shall be made only on the authorization and signature of the mayor, city manager and finance director, or any two thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1001) 
Sec. 3-1-2. - Purchases and contracts. 
(a)  No one may obligate the city on any contract unless it is by a contract or bond ordinance or pursuant to a purchase order issued by the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager shall establish rules and regulations for all purchasing and procurement for the city, including bidding procedures as may be necessary, provided that these rules and regulations and any amendments thereto, shall be approved by the mayor and council prior to their effective date. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1002) 
Sec. 3-1-3. - Budget adoption. 
(a)  The annual budget as adopted each year by the mayor and council is made a part hereof and incorporated into this code by reference as fully as if it were here set forth in full. Copies of the budget shall be available to the public in the office of the city clerk. 
(b)  The budget shall take effect July 1 of each year and shall remain in effect through the following June 30. 
State Law reference— Budgets and audits, O.C.G.A., § 36-81-1 et seq. 
CHAPTER 2. - REVENUE AND TAXATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage excise taxes, § 9-2-91 et seq. 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Delinquent taxes, char. § 5.12; transfer of executions, char. § 5.13. 
State Law reference— Liens for taxes, priority of liens, O.C.G.A., § 48-2-56; grounds and service of summons of garnishment, entries on execution and return, O.C.G.A., § 48-5-360; time, place and manner of sale of real and personal property for taxes due to municipalities, etc., O.C.G.A., § 48-5-359. 

Sec. 3-2-1. - Delinquent taxes; tax liens. 
(a)  For the collection of delinquent taxes, a fi. fa. shall be issued by the city clerk and executed by the chief of police under the procedure provided by the laws of the State of Georgia governing execution of process from the superior court, or by use of any other available process and remedies. 
(b)  A lien shall exist against all property on which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of January 1 of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those for federal, state or county taxes. 
(Code 1977, § 3-2001) 
Secs. 3-2-2—3-2-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - PROPERTY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Deadlines, method, etc., generally, char. § 5.09; maximum levy, char. § 5.10; due date and tax bills, char. § 5.11. 

Sec. 3-2-11. - Property tax rate. 
An annual ad valorem property tax is hereby set and levied upon all personal and real property within the city subject to such taxation under state law. The millage rate therefor shall be established each year by resolution of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 3-2-12. - Assessment. 
All property subject to the city ad valorem property tax shall be assessed for value at 40 percent of its full market value as established by the county for county tax purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 3-2012) 
State Law reference— Determination of fair market value for county and municipal ad valorem property taxation purposes, etc., O.C.G.A., § 48-5-352 et seq. 
Secs. 3-2-13—3-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - HOTEL/MOTEL TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Excise tax on rooms and lodgings, O.C.G.A., § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 3-2-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purpose of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
(1)  Person: An individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
(2)  Operator: Any person operating a hotel or motel in the city, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of the premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating a hotel or motel. 
(3)  Occupant: Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
(4)  Occupancy: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
(5)  Hotel or motel: Any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
(6)  Guest room. A room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
(7)  Rent: The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
(8)  Permanent resident. Any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guest room in a hotel or motel for at least 30 consecutive days next preceding the given date; provided that state and local government officials and employees traveling on official governmental business shall be considered permanent residents pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(g)(3). 
(9)  Return: Any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
(10)  Tax: The tax imposed by this article. 
(11)  Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
(12)  Due date. From the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 1, 11-9-09) 
Sec. 3-2-22. - Imposition and rate of tax; use of proceeds. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed an excise tax on any person or legal entity licensed by or required to pay a business or occupation tax to the City of Morrow for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, campground, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value at a tax at the rate of eight percent of the lodging charges actually collected from the hotel or motel guest and who receives a room, lodging, or accommodation that is subject to the tax. The city's prior levy of a six percent occupancy tax is hereby repealed as of July 1, 2010; provided that such repeal shall not affect any existing liability for amounts still due and owing by operators and the city retains the right to full payment of those outstanding obligations along with any applicable interest and penalties. 
(b)  The tax is authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b), and the proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51(b)(5) and 48-13-51(b)(6), with proceeds collected at the rate of five percent to be allocated towards any uses permitted under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3), proceeds collected at the rate of one and one-half percent to be allocated toward activities of one or more qualified destination marketing organizations designated by the city, and proceeds collected at the rate of one and one-half percent to be allocated toward tourism product development. 
(Code 1977, § 3-2032; Ord. No. 90-14, § 1, 12-11-90; Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 6-8-99; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 1, 6-28-05; Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-9-09; Ord. No. 2015-01 , § 1, 2-10-15) 
Sec. 3-2-23. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every such guest subject to the tax levied under section 3-2-22 shall pay the tax to the person or entity providing the room, lodging, or accommodation. The tax shall be a debt of the person obtaining the room, lodging, or accommodation to the person or entity providing such room, lodging, or accommodation until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law by the person or entity providing such room, lodging, or accommodation in the same manner as authorized for other debts. The person or entity collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the City of Morrow, and the tax remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by section 3-2-22 on the person or entity providing the room, lodging, or accommodation. 
(Code 1977, § 3-2033; Ord. No. 90-14, § 2, 12-11-90; Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 6-8-99) 
Sec. 3-2-24. - Exemptions. 
The tax hereby levied and imposed shall not apply to charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty. The tax shall apply to the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations during the first 30 days of continuous occupancy and shall not apply to charges imposed for any continuous occupancy thereafter. The tax shall not apply to charges made for the use of meeting rooms or other such facilities or to any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge. The tax shall not apply to the charges for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by Georgia state or local government officials or employees while traveling on official business. 
(Code 1977, § 3-2034; Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 6-8-99; Ord. No. 2009-15, § 3, 11-9-09) 
Sec. 3-2-25. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel or motel in this city shall immediately register with the city manager of the city, on a form provided by the city. Persons engaged in that business must so register not later than thirty (30) days after the date this article becomes effective and the tax is imposed, but the privilege of registration after the imposition of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. 
(Code 1977, § 3-2035) 
Sec. 3-2-26. - Determination; due date; returns and payments; collection fee. 
(a)  All amounts of the hotel/motel tax shall be due and payable to the city finance director monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city manager showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and any other information as may be required by the city manager. 
(c)  Operators collecting a tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and payment of the tax due, only if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction shall be three percent of the amount due. 
(Code 1977, § 3-2036; Ord. No. 90-14, § 3, 12-11-90; Ord. No. 92-07, § 1, 5-6-92; Ord. No. 2009-15, §§ 4, 5, 11-9-09) 
Sec. 3-2-27. - Deficiency determinations; interest; notice. 
(a)  If the city finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession and shall report such discrimination to the governing authority for confirmation. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  The city manager or his designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of the determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator at the address as it appears in the records of the city manager. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
Ord. No. 2009-15, § 6, 11-9-09) 
Sec. 3-2-28. - Determination if no return made; interest. 
(a)  If any person fails to make a return, the city finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person fails to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city's finance director. Such determination shall be reported to and confirmed by the governing authority. Written notice of the determination shall be given in a manner prescribed in section 3-2-27(c). 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(c)  In addition to the interest provided for by subsection (b) of this section, delinquent penalties shall be added to all unpaid balances at the rates prescribed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-58. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, §§ 7, 8, 11-9-09) 
Sec. 3-2-29. - Administration of article; authority of city manager; records. 
(a)  The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Every operator renting guest rooms in this city to a person shall keep any records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in any form as the city manager may require. 
(c)  The city manager or any person authorized in writing by the city manager may examine books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  In administration of the provisions of this article, the city manager may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in that person's possession or custody, information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city manager and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and any other information as the city may require. 
(Code 1977, § 3-2039) 
Sec. 3-2-30. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person responsible for reporting, return or payment of the taxes levied pursuant to this Article shall be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-58.1 through 48-13-63. In the event any such person is in violation of any of the provisions of this article that are not otherwise covered by state law then, upon conviction, such person shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be punished in municipal court to the extent of that court's authority. 
(b)  Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by that person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or any other person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Code 1977, § 3-2040; Ord. No. 2009-15, § 9, 11-9-09) 
Sec. 3-2-31. - Collection of tax; purchaser liable. 
(a)  At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this article, the city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the amount delinquent, together with the interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover the amount required until the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be refunded by the city. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city, he will have three years from the date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city, the excess amount paid may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators or executors. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 10, 11-9-09) 
Secs. 3-2-32—3-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - OCCUPATION TAX[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 1994, amended Art. D in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, Art. D, Business and occupation tax contained substantive §§ 3-2-51—3-2-69, 3-2-81—3-2-88, 3-2-101—3-2-103, and the user's attention is directed to the Code Comparative and Ordinance Disposition Tables at the back of this volume for derivation of such material. 

Division 1. - General Provisions 

Sec. 3-2-51. - Occupation tax required for business dealings in city. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in Morrow, Georgia with a physical location in the City of Morrow or, in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia but exerting substantial efforts within the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation. A receipt for the business tax shall be provided to the person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in Morrow, Georgia and shall be shown to the city manager or to his designee or to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 1, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-52. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term Morrow is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean Morrow, Georgia; wherever the term city is used herein, it shall be construed to mean Morrow, Georgia. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(2)  a.  Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation to the following: 
1.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; 
2.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
3.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
4.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
5.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
b.  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
1.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
2.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
3.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. Section 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. Section 1563(a)(2) or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
4.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent for services which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
5.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
6.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. The occupation tax office of the city, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books and records of the business to determine the accuracy of out of state sales. Failure of submission of such books or records shall be grounds for revocation of tax registration. 
(3)  Location of office shall include any structure or where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location of office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location of office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
(4)  Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
(5)  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee or registration fee. No local government is authorized to require any administrative fee, registration fee, or fee by any other name in connection with a regulatory fee, except an occupation tax, as defined in paragraph (4) of section 3-2-52(b). Development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(6)  Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
(7)  Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization. 
(8)  Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(9)(A)  Except as otherwise provided in subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
(9)(B)  An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1.A, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 98-18, § 1, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1.A, 10-26-99) 
Sec. 3-2-53. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of eighty dollars ($80.00) shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-9 on those businesses that require an application on an annual basis, and on those businesses that will require an application for the initial business registration for the purpose of regulating the business in reference to character checks, or other verification that is necessary to legally permit operation of that business for the current licensing year. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  Examples of businesses or practitioners of professions or occupations which may be subject to regulatory fees by local governments include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Building and construction contractors, subcontractors, and workers; 
(2)  Carnivals; 
(3)  Taxicab and limousine operators; 
(4)  Tattoo artists; 
(5)  Stables; 
(6)  Shooting galleries and firearm ranges; 
(7)  Scrap metal processors; 
(8)  Pawnbrokers; 
(9)  Food service establishments; 
(10)  Dealers in precious metals; 
(11)  Firearms dealers; 
(12)  Peddlers; 
(13)  Parking lots; 
(14)  Nursing and personal care homes; 
(15)  Newspaper vending boxes; 
(16)  Modeling agencies; 
(17)  Massage parlors; 
(18)  Landfills; 
(19)  Auto and motorcycle racing; 
(20)  Boardinghouses; 
(21)  Businesses which provide appearance bonds; 
(22)  Boxing and wrestling promoters; 
(23)  Hotels and motels; 
(24)  Hypnotists; 
(25)  Handwriting analysts; 
(26)  Health clubs, gyms, and spas; 
(27)  Fortunetellers; 
(28)  Garbage collectors; 
(29)  Escort services; 
(30)  Burglar and fire alarm installers; and 
(31)  Locksmiths. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 98-13, § 1, 11-24-98; Ord. No. 2002-111, § 1.A., 1-14-03) 
Sec. 3-2-53.1. - Businesses or practitioners of professions or occupations subject to regulatory fees and occupation taxes. 
Businesses or practitioners of professions or occupations subject to regulatory fees are also subject to occupation taxes as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.A, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 3-2-54. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city and/or upon applicable businesses with no location or office in the city but exerting substantial efforts within the city based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. Each type of business shall be assigned to a profit class based on the profitability ratio for that business type. The occupational tax rate levied will be based on the profit class of the dominant line of the business as defined by the North American Industry Classification system. 
(2)  The number of employees of the business or practitioner as computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of the computation an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule: 
(1)  Profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts. The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the occupation tax office: 
0—1.82/Class 1 
1.83—3.15/Class 2 
3.16—4.18/Class 3 
4.19—5.18/Class 4 
5.19—13.48/Class 5 
13.49 and above/Class 6 
The tax rate on gross receipts will be determined by referring to the Volume Rate Classification Schedule (Attachment B) which is made a part of this article by reference. 
Editor's note— Attachment B referenced above is not set out at length herein, but is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(2)  The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be $5.00 per employee. 
(c)(1) No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of the gross receipts of a business. 
(3)  No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall not be required from real estate brokers, agents, or companies whose offices are located outside the taxing jurisdiction and who sell property inside the taxing jurisdiction. 
(5)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this Section. 
(6)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the State of Georgia. 
(7)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in O.C.G.A. Section 14-13-7 (see section 3-2-52(2)(a) and (b) of this article) which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the State of Georgia. 
(8)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this article, any city levying an occupation tax is authorized to request payment of such occupation tax from and accept payment from a partnership, corporation, or other business entity composed of practitioners subject to the election set out in section 3-2-63 of this code for each such practitioner. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.B, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1.B, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1.B, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 2002-11, §§ 1.B, 1.C, 1-14-03; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 2, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-55. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax are hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in Morrow and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of Morrow for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of Morrow. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-56. - Change of address. 
Any person moving from one location to another within the city limits shall notify the occupation tax administrator of the move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the administrator no later than the day of moving. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-57. - Taxes not transferable. 
A transfer of ownership shall be considered in the same light as the termination of the business and the establishment of a new business. Therefore, a new business tax shall be required for the new owner of the business. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-58. - Casual and isolated activity exclusion. 
Persons involved in casual or isolated activity involving their personal assets, not related to a business entity, are excluded from this article, except that "garage sales" must be registered in accordance with section 9-4-2 of this Code, and persons involved with the rental of real property are subject to a tax to the extent provided in section 3-2-52(b)(2)5. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-59. - Rules and regulations. 
The city manager or his designee shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, or the constitution of this state of the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provision of this article and the collection of the business taxes hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-60. - Exceptions. 
Any individual, association, estate or trust holding stocks, bonds or any other type of securities for personal investment purposes is hereby declared not subject to the provisions of this article provided that the principal occupation of the individual estate, association, or trust is not the trading, holding, or exchange of stock, bonds or securities. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-61. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
Each business and practitioner of a profession or occupation within the city shall file a return for that business, profession or occupation with the city tax office that identifies the line or lines of business conducted by that enterprise. Such return shall be filed no later than February 15 in any calendar year for existing businesses in the city or within 30 days of commencement of business in the city for businesses established after February 1 of any given year. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 3, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-62. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-63. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-9(c), paragraphs (1) through (18). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratio and the number of employees as set forth in section 3-2-54 of this article. 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
This election is to be made by each practitioner practicing in the city on an annual basis and must be completed by February 15 of each year. For practitioners electing to utilize the flat tax rate, no proration of the tax is made for period of less than one year. 
Examples of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations which local governments are not authorized to subject to regulatory fees include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Lawyers; 
(2)  Physicians licensed [pursuant to] Chapter 34, Title 43, O.C.G.A.; 
(3)  Osteopaths licensed [pursuant to] Chapter 34, Title 43, O.C.G.A.; 
(4)  Chiropractors; 
(5)  Podiatrists; 
(6)  Dentists; 
(7)  Optometrists; 
(8)  Psychologists; 
(9)  Veterinarians; 
(10)  Landscape architects; 
(11)  Land surveyors; 
(12)  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
(13)  Public accountants; 
(14)  Embalmers; 
(15)  Funeral directors; 
(16)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; 
(17)  Architects; 
(18)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors; 
(19)  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in subsection (1) of section 10-1-622 O.C.G.A.; 
(20)  Owners or operators of bona fide coin operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1, and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9; 
(21)  Merchants or dealers as defined in O.C.G.A. 48-5-354 as to their deliveries to businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and 
(22)  Any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law which regulates such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1.C, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1.C, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 4, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-64. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government; nonprofit organization. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
The city shall not be authorized to levy any occupation tax, regulatory fee, or administrative fee on any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1.D, 11-28-95) 
Sec. 3-2-65. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. 
The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. Sections 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-66. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  All occupation taxes authorized by this article, except as otherwise specifically provided, shall be due and payable annually April 1 for the immediately preceding calendar year. Estimated taxes for the current calendar year shall be made and accompany the return due February 15 of each calendar year for all businesses other than attorneys. No estimated tax is due for attorneys whose tax is due April 1 of the following year for the immediately preceding calendar year. Any business or practitioner commencing operations after February 15 of any year shall complete a business occupation tax return; all new businesses and practitioners, other than attorneys, shall make an estimated tax payment within 30 days of commencing operations. 
(b)  Regulatory fees authorized by this article shall be paid before commencing business or the practice of a profession as a condition precedent for transacting business, or practicing a profession. 
(c)  Regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession only when: 
(1)  The work done or services provided are necessary for the health or safety of one or more individuals; 
(2)  The work done or services provided have no adverse effect on any other person; and 
(3)  Regulatory fees are tendered to the local government within two business days after commencing business or the practice of a profession. 
(d)  In addition to the other remedies available to the city for the collection of taxes and fees due the city from persons subject to the tax or fee who fail or refuse to pay after the established due date, the occupation tax administrator shall issue executions against the delinquent taxpayers for any or all of the following: the amount of the taxes or fees due when the taxes or fees become due; a penalty of ten percent for delinquency; and, interest at a rate not to exceed one and five-tenths percent per month. 
(e)  Furthermore, the municipal court judge shall have the authority to impose a civil fine not to exceed $500.00 against persons who fail or refuse to pay the tax or fee. The civil fine may be enforced by the contempt power of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1.E, 11-28-95; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1.D, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 2008-01, 4-8-08; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 5, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-67. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intra- or interstate locations. 
(a)  In levying occupation tax upon a business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction, including businesses or practitioners with one or more locations or offices in Georgia and one or more locations outside the state, the occupation tax administrator shall allocate the gross receipts as defined in section 3-2-52(b)(2)a. of the business or practitioner for occupation tax purposes in accordance with one of the following methods: 
(1)  Where the business or practitioner can reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts of the business or practitioner to one or more of the locations or offices on the basis of product manufactured in that location or office or the sales or other services provided in that location or office, each local government is authorized to tax the gross receipts generated by the location or office within the jurisdiction of the local government; or 
(2)  Where the business or practitioner cannot reasonably allocate the dollar amount of gross receipts among multiple locations or offices, the business or practitioner shall divide the gross receipts reported to all local governments in this state by the number of locations or offices of the business or practitioner which contributed to the gross receipts reported to any local government in this state, and shall allocate an equal percentage of such gross receipts of the business or practitioner to each location or office. 
(b)  In no instance shall the sum of the portions of the total gross receipts of a business or practitioner taxed by all local governments exceed 100 percent of the total gross receipts of the business or practitioner. 
(c)  In the event of a dispute between the business or practitioner and the local government as to the allocation under this code section, the business or practitioner shall have the burden of proof as to the reasonableness of this allocation. 
(d)  Upon request, businesses or practitioners with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to any local government authorized to levy an occupation tax upon such business or practitioner the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(e)  When more than one local government levies occupation tax on a business or practitioner which has locations encompassed by more than one local government and the local governments use different criteria for taxation in accordance with subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10, local governments which use the criterion described in paragraph (3) of subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10 are not authorized to tax any greater proportion of the gross receipts than authorized by subsection (1) of this code section, and local governments which use the number of employees as a criterion for taxation are authorized to tax the number of employees who are employed within the local government's geographic jurisdiction. In the case of an employee who works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county, the municipal corporation or county in which the employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year shall be authorized to count the individual as an employee who is employed within the local government's geographic jurisdiction for the purposes of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1.E, 10-26-99) 
Sec. 3-2-68. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business for which a business return is required or an occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from filing said return or paying such tax on the grounds that the business is operated for a charitable purpose unless 100 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 6, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-69. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure to the city at the time of filing its business tax return. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 7, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-70. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or other regulatory matters shall show evidence that such requirement had been met at the time of filing their annual business occupation tax return. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 8, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-71. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall file the annual return for that person's business, and upon failure to file the annual return by the due date, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such person shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 3-2-72. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1.F, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 9, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-72. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, shall, upon conviction before the municipal judge, be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 per violation. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 10, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-73. - Occupation tax administrator; subpoena and arrest powers. 
The city and its duly designated officer and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena power in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business tax ordinance for 1995 (this law) and succeeding years. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1.G, 10-26-99) 
Sec. 3-2-74. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. Section 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. Section 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. Section 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-75. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-76. - Occupation tax levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts from preceding calendar year. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the current calendar year. However, for convenience of both Morrow and the taxpayer, each business subject to the occupation tax levied in section 3-2-54 hereof shall, on or before the dates hereinafter set forth, file with the occupation tax administrator the return hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth herein. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager, secretary, or officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before February 15 of the current calendar year, file with the occupation tax administrator of the city, on a form furnished by said administrator, a signed return setting forth the following information: 
(1)  Names and home addresses of owners, partners, officers, and directors of business; 
(2)  Business location; 
(3)  Each line of business conducted at the business location; 
(4)  Amount of gross receipts of business for the entire preceding calendar year; and 
(5)  Any additional information which the city may find reasonably necessary for the fair administration of this chapter. 
This return will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current year. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-77. - Filing return showing actual gross receipts for calendar year; taxes overpaid or underpaid, procedure. 
(a)  On or before February 15 of each year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for said occupations tax levied for the year shall file with the occupation tax administrator of the city, on a form furnished by the administrator, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article, is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 3-2-76 hereof, the difference in said amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on April 1 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before said date. 
(c)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article, exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 3-2-76 hereof, the difference in said amount shall be refundable by the city to the taxpayer; or, if said business continues to be conducted in said city during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by said business for the current year. This election is to be taken by the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-78. - Payment of tax by new businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of Morrow in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-79. - Returns confidential. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (3) of this code section, information on gross receipts received by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession provided to a local government for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner is confidential and exempt from inspection or disclosure under O.C.G.A. Title 50, Chapter 18, Article 4. 
(b)  Violation of the confidentiality provision of subsection (1) of this code section shall be unlawful and upon conviction shall be punished as a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Information on gross receipts received by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession provided to a local government for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collection of occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(d)  In the event a taxpayer completes one or more forms in order to comply with the city's ordinance imposing either an occupation tax or a regulatory fee and any such form fails to disclose the social security number or the appropriate federal or state taxpayer identification number, or other identification numbers, if required by the city, such omission shall be reported in a timely manner to the state revenue commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 99-22, § 1.H, 10-26-99) 
Sec. 3-2-80. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the occupation tax office of the city, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The occupation tax administrator shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in Morrow, Georgia, and upon demand of the administrator such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days after demand by the city shall be a violation of this chapter and shall subject the business to the monetary penalties provided by section 3-2-66(d). Adequate records shall be kept in Morrow, Georgia, for examination by the occupation tax administrator at that administrator's discretion. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 11, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-81. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-09, § 12, adopted Aug. 11, 2009, repealed § 3-2-81 which pertained to grounds for revoking registration and derived from Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 1994. 
Sec. 3-2-82. - Failure to comply with articles. 
Any person, business, their managers, agents, or employees, who fail to make the required occupation tax returns, fail to make said tax returns within the required time and in the manner provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, those who make false returns, or who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when officers, agents, employees of the city request such inspections during normal business hours for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein filed, shall be subject to the penalties provided by section 3-2-72 of this Code for each such violation and, in addition, shall be subject to all delinquent penalties, interest, and other fees associated with unpaid or underpaid taxes as provided in section 3-2-66(d). Additionally, where three or more separate enforcement actions have begun under this article for a business or a practitioner operating in the city within a 18-month period and the required business occupation tax remains unpaid, the city may bring action in municipal court requesting that the business be shut down as a nuisance; provided that the authorization to seek discontinuance or shut down a business for nonpayment of required taxes is not permitted by Georgia statutory or case law, as in the case of attorneys, no such nuisance action may be brought by the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 13, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-83. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-09, § 14, adopted Aug. 11, 2009, repealed § 3-2-83 which pertained to revocation and suspension and derived from Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 1994. 
Sec. 3-2-84. - Lien for delinquent tax. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the occupation tax administrator of the city, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the marshal or other appropriate officer of said city upon the property of the defendant located in said jurisdiction and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and charter of said city and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the occupation tax administrator against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-85. - Amendment, repeal of provisions. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-86. - Application of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-87. - Enforcement. 
It is hereby made the duty of the occupation tax administrator and the Morrow Police Department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 2009-09, § 15, 8-11-09) 
Sec. 3-2-88. - Provisions effective until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-89. - Public hearing required. 
The council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax as set forth in this article. In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, a public hearing shall be held to determine how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94; Ord. No. 95-11, § 1.F, 11-28-95) 
Sec. 3-2-90. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Secs. 3-2-91—3-2-93. - Reserved. 
Division 2. - Special Business Taxes 

Sec. 3-2-94. - Insurers. 
(a)  Insurers license fees. There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $50.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by subsection (b), which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $50.00. For the purpose of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. Section 33-3-5. 
(b)  License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $17.50 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(c)  Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. Section 33-3-5, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Due date for license fees. License fees imposed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be due and payable on the first day of 2012 and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(f)  Administrative provisions. The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this section to the insurance commissioner of the State of Georgia within 45 days of its enactment. 
(g)  Effective date; prior provisions. This section shall become effective January 1, 2012. Fees and taxes imposed on insurers by Ordinance No. 2001-21, adopted November 27, 2001, are not repealed by the ordinance codified in this section, but remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2001-21, §§ 1—6, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 2011-28, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-21, adopted November 27, 2001, repealed section 3-2-94, insurance companies; agents; brokers and businesses, and enacted a new section 3-2-94 as set out herein. Said former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 94-12, adopted October 25, 1994. 
Sec. 3-2-95. - Financial institutions. 
(a)  Business Tax. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 48-6-93 there is hereby levied an annual business tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations tax at the rate of one-fourth of one percent of the gross receipts of said institutions. "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. Section 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(b)  Due date; filing of return. 
(1)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in subsection (d) of section 48-6-93 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. 
(2)  The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Sec. 3-2-96. - Telephone companies, special tax. 
(a)  Each telephone company operating in the city shall pay an occupational tax in the amount of three percent of the recurring local service revenues received by the company from subscribers located within the city. This occupational tax shall be paid in quarterly installments, each of which shall be due on or before the last day of the second month following the end of each calendar quarter and shall be based on recurring local service revenues billed during such calendar quarter. The first payment under this section shall be based on revenues billed between the effective date of this section and the end of the calendar quarter in which the effective date falls. Any amount of tax previously paid and absorbed by a telephone company which is applicable to any person subsequent to the effective date of this section shall be credited against the amounts imposed herein or by subsequent ordinances. 
(b)  "Recurring local service revenues" shall mean: 
(1)  Monthly charge for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users; 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semipublic pay station services; 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages; and 
d.  Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service. 
(2)  Charges for Morse code transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)  All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
Nothing in this definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee or tax for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by CATV companies. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 10-25-94) 
Division 3. - Classification Schedule 

Sec. 3-2-97. - Alphabetical business classification (SIC). 
The alphabetical business classification is made a part of this article by reference thereto and is attached to Ordinance 94-12. 
(Ord. No. 94-12, § 2, 10-25-94) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-12, § 2, adopted Oct. 25, 1994, provided for the adoption by reference of the alphabetical business classification, § 3-2-97. Such list is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 3-2-98—3-2-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE TAX 

Sec. 3-2-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purpose of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
Customer means any person that leases or rents a vehicle on a short-term lease or rental basis. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease for 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in this state. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 2, 1-27-04) 
Sec. 3-2-112. - Purpose and levy of tax. 
The purpose of this article is to levy and collect an excise tax upon the rental charge collected by a rental motor vehicle when such charge constitutes a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax. The tax shall be levied or collected at the rate of three percent of the rental charges. The tax levied shall be imposed only at the time when and place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts. The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the governing authority imposing the tax, and the tax remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to a tax levied shall be liable for the tax at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 3, 1-27-04) 
Sec. 3-2-113. - Expenditure of taxes; projects or purposes. 
(a)  The City of Morrow shall only levy excise tax by ordinance, which shall specify with particularity the authorized projects or purposes, or both, for which proceeds of the tax are to be expended, and shall apply in each fiscal year during which the tax is collected. Revenue derived from such tax may be expended for the following purposes and or projects: 
(1)  Promoting industry, trade, and commerce. 
[(2)  Reserved.] 
(b)  The tax levied pursuant to this article shall terminate on December 31, 2038. 
(c)  Nothing in this Code section shall be construed to impair, or authorize or require the impairment of, any existing contract or contractual rights. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 4, 1-27-04) 
Sec. 3-2-114. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed under this article on the rental charge associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside this state and returns it in this state; or 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in this state and returns it outside this state. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 5, 1-27-04) 
Sec. 3-2-115. - Collection of tax by operator. 
Every such person subject to the tax levied under this article shall pay the tax to the person or entity providing the rental motor vehicle. The tax shall be a debt of the person renting the rental motor vehicle to the person or entity providing the rental motor vehicle in the same manner as authorized for other debts. The person or entity collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the City of Morrow, and the tax remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this article on the person or entity providing the rental motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 6, 1-27-04) 
Sec. 3-2-116. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a rental motor vehicle facility in this city shall immediately register with the city manager of the city, on a form provided by the city. Persons engaged in that business must so register not later than 30 days after the date this article becomes effective and the tax is imposed, but the privilege of registration after the imposition of the tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 7, 1-27-04) 
Sec. 3-2-117. - Determination; due date; returns and payments; collection fee. 
(a)  All amounts of the rental motor vehicle tax shall be due and payable to the City of Morrow monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the finance officer showing the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and any other information as may be required by the city manager. 
(c)  Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state taxes under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951 (Ga. Laws, 1951, page 360), as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 8, 1-27-04) 
Sec. 3-2-118. - Deficiency determinations; interest; notice. 
(a)  If the city finance officer is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  The city manager or his designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of the determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator at the address as it appears in the records of the city finance officer. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 9, 1-27-04) 
Sec. 3-2-119. - Determination if no return made; interest. 
(a)  If any person fails to make a return, the city finance officer shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 3-2-27(c). 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 10, 1-27-04) 
Sec. 3-2-120. - Administration of article; authority of city manager; records. 
(a)  The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Every operator renting a motor vehicle in this city to a person shall keep any records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in any form as the city manager may require. 
(c)  The city manager or any person authorized in writing by the city manager may examine books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting motor vehicles to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  In administration of the provisions of this article, the city manager may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in that person's possession or custody, information relating to rentals of motor vehicles which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city manager and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and any other information as the city may require. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 11, 1-27-04) 
Sec. 3-2-121. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of the City of Morrow Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the article is committed, continued, or permitted by that person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or any other person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 12, 1-27-04) 
Sec. 3-2-122. - Collection of tax; purchaser liable. 
(a)  At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected under this article, the city manager may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the City of Morrow to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover the amount required until the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this article, it may be refunded by the city. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city, he will have three years from the date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city, the excess amount paid may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his administrators or executors. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 13, 1-27-04) 
Sec. 3-2-123. - Auditor's report. 
As a part of the audit report required under Code section 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues and expenditures pertaining to the tax under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-02, § 14, 1-27-04) 
CHAPTER 3. - PURCHASING POLICIES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted June 12, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 3, §§ 3-3-1—3-3-14, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-16, adopted Feb. 9, 2010. 

Sec. 3-3-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to state the City of Morrow's position regarding the purchasing responsibility and authority of non-construction goods and services. This chapter clarifies purchasing functions and outlines purchasing policies, as well as describes departmental relationships, responsibilities and participation in the procurement cycle. Additionally, the purpose of this chapter is to provide control functions, assure proper record keeping and confirm purchases in writing to allow the city to meet the following goals: 
(1)  Maintain at all times and under all conditions a continuous supply of goods and services necessary for the operation of the city; 
(2)  Encourage and promote fair and equal opportunity for all persons doing, or seeking to do, business with the city; 
(3)  Safeguard the quality and integrity of the city's procurement process; 
(4)  Ensure compliance with laws and regulations pertaining to the procurement of goods and services; 
(5)  Manage procurement and inventories of purchased goods to meet the use requirements of city departments at the most advantageous cost to the city; 
(6)  Administer procurement contracts and contract amendments; 
(7)  Properly dispose of all material and equipment declared to be surplus or obsolete; and 
(8)  Ensure the city provides quality service to its citizens and supports its businesses by planning in a careful and thoughtful manner. 
The philosophy behind this policy is one of separating the need for goods and services from the function of negotiation and executing the necessary contractual purchase agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-12-18) 
Sec. 3-3-2. - Scope. 
The scope of this chapter covers the procurement of most goods and services for non-construction purposes without regard to the past method by which the material or service has been or is customarily procured. Except as otherwise indicated herein, this chapter applies to all contractual and purchase agreements between the City of Morrow and another person. The procurement function includes the initial agreement/purchase, changes and/or re-negotiations. This chapter establishes the specific responsibility and authority of the procurement of materials and services. 
The provisions in this chapter do not apply to procurements for the following: 
(1)  Public works construction contracts to the extent governed by O.C.G.A. §36-91-1 et seq. 
(2)  Services and construction whose procurement falls under a conflicting federal or Georgia statute; 
(3)  Except as otherwise provided in section 3-3-7(6), land, artistic work, or other good whose inherent nature is unique and cannot be competitively compared to other goods within its class; 
(4)  Employee benefits and health related services procured through a quotation and negotiating process conducted by an expert in the field, or to maintain continuity of employee-health records; 
(5)  Travel, entertainment, conferences, training, speakers, instructors, facilitators, and meeting expenses, or other expenditures covered by another city policy; 
(6)  Insurance procured through a negotiating process; 
(7)  Items or services procured for resale or to generate a revenue; 
(8)  Advertising; 
(9)  Subscriptions and dues established during the budget process; 
(10)  A transaction approved by the city council that involves another governmental entity; 
(11)  Utilities; and 
(12)  Seized property included in a court order authorizing disposal. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-12-18) 
Sec. 3-3-3. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases, and their derivations, shall be the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addendum means a change, clarification or correction in the solicitation documents, prior to the award of a contract. 
Agent means an official, an employee, or a contracted or subcontracted person who is authorized to act on behalf of the city and represent its interests. 
Amendment means an agreed upon addition to, deletion from, correction or modification of a contract. 
Annual contract means an agreement or contract, typically for a specified duration, between a supplier and the city, to furnish goods or services usually of an indefinite quantity and delivery schedule, at unit prices provided for under the terms of the contract. Also known as a term contract, annual agreement or requirements contract. 
Appeal means a specific written objection by an interested person to a request for qualifications, a request for quotations, an invitation for bid, an invitation to negotiate, a request for proposal, or an award or proposed award of a contract, with the intention of receiving a remedial result. 
Available locally means that one or more persons within the limits of the city or immediate surrounding areas are able to provide to the city goods and services in a timely manner, and in sufficient quantity and quality to meet a specific need. 
Bid/proposal bond means a form of bid security executed by the bidder (or proposer) as principal and by a surety, to guarantee that the bidder (or proposer) will enter into a contract within the time specified in the invitation for bid or request for proposals, and will furnish the necessary bonds and insurance, and meet any other requirements of those documents. 
Bidder means a person submitting a bid or quote to the city for the supply of goods or services. 
Buying cooperative or alliance means a group of public entity purchasers organized for the purpose of creating contracts or pricing agreements in order to take advantage of group or quantity buying discounts or special pricing from which members of the group can benefit. 
Capital expenditure item means an item that has a normal life expectancy of three years or more and is a complete entity within itself. 
City finance director means the individual employed by the city as the department head of the city's finance department. 
City means the City of Morrow and, as the context warrants, those persons or bodies authorized to act on its behalf, including but not limited to the council, committees, and staff. 
Collaboration or piggy-backing means a situation when the city works with another agency to enter into contract together for a better price or product or when the city joins in with another agency that has an existing contract in order to receive a more competitive price or to avoid labor costs. This will include collaborations with Clayton County when the city is able to secure services in excess of the cost. This method will also apply when collaborations take place between multiple municipalities within Clayton County, Clayton County, and or the Clayton County School System. 
Competitive award means a procurement based upon the outcome of one of the competitive processes set forth in this policy, where award is made based on the best quotation or bid submitted by a responsible and responsive bidder or to the most qualified or advantageous proposer based on the qualitative and/or quantitative factors identified for the procurement. A competitive award can be made even if only a single bid or proposal has been received from a bidder or proposer who is determined to be responsible and responsive. 
Construction means the process of building, altering, improving or demolishing any public structure or building, or other public improvements of any kind to any public real property. The term "construction" does not include the routine operation, repair and/or maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real property. 
Continuing purchase contract means a contract procured under this policy with one or more vendors based on general specifications and/or scope of work, for which award of specific scopes of work is intended periodically during the contract term as the need arises. Pricing and/or rates may be defined in the original contract or by amendment at the time that specific scopes of work are awarded. 
Contract extension means an amendment to a contract that includes an increase in the term of a contract, for which no options to renew the contract beyond the current expiration date exist. 
Contract means all types of city agreements for the purchase or disposal of goods and for the obtaining of services or professional services regardless of what they may be called, including contracts for a fixed price, cost plus a fixed fee, incentive contracts, and contracts providing for the issuance of job or task orders, leases, letter contracts and purchase orders. Contracts also include amendments, modifications and supplemental agreements with respect to any of the foregoing. Every contract must be duly authorized and approved prior to execution. The term "contract" does not include any of the following items: invoices, pcard transactions, signature to accept deliveries, terms and conditions of using public spaces, rental forms for the Morrow Center, the Morrow Tourist Center, or the Morrow Community Room. 
Contract renewal means an exercise of an approved, existing option to increase the term of a contract. Options to renew a contract are often done in annual increments. 
Department head means an individual who is currently employed by the city as the administrative head of any of the departments of the city identified in section 2-3-31 of the Code of Ordinances. 
Emergency means a situation that occurs suddenly and unexpectedly and demands immediate action to prevent delays which may vitally affect the health, safety or welfare of the public or city employees and affects the continuation of services to the citizens, and/or serious loss or injury to the city. Emergency shall also mean a condition, malfunction, or occurrence in which the immediate procurement of an item (i.e. good, services, or professional service) is essential to comply with regulatory requirements. 
Emergency procurement means any procurement of goods or services in the context of an emergency. 
Employee means an individual drawing a salary or wage from the city whether on a full-time or part-time basis. The term shall encompass all members of the council without regard as to whether or not such individuals are compensated. 
Gifts or favors means anything of any service of value. Value shall be considered anything in excess of $100.00. 
Goods or commodities means supplies, apparatus, materials, equipment and other forms of tangible personal property used by a city department in the accomplishment of its responsibilities. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council responsible for the contract. 
Informal written quotes (IWQ) means all documents or communications used for soliciting quotations or estimates for goods, services, or professional services, in which award is made based on the most responsive and responsible quotation that is best suited for the city and in which the type or cost of the procurement does not require a more formal bid or proposal process. 
Late bid/proposal means a bid or a proposal received after the time or date such bid or proposal was due, as stated in the solicitation documents. 
Life cycle cost assessment means the comprehensive accounting of the total cost of ownership, including initial costs, energy and operational costs, longevity and efficacy of service and disposal costs. 
Multiple award schedule contract means a contract based upon one solicitation awarded to two or more vendors to supply goods or services. 
Negotiated award means a procurement made as the result of negotiations between the city and a supplier, such as a sole source procurement or single source procurement or another instance, including request for proposal, where a contract award based on direct negotiations with a supplier of goods or services is appropriate. 
Official means any elected or appointed person who holds office or serves in a position of public capacity for the city. 
Online reverse auction means a purchasing method wherein bidders enter prices for items electronically, and their prices are displayed for other bidders to see with all bidders given the opportunity to continually bid a lower price until the time period of the bid expires. 
Ordinance means related Administration Ordinance in Charter Sections 2.20 through 2.22. 
Payment terms means the established due date for payments by the city to pay an invoice. Absent any agreement otherwise stated, the city's payment term will be Net 30. 
Performance bond means a bond provided by a contractor/supplier in whom a surety guarantees to the city that the goods are delivered or the Services are performed in accordance with the contract documents. A letter of credit issued by a financial institution that meets the city's requirements may, at the discretion of the city, be substituted for the performance bond. 
Person means any business, entity, company, firm, individual, union, committee, club or other organization or group of individuals. 
Practicable means satisfactory and within reason when considering price, performance, availability, compatibility with specified operation, and public safety. 
Pre-qualification means the part of a competitive procurement process in which the city determines, based on standards developed for a specified product or service, which interested vendors meet those standards and are eligible for further consideration in the purchasing process, when further consideration is applicable. 
Product evaluation means the evaluation of a product to help determine its usefulness in meeting the city requirement or specification. 
Professional services means services rendered by an independent contracting individual or firm having expertise in a particular industry or subject matter due to specialized education, training, licensure or skill, and consisting primarily of advice reports, conclusions, recommendations or other outputs resulting from the time and effort of the service provider, as opposed to the acquisition of specific commodities, or of services not requiring any specialized education, licensing, training or skill (e.g. janitorial services). Professional services include, but are not limited to, art design and installation or performance, evaluations, consultations, management systems, management consulting, compiling statistical data, support of planning and operating activities, appraisal services, and research and development studies or reports. 
Proposer means a person submitting a proposal or qualifications to the city for the supply of goods, services, or professional services. 
Purchase order means a document approved and issued by the purchasing agent or designee and accepted by the vendor to obtain goods, commodities, services or professional services. 
Purchasing agent means the individual employed by the city as the city manager or his/her designee. In the absence of such employment, the term shall mean the individual designed by the council to serve as the purchasing agent. 
Purchasing is the process of securing materials, services, repairs, leases and rentals necessary for the operation and support of the city. The renewal, renegotiations and changes to contracts, leases and agreements are functions of purchasing. 
Request for bids (RFB) means all documents used for soliciting bids, including those attached or incorporated by reference. These include a scope of work and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. Bids are requested when requirements are clearly defined, price is among the major determining factors for award, expenses are itemized or categorized, and a formal sealed submittal is required. 
Request for proposals (RFP) means all documents utilized for soliciting proposals for goods, services, or professional services, including those attached or incorporated by reference. These include a scope of work and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. This method is used when factors in addition to price are considered for award. This method may include negotiation of price and other factors that commence after receipt of proposals and prior to recommendation of award. 
Request for qualifications (RFQ) means all documents utilized for soliciting qualifications for goods, services, or professional services. 
Responsible bidder or proposer means a person, who, in the exclusive judgment of the city, (a) has the capability in all respects to fully perform the contract requirements; and (b) the integrity, experience, qualification, and reliability which assures good faith performance. 
Responsive bidder or proposer means a person, who, in the exclusive judgment of the city, has submitted a bid or proposal that conforms in all material respects to the solicitation documents. 
Services mean any performance of effort or labor, for which the city has contracted other than professional services or services classified as construction. Services include, but are not limited to, janitorial, landscaping, and street striping. 
Shortlisting means the part of a competitive procurement process in which the city determines, based on criteria developed for a specified good, service, or professional service which of the interested vendors are the best qualified to be eligible for further consideration in the purchasing process. Shortlisting may only be applicable when many responsive bidders and proposers respond to solicitations. 
Single-source procurement means identifying and using, without first completing a competitive process, one source for goods or services among others in a competitive marketplace, which, for justifiable reasons, is found to be most advantageous for the purpose of fulfilling a given purchasing need of the city. 
Sole-source procurement means identifying and using, without first completing a competitive process, one source for goods or services, when that source is the only one available that can fulfill a given purchasing need of the city. 
Solicitation documents means a request for bids, a request for proposals, a request for qualifications or a request for quotations, including all of the associated forms and documents of each solicitation, or any other types of documents used by the city to procure goods, services, or professional services. 
Specification or scope of work means any description of the physical or functional characteristics, or of the nature of goods, services, or professional services. Specifications or scope of work may include any function and other criteria that will be required to perform the work and a description of any requirement for inspection, testing, or delivery. 
Supplier, merchant or vendor means a person currently supplying, or in the business of supplying, goods, services, or professional services. 
Surety means a person who, for a consideration, promises in writing to make good the debt or default of another organization. The surety must be satisfactory to the city and licensed to do business in georgia. 
The using department/division (user) is defined as the department which has the authority and responsibility for determining the need for an item or service, its related specifications, and need date. The user is responsible for funding the need and advising purchasing of the approved funding and the specific budget account number. The user is responsible for authorizing the purchases of all materials, services, repairs, leases and rentals in which the negotiated price exceeds the approved funding. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-12-18) 
Sec. 3-3-4. - Ethics in procurement. 
Each person involved in the procurement process must adhere to a high standard of ethics and is bound by the provisions in this section. To the extent the Code of Ethics in Chapter 2 of Title 2 of the Code of Ordinances applies, each person involved in the procurement process also is bound by the provisions contained therein. 
(1)  Employee conflict of interest. It shall be unethical for any Employee, official or agent to transact any business or participate directly or indirectly in a procurement contract when the employee, official or agent knows that: 
a.  The employee, official or agent or any member of the employee, official or agent's immediate family has a financial interest pertaining to the procurement contract, except that the purchase of goods and services from businesses which a member of the city council or other City of Morrow employee has a financial interest is authorized as per O.C.G.A. § 36-1-14, or the procurement contract is awarded pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 45-10-22 and § 45-10-24, or the transaction is excepted from said restrictions by O.C.G.A. § 45-10-25, interpreting such statutes as if they were applicable to a municipality. 
b.  Any other person, business or organization with whom the employee, official, agent or any member of an employee, official or agent's immediate family is negotiating or has an arrangement concerning prospective employment is involved in the procurement contract. 
c.  An employee, official, agent or any member of an employee, official or agent's immediate family who holds a substantial interest or financial interest in a disclosed blind trust shall not be deemed to have a conflict of interest with regard to matters pertaining to that substantial interest or financial interest. 
(2)  Gratuities, rebates or kickbacks. 
a.  Gratuities. It shall be unethical for any person to offer, give, or agree to give any employee, official or agent, or for any employee, official or agent to solicit, demand, accept, or agree to accept from another person, a gratuity, rebate or an offer of employment in connection with any decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation or preparation of any part of a program requirement or a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing or in any other advisory capacity in any proceeding or application, request for ruling, determination, claim or controversy, or other particular matter, pertaining to any program requirement or a contract or subcontract, or to any solicitation or proposal therefore in any manner inconsistent with the State of Georgia's Department of Administrative Services Gratuity Policy. Rebates normally or routinely offered to all customers for the purchase of their goods and services are acceptable and are the property of the city. 
Nothing in this section shall preclude an official, employee or agent from attending seminars, courses, lectures, briefings, or similar functions at any vendor's facility or at any other place if any such seminar, course, lecture, briefing, or similar function is for the purpose of furnishing the official, employee, or agent with knowledge and information relative to the vendor's products or services and is one which the city manager determines would be of benefit to the city. 
In connection with any such seminar, course, lecture, briefing, or similar function, nothing shall preclude the official, employee or agent from receiving meals from a vendor. Nothing in this section shall preclude the official, employee, or agent from receiving educational materials and business-related items of not more than nominal value from a vendor. 
Nothing contained in this section shall permit the official, employee, or agent to accept free travel from the vendor outside the State of Georgia or free lodging in or out of the State of Georgia unless such an offer is an invitation for the official, employee, or agent to teach, participate in certification, or learn about best practices and communities, all which benefit the City of Morrow. 
b.  Kickbacks and rebates. It shall be unethical for any payment, gratuity, or offer of employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor, or any person associated therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order. 
c.  Courtesies. Employees may accept for themselves and members of their families common courtesies usually associated with customary business practices so long as a strict standard is enforced with respect to gifts, services, discounts, entertainment or consideration of any kind from suppliers of merchandise, services, supplies, etc. to the City of Morrow. An example of a common courtesy is free pens or notepads with the vendor's name on them. 
d.  Cash. It is never permissible for an official, employee or agent to accept a gift in cash, cash equivalents, stocks or other forms of marketable securities of any amount. 
(3)  Prohibition against contingent fees. It shall be unethical for a person to be retained, or to retain a person, to solicit or secure a contract upon any agreement or understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage or contingent fee, except for retention of bona fide employees or bona fide established commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business. 
(4)  Use of confidential information. It shall be unethical for any employee, official or agent knowingly to disclose or to use confidential information for actual or anticipated personal gain, or for the actual or anticipated personal gain of any other person. 
(5)  Unauthorized purchases. No purchases of goods and services shall be made in the name of the City of Morrow or one of its departments, except such as is required for official use by the City of Morrow or one of its departments. Purchases in the name of the City of Morrow or a department for personal use by an individual or for other than official use are prohibited, and no City of Morrow funds will be expended or advanced therefore. 
Purchases of personal-professional computers, digital tablets, and phones can be used for a secondary personal use but such secondary personal use can never disrupt or diminish the primary professional use intended for the device. 
(6)  Penalties and sanctions. Any Person who violates any provision in this section may be subject to appropriate legal or disciplinary actions pursuant to applicable provisions of Georgia law and applicable provisions of the ordinances and regulations of the City of Morrow. 
(7)  Disclaimer of responsibility for improper purchasing. The city may disclaim responsibility and liability for any purchase, expenditure, or agreement for expenditure arising from procurement made in its name, or in the name of any governmental body under its authority, by an unauthorized person or any person acting outside of this chapter or the authorization or delegation as provided in this chapter. The expense of any such disclaimed transaction shall become the personal liability of the individual who acted improperly. 
(8)  Vendor contact during open solicitations. No person seeking an award of a City of Morrow contract may initiate or continue any verbal or written communications regarding such solicitation with any official, employee or agent other than the purchasing agent named in the solicitation between the date of the issuance of the solicitation and the date of the final contract award. The city manager or designee will review violations. If determined that such communication has compromised the competitive process, the offer submitted by the individual, firm or business may be disqualified from consideration for award. 
(9)  The terms "immediate family" and "financial interest" shall have the meaning given to such terms in the City's Code of Ethics (chapter 5 of title 2 of the Code of Ordinances). 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-12-18) 
Sec. 3-3-5. - Responsibility. 
(a)  Purchasing agent. The purchasing agent shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  Arrange and negotiate the purchase or contract for all equipment, supplies and contractual services for the city or any using agency; arrange and negotiate for the sale or otherwise dispose of all surplus equipment and supplies or real estate of the city or any using agency. 
(2)  In collaboration with each department head, maintain a perpetual or periodic inventory record of, all materials, supplies, software, or equipment stored in city storerooms, warehouses, and elsewhere. 
(3)  In collaboration with the city clerk and the city finance director, maintain the following items: 
a.  A list of all contracts. 
b.  Copies of all titles. 
c.  A separate list of emergency contracts, should any be negotiated. 
d.  Copies of every annual budget. 
e.  Copies of all budget adjustments approved by council. 
f.  Copies of all official auditing reports. 
g.  Copies of all RFQs, RFPs, RFBs, and winning contracts of each. 
h.  Copies of every check issued to and from the City of Morrow. 
i.  Any other documents critical to proper records keeping. 
(4)  Develop and maintain a purchasing procedures manual implementing the regulations stated herein. 
(5)  Direct efforts to procure goods and services through advertisements of bids in the local legal organ as required by the city's Municipal Code and by state law. 
(6)  Terminate solicitations for bids for any good(s) or service(s) when, in the opinion of the purchasing agent, it is in the city's best interest to do so. 
(7)  Reject any and all bids, when in the opinion of the purchasing agent it is in the city's best interest to do so. 
(8)  Consult with the city attorney if a contracting party breaches or is reasonably anticipated to breach its contract with the city. 
(9)  Assist in negotiating city contracts, as directed. The mayor and council must approve final contract unless the contract represents a specific line item already approved in the current year's budget. If a specific item or service is itemized in the current year's budget, the approval of the budget will serve as the approval by mayor and council for the expenditure and the Mayor is authorized to work with the city manager and city attorney to execute the contract without additional council approval. If an item or service is only represented by a budget category, the contract requires additional council approval. This practice is meant to ensure that no uncertainty exists when making decisions about budget expenditures. 
(10)  The purchasing agent is authorized to make purchases up to $25,000.00. Any purchase in excess of $25,000.00, even when a contract is not required, must be approved by the city council. 
(11)  Advise the city finance director on the status of contract negotiations, as well as contract provisions and their impacts on the city. 
(12)  Make recommendations on contract approval, rejection, amendment, renewal and cancellation. 
(13)  Provide administration and supervision of contracts. 
(14)  Plan and implement processes for the ongoing protection of the city's interests. 
(15)  Recommend and implement policies and procedures to provide for compliance with laws related to bidding, contracting and purchasing as set forth in the State of Georgia Code and Regulations, by examining the applicable laws and developing procedures for bidding, contracting and procurement processes. 
(16)  Where the city attorney is requested to prepare a contract for execution pursuant to section 2-3-22, ensure that all necessary documents and information are provided to the city attorney to facilitate that task. 
(17)  Ensure all procurements, when required, have council approval. 
(b)  Department heads. Each department head shall have the following duties and powers regarding the purchase of goods or services for the department under his supervision: 
(1)  Determine need: Each department head or his or her designee is responsible for determining the needs of the department under his supervision for goods or services. 
(2)  Determine funding: Each department head or his or her designee is responsible for researching informal written quotes and capturing these quotes for record. A minimum of two informal written quotes is required for any purchase over $1,500.00. A department head can only approve a purchase of goods or service that does not exceed $5,000.00. Except for a sole-source or single-source procurement, any purchase in excess of $5,000.00 must be approved by the city manager and should be presented with a minimum of two informal quotes and product or service details. 
(3)  Determine specifications: Each department head or his or her designee is responsible for determining the quantity, quality, dimensions, duration and all other necessary specifications essential to the determination of what is to be procured. The specifications must, where applicable, conform to the approved city standards for identity and continuity. 
(4)  Purchase details: The decision on each purchase must take into consideration any relevant policies, codes, and laws. Purchases must include an invoice, or receipt. Purchases between $1,500.00 and $5,000.00 must include a minimum of two informal quotes. All purchases between $5,000.00 and $25,000.00 must be approved by the city manager and should be accompanied with the two informal quotes and product or service details. All purchases in excess of $25,000.00 must be approved by mayor and council unless they were a specific item in the budget that was approved by council in the current year's budget, then, such purchases must be signed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-12-18) 
Sec. 3-3-6. - Competitive procurements. 
(a)  Request for informal written quotes (IWQ). Requests for informal written quotes (IWQ) are prepared and issued with the goal of obtaining competitive responses. 
Public notice shall be posted on the purchasing agent's internet web page for an IWQ in which the value is expected to exceed $50,000. Additional public notice may be provided for solicitations that, in the sole discretion of the City, are of the size, type, or dollar value that make additional public notice appropriate. 
Quotations are to be opened by the purchasing agent at the location indicated and on or after the date indicated in the request for an IWQ. A split or partial quotation may be awarded, if a request for an IWQ is for multiple goods or services, more than one vendor provides a quotation that meets the specifications for the item, and a price comparison can be made between the items quoted. The award may be split between more than one vendor by awarding to the lowest cost provider of each item or reasonable grouping of items if acquisition, delivery, and other requirements can be reasonably administered. A split or partial quotation award shall not be used under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the solicitation is for an integrated system and the split of the award between components or parts of that system would jeopardize performance; or 
(2)  If the item is part of a system and the performance of that system would be jeopardized if another brand is substituted. 
(b)  Request for bids. Requests to bid (RFB) are prepared and issued to prospective bidders, with the goal of obtaining competitive responses. 
Public notice (such as publication in a newspaper of general circulation or posting on the purchasing agent's internet web page) of the RFB must be given a minimum of 14 calendar days prior to the date set for bid opening, unless it can be demonstrated that an urgent requirement for goods or services exists, in which instance, the requirement for public notice may be reduced by the purchasing agent. Additional public notice may be provided, at the sole discretion of the city, by publication on the Georgia Municipal Association Marketplace website or through any other advertising opportunities identified by the city. 
Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the RFB. All relevant information, including each bid amount and bidder's name, will be recorded on a summary sheet. 
Split or partial bid awards may be awarded with the same guidelines and restrictions as those provided for split or partial quotation awards. 
A designated employee or agent will make a recommendation to the council for the selection of the best and most responsive bid. 
Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids is permitted in accordance with the terms indicated within the RFB. The city, in its sole discretion may waive any irregularity in an erroneous bid and consider such bid. 
Late bids will be rejected and will not be returned. 
Bids shall be evaluated based on the evaluation factors set forth in the RFB, which may include criteria to determine acceptability of goods (for example, inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose). Criteria for the acceptability of goods shall be used to determine whether particular goods are responsive to the RFB, and not to determine the relative desirability between acceptable goods. The city reserves the right to waive any informalities or irregularities of bids, to request clarification of information submitted in any bid, to further negotiate with the responsive and responsible bidder selected for contract award, or to reject any or all bids for any reason whatsoever. 
If no bid is received from any responsible and responsive bidder or all bids are rejected, the city shall go through the bid process a second time. If at the conclusion of the second bid process, the city receives no bids or no bid from any responsible and responsive bidder, the city may procure such goods and services by direct negotiation as indicated below in non-competitive procurement of goods and services. 
The bid will be awarded, if an award is made, to the most responsible and responsive bidder offering an acceptable price whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the RFB. The bid may require a contract. 
(c)  Request for proposals (RFP). When the purchasing agent determines the use of a request for bid is not practical or not advantageous because of existing market conditions or the type of items required, the city may procure goods, services, or professional services through receipt of competitive sealed proposals. Competitive sealed proposals are solicited through the use of an RFP, with the goal of obtaining competitive responses. 
Public notice of the RFP shall be given in the same manner as set forth in subsection (b) of this section regarding an RFB. 
Proposals shall be opened publicly by the purchasing agent, in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the RFP. A register of proposals shall be prepared that lists each proposer's name. Interested persons shall have access to information regarding procurement transactions of the City of Morrow in accordance with city policy and the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A.§50-18-70 et seq. 
All meetings of the city's council are duly noticed public meetings and all documents submitted to the city as a part of or in connection with a Proposal may constitute public records under Georgia law regardless of any person's claim that proprietary or trade secret information is contained therein. By submission to the city, proposers shall waive any declaration that the entire response to any solicitation constitutes proprietary information. The proposer shall designate in the smallest increments possible, that part of any qualification which it deems to be proprietary. Proposals and all related correspondence are governed by the Georgia Open Records Act and shall be provided to anyone properly requesting same, after contract award. The city shall have no obligation to protect proprietary data submitted in vendor proposals unless provided for under the Open Records Act and clearly marked as proprietary by the proposer. In the event the proposer deems certain information to be exempt from the disclosure requirements, the proposal must specify what content is considered exempt and cite the applicable provision of the law to support that assessment. In the event such information is requested under the Open Records Act, the proposer's assessment will be examined by the city attorney who will make a determination as to the applicability of that law. The decision to withhold or release the information will be at the city's sole discretion. 
Late proposals will be rejected and will not be returned. 
The RFP shall identify the criteria to be considered and evaluated as the basis of award. 
Proposals submitted by responsible and responsive proposers shall be evaluated by city staff based upon the criteria applicable to the RFP. All proposals shall be reviewed considering the criteria set forth in the RFP. The city shall have no obligation to award the contract to the proposer who proposes the lowest price. 
The city reserves the right to waive any informalities or irregularities of proposals, to request clarification of information submitted in any proposal, to further negotiate with a responsive and responsible proposer who has been selected for contract award, or to reject any or all proposals for any reason whatsoever. 
The contract award will be awarded, if award is made, by the city to the responsive and responsible proposer whose proposal is determined, in the city's exclusive discretion, to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price, qualifications, and other factors as indicated in the RFP. The RFP shall contain the basis on which the award is to be made. 
If no proposals or no responsive and responsible proposals are received or all proposals are rejected, the city shall go through the RFP process a second time. If at the conclusion of the second RFP process, no proposals, or no responsive and responsible proposals are received, the city may procure such goods, services, and professional services by direct negotiation as indicated below in non-competitive procurement of goods and services. 
(d)  Request for qualifications. Requests for qualifications (RFQ) may be used when it is determined to be in the city's best interest to evaluate the experience and qualifications of a service provider, without regard to price or prior to considering price. 
The procedure for soliciting, opening and evaluating statements of qualifications shall be the same as described herein for competitive sealed proposals. Service providers whose qualifications meet the criteria established in the request for qualifications, at the sole discretion of the city, may be considered for contract award by participation in the completion price negotiation. The city shall attempt to negotiate a fee with the selected firm. If no agreement is reached, the city shall begin negotiations with the second selected firm. Negotiations will proceed in this manner until an agreement is reached. Alternatively, the city may, by direct negotiation, finalize terms with service providers who are selected for award based on qualifications. The city reserves the right to reject any or all responses for any reason. Clarification of information may be requested by the city. 
(e)  Online reverse auction. The city reserves the right to utilize this procurement method when advantageous. The process will be specified in the solicitation documents. 
(f)  Performance guarantee. A performance guarantee, such as a performance bond or letter of credit, may be required for any solicitation that includes services to be performed after consultation with the city manager, and others, as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-12-18) 
Sec. 3-3-7. - Non-competitive procurements. 
The provisions of this section shall apply to the procurement of goods and services, when competitive procurement is not practical, feasible, or possible. Notwithstanding any other provision, any contract or subcontract entered into by the city with any person for the construction, reconstruction, or maintenance of all or part of a public road in the City, including but not limited to a contract or subcontract for the purchase of materials, for the hiring of labor, for professional services, or for other things or services incident to such work, shall be entered into in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 32-4-114. 
(1)  Sole source procurement. The city may acquire goods, services, or professional services pursuant to a sole source procurement. Sole source procurement shall be available when goods, services, or professional services are limited to one source, or when they must be obtained from a specific manufacturers' dealer and valid competition among dealers does not exist. The city shall provide the justification for the sole source procurement to the purchasing agent. 
(2)  Single source procurement. The city may acquire goods and services pursuant to a single source procurement. A single source procurement is a procurement made from one person among others in a competitive market place which, for justifiable reasons, is found to be most advantageous for the purpose of fulfilling the given purchasing need. The user shall provide the justification for the single source procurement to the purchasing agent. The purchasing agent may elect to purchase particular brand name goods or services when the goods or services comprise a major brand system, program or service previously selected by the city and due to operational effectiveness, future enhancements or additions, or maintenance or storage of spare parts precludes the mixing of brands, manufacturers, etc. 
(3)  Direct negotiation. Following the completion of a competitive award solicitation process that fails to produce a responsible and responsive bidder or proposer, fails to produce a qualified respondent, or for which all submissions were rejected for any reason, the city may procure the goods, services, or professional services that were the subject of such failed solicitation by direct negotiation with any provider of such goods or services when issuing a revised solicitation is not recommended by the city manager with concurrence from legal counsel. Direct negotiation shall be completed by the purchasing agent, assisted as needed by the city attorney. 
(4)  Emergency procurement. The city may acquire goods, services or professional services by directly negotiating an award pursuant to emergency procurement. Emergency purchasing situations occur when there exists an emergency constituting a threat to public health, safety or welfare or to the soundness and integrity of public property or to the delivery of essential services and where the diverse effects of such emergency may worsen materially with the passage of time. 
It is understood that, from time to time, occasions arise at departments, which dictate immediate action to purchase items in order to prevent disruption of operations. Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, the purchasing agent may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements for goods, services, construction items, or professional services. Such emergency procurements shall be made with as much competition as is practicable under the circumstances. 
A written determination of the basis for the emergency situation and for the selection of the particular person for the provision of goods or services shall be included in the contract file. As soon as practicable, a record of each emergency procurement shall be made and shall set forth the contractor's name, the amount and type of the contract, a listing of the item procured under the contract, and the identification number of the contract file. 
If an emergency situation should arise after office hours which requires immediate action on the part of the agency involved for the protection of the best interest of the city or if a like situation arises on a weekend or holiday and when it is not possible or convenient to reach the purchasing agent, any purchase necessary shall be made by the official in charge of such agency, and such purchase reported to the purchasing agent within 24 hours. 
(5)  Direct negotiation and other public entities and co-ops. The city may acquire goods, services, and professional services by direct negotiation or other method involving limited or no competition from a supplier having a requirements contract/annual agreement with any public entity (e.g., federal, state, county, city, authority, school board, buying cooperative, etc.) for goods, services, or professional services described in such contract and at prices or discounts no less favorable than any set forth in such contracts. Use of state/co-op contracts: The purchasing agent or designees may, independent of the requirements of bid process of this article, procure supplies, services or construction items through the contract established through competitive means by the purchasing division of the State of Georgia, national co-ops (i.e. U.S. communities), and collaborative purchasing agreements with other local governments when deemed to be in the best interest of the city. 
(6)  Real estate acquisition (other than rights-of-way acquisition). 
a.  Compliance with applicable regulations. All real estate acquisition activities shall conform to applicable federal, state (e.g. O.C.G.A § 36-80-18) and local laws and regulations and shall be subject to the provisions of the city Code of Ethics. 
b.  Confidentiality. The city council and city staff shall maintain the confidentiality of potential and on-going real estate acquisitions and related information. 
c.  Formal approval. All real estate transactions shall be formally approved by the city council in a public meeting prior to the city entering a sales contract. 
d.  Land acquisition procurement process. 
1.  City staff shall investigate and identify properties for purchase that generally meet an approved plan or strategy (e.g. "parks bond land acquisition strategy"). Furthermore, land purchased with a specific funding source (e.g. parks bond funds) shall only be used for such purposes anticipated and/or authorized. If the city determines that the land cannot be used for its intended purpose, the city may dispose of the property in a manner consistent with Georgia law and funds raised through the sale of the property will be used for future land purchases consistent with the purposes authorized. 
2.  City staff shall work with a real estate broker to gather information and make site visits related to properties under consideration for acquisition. 
3.  City staff shall regularly brief the city council in executive session when necessary on properties the city is considering purchasing to receive direction on "terms and price" from the city council. City staff shall not make any land acquisition or sell any land without the approval of mayor and council. 
4.  All land transactions require the involvement of the city attorney. 
(7)  Performance guarantee. A performance guarantee, such as a performance bond or letter of credit, may be required for any solicitation that includes services to be performed after consultation with the city manager, and others, as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-12-18) 
Sec. 3-3-8. - General procedures and approval authorizations. 
(a)  The city, in its sole discretion, shall have the right to reject any or all bids if it determines such rejection to be in the best interest of the city. 
(b)  All awards for bids, proposals and qualifications that result in a formal contract shall require approval from the mayor and council. Any procurement that does not involve a formal contract shall meeting the following requirements: 

 
(c)  The city manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to approve budgeted capital purchases up to $25,000.00 without obtaining further city council approval (except for initial budget approval from the city council). 
(d)  The city manager shall have the authority to propose contractual employment relationships between the city and third parties. The terms of these third-party contracts will be established by the contract at the time of hiring. The city council must approve any such contract or expressly authorize the city manager to approve any such contract. 
(e)  The city council must approve the purchase of any budgeted capital purchase or contract over $25,000.00. The city manager is responsible for submitting the recommendation for this award to the city council for consideration. 
(f)  Periodically, the city may be given private/public grants and donations from sources such as the state and federal government and private corporations. These types of solicitations are more restrictive and may dictate the procurement process and methodology that the city is to follow for an award. Both federal and state procurement policy supersedes the city's purchasing requirements when buying goods and services using federal or state grant monies. A department head shall refer to the federal acquisition regulation for guidance on specific federal procurement policies. 
(g)  The final determination of the price and terms of any goods or services shall rest with the purchasing agent. 
(h)  It shall be the responsibility of the purchasing agent to document all contracts, purchases, agreements for services and leases and to maintain said documents consistent with the records retention policy of the city. All agreements or contracts binding the city must be in writing. 
(i)  All negotiations of agreements for goods and services shall be conducted by the purchasing agent or his or her designee acting under the direct supervision of the purchasing agent. 
(j)  Once the contract is officially executed, the original of the contract shall be filed in the city clerk's office. The department head whose department is most affected by the contract shall ensure the city clerk has a copy of the fully executed contract. 
(k)  Once a contract is awarded by the city, the contract may be amended, without the necessity of rebidding such contract, provided the original contract amount and the scope of the contract is not substantially altered. The purchasing agent shall review all change orders and adjust encumbrances as applicable. Change orders shall be processed to correct the account distribution, quantity, addition/deletion of line items, change in description and unit price. If a revised quoted price, including the change order is up to $50,000.00, the requisition shall be sent to the city finance director and the city manager for approval. Any revised pricing over $50,000.00 shall require approval of the city council. No department head shall use the change order process to circumvent the purchasing policy. Change orders cannot substantially change the scope of the contract. 
(l)  The purchasing agent and the department head whose department is most affected by a contract shall equally share the responsibility to ensure the quality, delivery and payment of goods and services provided under that contract. 
(m)  Final adjudication of any dispute between the vendor and a department head shall be made by the purchasing agent. 
(n)  It shall be the responsibility of the department head whose department is most affected by a contract to ensure that goods purchased under that contract are received, inspected and verified as to condition. As the department head signed the purchase requisition, that person shall not be the receiver of the goods provided under the contract and must appoint an individual within the department to be the receiver of such goods. 
(o)  Protests. 
(1)  Right to protest. Any person who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a contract may protest to the City of Morrow. Any such person initially shall seek resolution of the complaint by the city manager. All protests must be submitted in writing to the department head whose department is the most affected by the contract. The complaint shall specify the alleged act or omission by the city that provides the basis for the complaint. 
(2)  With ten business days after the receipt of a written complaint, the department head shall submit that item and his response thereto to the city manager. 
(3)  Within 14 calendar days of his receipt of a written complaint and the department head's response thereto, the city manager shall render a decision on the complaint. The city manager is empowered to uphold, dismiss or amend the decision of the department head. The person who submitted the written Complaint shall be informed of the decision. 
(4)  In the event the person who filed the written complaint is dissatisfied by the decision of the city manager rendered under subsection (o)(3) of this section, that person may seek additional review by the city council by submitting a second written complaint to the city clerk's office within 14 days of being informed of the city manager's decision. Upon the timely receipt of the second written Complaint, the Mayor shall appoint a committee of two council members to review that item and to render a decision. The decision by such committee shall be delivered in an open meeting that is advertised in accordance with the law. The decision by such committee will be final. 
(5)  Protests concerning invitations. A protest with respect to an RFB, RFQ, or RFP shall be submitted in writing prior to the opening of bids or the closing date of proposals. If not done by that time, the complaint or protest is invalid. 
(6)  Stay of procurement during protests. In the event of a timely protest under subsection (o)(2) of this section, the purchasing agent shall not proceed further with the solicitation or award of the contract until all administrative remedies have been exhausted or until the city manager or city attorney makes a determination that the award of the contract without delay is necessary to protect the interests of City of Morrow. 
(p)  Credit cards shall only be issued upon approval of the city manager. The credit limit for each card shall be established by the city manager. All individuals assigned a credit card on behalf of the City of Morrow shall be personally responsible for the use of such card. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-12-18) 
Sec. 3-3-9. - Property disposal. 
(a)  Excess, surplus, and obsolete materials. a department head shall report to the purchasing agent all excess, surplus or obsolete items in the possession of the department under his supervision. The purchasing agent, in his sole discretion, shall determine the most advantageous method for the disposition of the items and shall confirm that such method of disposition complies with O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6 and all other applicable provisions of Georgia law. For any such items having a value of more than $5,000.00 in aggregate or $500.00 individually, the request to have those items declared surplus shall require the approval of the city council. For all other items, the request to have the items declared surplus shall require the approval of the city manager. Any item determined to be excess, surplus or obsolete may be disposed of by any of the following methods: 
(1)  Transfer or re-use: The item may be transferred to another department of the city that has a use for the item. 
(2)  Trade-in: In replacing obsolete equipment, it may be financially advantageous to trade-in the old equipment. The invitation for bids on the replacement item should call for bid prices with or without trade-in and provide that award may be made either way. 
(3)  Sale: Excess, surplus and obsolete items not transferred or traded-in may be consolidated and offered for sale. Except as otherwise provided in, included but not limited to subsections (b) through (j) of O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6, the city shall make all such sales to the highest responsible bidder, either by sealed bids or by auction after due notice has been given. Auctions can be traditional or contemporary including online auctions such as www.Govdeals.com or similar websites. The city shall have the right to reject any and all bids or to cancel any proposed sale. 
(4)  Disposal of confiscated weapons and other seized assets: The disposal of these assets will be performed in accordance with all applicable laws. 
(5)  Other disposal: To the extent it does not violate Georgia law, the city council may approve an alternative method of disposal of the surplus property (e.g. sale to another governmental entity without bidding). 
(b)  Sale to employees. To avoid any appearance of impropriety in the disposition program, the city shall not directly sale any excess, surplus or obsolete property to any employee, official or agent. This prohibition shall not apply to the following situations: 
(1)  The sale of any excess, surplus or obsolete property by a public auction or in the form of a sealed bid process; or 
(2)  A single item of excess, surplus or obsolete property that has a value of less than $500.00. 
(c)  Allocation of proceeds. Unless otherwise required by state law, all proceeds from the sale of excess, obsolete or surplus property shall be deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 2018-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-12-18) 
CHAPTER 4. - SCHEDULE OF FEES 

Sec. 3-4-1. - Schedule of fees to be paid to the City of Morrow. 

 

 

 

 

 
The City of Morrow, Georgia, its Departments, and authorized employees may charge the referenced fees and costs on behalf of the city, as specified pursuant to Code of Ordinances section 3-4-1 and the schedule of fees. Said fees and costs paid shall be remitted to the City of Morrow. 
(Ord. No. 2013-44, § 1, 5-14-13; Ord. No. 2014-08 , § 1, 7-8-14; Ord. No. 2015-02 , § 1, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2015-08 , § 1, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 2017-06 , § 1, 5-9-17; Ord. No. 2018-06 , § 1, 4-24-18; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § 1, 10-9-18) 
Title 4 - PUBLIC SAFETY 
CHAPTER 1. - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Police department created, § 2-3-31. 
State Law reference— Powers concerning police protection, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, § II, ¶ 3; Georgia peace officers standards and training act, O.C.G.A. §§ 35-8-1 et seq.; compensation of officers restricted, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-9; liability for torts of police officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3; obstructing or hindering law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; subsistence allowance, O.C.G.A. § 35-1-3. 

Sec. 4-1-1. - Chief of police; powers and duties. 
The chief of police, or city police officers under his direction, shall: 
(1)  Regularly attend meetings of the mayor and council and any other meetings as directed by the mayor and council; 
(2)  Execute all orders and directions of the city manager; 
(3)  Abate or remove any nuisance when so directed upon order of the recorder's court; 
(4)  Maintain the peace, good order and tranquility of the city by the enforcement of all municipal ordinances and state laws; 
(5)  Place upon the recorder's court docket the names of all persons violating any of the municipal ordinances and arrest and take into custody all persons who violate any city ordinances or state laws; 
(6)  Under the direction of the city manager, be in charge of the police department and have supervision over the members thereof in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority and in hiring, discharging or suspending any members; 
(7)  Should any arrested person be confined in the city holding cell, enter or cause to be entered the name of the person arrested, the date of arrest, and the name of the arresting officer or other person, on the station docket; 
(8)  Post with the city a performance bond for the faithful performance of duties in an amount set by the mayor and council payable to the city; all monies received by this officer while acting in the capacity of a law enforcement officer or while executing his or her administrative duties shall be paid over to the city clerk; 
(9)  Serve all subpoenas and warrants of the recorder's court; and 
(10)  Approve appearance bonds as provided in section 2-4-6. 
(Code 1977, § 2-1001) 
Cross reference— Police attendance in recorder's court, section 2-4-3. 
Sec. 4-1-2. - Police department rules and regulations. 
Under the direction of the city manager, the police chief shall maintain written rules and regulations for the operation of the police department as are necessary. Changes in the departmental rules and regulations shall be proposed in writing by the police chief. Such changes shall be submitted to the city manager for his approval. These rules and regulations shall become effective after review and final approval of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 89-06, § 1, 5-8-89) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the mayor and council, by Res. No. 89-03, adopted Sept. 29, 1989, approved the Police Department Operations Manual of the City of Morrow, as revised on such date. Such manual is not included herein, but is on file in the police department. 
Sec. 4-1-3. - Patrol powers. 
(a)  The police officers of the city shall have the authority to patrol over any street, alley, path, sidewalk, or park, in and around any stores, cafes, taverns, restaurants, dance halls, service stations or any other establishment in the city. 
(b)  An officer while on duty for the city shall have authority to enter any type of business while open to the public and check to see if everything is being carried on in a lawful manner. After business hours, and while closed to the public, an officer for the city has authority to check places of business, to see if the doors and windows are safely locked. 
(c)  An officer for the city shall have the authority to check and investigate, enter and patrol any park, business, residential section or public place within the city limits if the officer has reason to believe some act is being committed which would involve the violation of a law or a city ordinance, a personal injury or damage to property, or if any of the above appear to be imminent. 
(d)  No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless he has the voluntary consent of the owner or occupant or he or she is in pursuit of a fugitive who the officer has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a felony. 
(Code 1977, § 2-1003) 
Sec. 4-1-4. - Authority and duties of police officers, generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or any officers assigned by the chief of police, to enforce this Code and all traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city or any other state laws violated in this city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department, or any officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformity with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency, to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1977, § 2-1004) 
Sec. 4-1-5. - Unauthorized intrusion alarms; false alarms. 
(a)  Every establishment or residence within the city limits having an electronic, telephone or mechanical unauthorized intrusion alarm system, including those alarms which are audible or visible on premises, shall be entitled to report a maximum of three false alarms in any three-month time frame to which the police department will respond in the appropriate manner without charge. Any business with multiple buildings on its premises may report a maximum of three false alarms in any three-month time frame without charge for each building that is wired with a separate alarm system. 
(b)  After the third residential false alarm in any three-month time frame, the fee of $50.00 shall be imposed for each additional alarm up to a total of six, after which time the fee shall be $150.00 for each alarm during the same three-month time frame. After the third establishment (commercial or industrial) false alarm in any three-month time frame, the fee of $150.00 shall be imposed for each additional alarm up to a total of six, after which time the fee shall be $300.00 for each alarm during the same three-month time frame. 
(c)  Whenever four or more alarms in any 30-minute period are received on the control panel at the law enforcement center, which subsequently turn out to be false alarms, the same shall be conclusive evidence of natural disturbances (such as electrical storms, etc.), city-wide, and no charge shall be imposed by the city nor shall alarms occurring during such period be counted toward the allowance above. 
(d)  Where substantiated by written evidence satisfactory to the police chief from a third party that the false alarm was not caused by the alarm owner/subscriber or the installing alarm company, such a false alarm will not be included in the monthly statistics. 
(e)  A 30-day grace period, during which no alarms will be counted, shall be permitted for each new installation. 
(f)  "False alarm" means an alarm signal or recorded message indicating an attempted or unauthorized intrusion into a structure or the attempted commission of a crime, when in fact no evidence exists upon inspection of the premises upon response to such alarm that an unauthorized intrusion or crime was attempted or committed in or about the structure. 
(g)  The investigating police officer responding to an alarm shall determine if the alarm is a false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 98-21, § 1, 12-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-24-06) 
Cross reference— Deliberate turning in of false alarms, § 11-1-9. 
Sec. 4-1-6. - Traffic signal violation detection system. 
The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety claims that, each year, more than 800 people die and an estimated 200,000 people are injured in accidents involving running red lights. Traffic-control signal monitoring devices alleviate the need for extensive and dangerous conventional traffic enforcement at heavily traveled, high risk intersections. 
The Morrow Police Department will identify intersections throughout the city where these traffic-control systems will be utilized. Use of said devices shall be governed by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-20, 40-14-21, 40-14-22, 40-14-23, and 40-14-24 and any other applicable provisions of the law. The Morrow Police Department shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this effort as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-14-22 and 40-14-23. 
A driver of motor vehicles cited pursuant to this section shall be liable for a civil monetary penalty not to exceed $75.00. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20, liability will be determined based upon preponderance of the evidence. Citations are not reported to the Department of Driver Services. 
(Ord. No. 2006-03, 3-28-06) 
CHAPTER 2. - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Powers concerning fire protection, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, § II, ¶ 3. 

ARTICLE A. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department created, § 2-3-31; stormwater management, § 5-3-1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Powers of local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; firefighters standards and training act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4-2-1. - Fire department rules and regulations. 
(a)  Under the direction of the city manager, the fire chief shall maintain written departmental rules and regulations for the operation of the fire department as are necessary. Fire department rules and regulations, and any changes or amendments thereto, shall be proposed in writing by the fire chief and submitted to the city manager for the city manager's approval. If approved by the city manager, such shall be thereafter submitted to the mayor and council for their review. 
(b)  Upon submission, any member of the mayor and council may object to the implementation of proposed rules, regulations or amendments, by notice to the city manager, within ten days from receipt of the proposal. If no member of the mayor and council timely objects, then the proposed rules and regulations, or any changes or amendments thereto, will become effective immediately after the expiration of the period for objection. If an objection is timely received, such objection shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting for consideration by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Should the mayor and council wish at any time to consider and discuss any changes to the written fire rules and regulations, then such discussion may be added as an agenda item for any meeting of the mayor and council according to the rules and procedures contained within this code. 
(d)  Once a policy or an amendment thereto is approved, it shall remain in place, regardless of the occupant of the office of the fire chief, until subsequently modified by this procedure. The reissuing, restating, or updating of the fire department rules and regulations with the signature of a new or subsequent fire chief, shall not constitute a new rule or regulation, or any change or amendment to an existing rule or regulation, for purposes of this statute. 
(Ord. No. 2018-08 , § 1, 6-12-18) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-08 , § 1, adopted June 12, 2018, repealed the former § 4-2-1 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 4-2-1 pertained to rules and regulations authorized for fire department and derived from Ord. No. 89-06, § 2, adopted May 8, 1989. 
Sec. 4-2-2. - Authority at fires. 
(a)  The fire chief or fire officers under his direction shall have full control over all fire apparatus of the fire department in service at any fire. It shall be the duty of the fire chief or his designee to superintend the fire department while performing any public duty in fighting a fire; to give general and specific directions as to the manner of fighting fires, the use of hose and apparatus, and the specific duties and assignments of the various members of the fire department in attendance at a fire. The fire chief may immediately suspend any member of the fire department for insubordination at any fire. 
(b)  The fire chief or his designee shall, in all cases of fire and fire alarms, have full control and occupy sufficient ground or space necessary for the operation of all fire companies at any fires, and for the protection of life and property, and shall be protected in the discharge of their duties by the police officers of the city. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the city police department in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity and while in this capacity shall have all rights and authority as a police officer of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 2-2004) 
Sec. 4-2-3. - Certain acts interfering with fire-fighting activities. 
No person, except an active member of the fire department, shall at any time enter within the territory or vicinity of any fire, when the area is roped off or access is denied by the city police, or interfere with or attempt to operate any of the apparatus or equipment of the fire department or any fire hydrant, or interfere by giving orders to any individual, unless requested to do so by the fire chief or fire officers under his direction; provided, however, that the mayor or any member of the council; any police officer or other law enforcement officer; the owner or occupant of the property, and the city manager or any other persons as may be specifically authorized by the fire chief or his designee, may enter the restricted areas. 
(Code 1977, § 2-2007) 
Sec. 4-2-4. - Obstruction of fire officer prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall in any way, obstruct or prevent, or attempt to obstruct or prevent, the fire chief or fire marshal in the discharge of his duties, by denying or attempting to deny access to any premises owned or occupied by the person, or by failing or refusing to furnish correct information requested by the fire chief in the investigation into the cause, origin or circumstances of any fire. 
(b)  No person shall in any way, obstruct or prevent, or attempt to obstruct or prevent, the fire chief or fire marshal while inspecting any construction, building or premises, to determine the existence of any possible fire hazard, nor shall any person deny access to the fire chief or fire marshal to any construction, building or premises for inspection thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 2-2008) 
Sec. 4-2-5. - Records of fires. 
The fire chief or his designee shall keep a permanent record of the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire and the damages resulting therefrom immediately after the occurrence of any fire. 
(Code 1974, § 2-2005) 
Sec. 4-2-6. - Obstruction of or tampering with fire hydrants and apparatus prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall place ashes, cinders, dirt, rubbish, building material or any other material around or in close proximity to any fire hydrant so as to cause hindrance or delay in access thereto, or prevent the free use thereof by the fire department. No person shall, in any way, interfere with or tamper with any fire hydrant or attempt to take water therefrom without special authority from the fire chief or his designee. 
(b)  Without the consent of the fire chief, no person not an active member of the fire department shall at any time ride upon any of the fire apparatus of the fire department, nor shall any person make use of any fire apparatus, hose, or other equipment of the fire department, other than for the purpose for which the equipment was intended, without the consent of the fire chief. 
(Code 1977, § 2-2006) 
Sec. 4-2-7. - Fire drills. 
The fire chief or his authorized representative shall have the authority to conduct fire drills in all public buildings located within the city. Public buildings shall include, but not be limited to, all buildings owned by the city, county, county school district or the county board of education, all libraries, recreation facilities, and any privately owned structure if the owners or occupants thereof request this service of the fire chief. The principal of any school shall be notified before any drill is held. 
(Code 1977, § 2-2009) 
Sec. 4-2-8. - Open burning. 
There shall be no open burning after sunset till sunrise. All other open burning shall be performed only after notifying the fire department. Open burning shall not include fireplaces, charcoal grills or small recreational campfires provided they create no fire hazard or smoke nuisance. 
(Code 1977, § 2-2010) 
Cross reference— Burning solid waste prohibited, § 5-2-9. 
Sec. 4-2-9. - False fire alarms. 
(a)  Every establishment or residence within the city limits having an electronic, telephone or mechanical fire alarm system, including those alarms which are audible or visible on premises, shall be entitled to report a maximum of three false alarms in any three-month time frame to which the fire department will respond in the appropriate manner without charge. Any business with multiple buildings on its premises may report a maximum of three false alarms in any three-month time frame without charge for each building that is wired with a separate alarm system. 
(b)  After the third residential false alarm in any three-month time frame, the fee of $50.00 shall be imposed for each additional alarm up to a total of six, after which time the fee shall be $150.00 for each alarm during the same three-month time frame. After the third establishment (commercial or industrial) false alarm in any three-month time frame, the fee of $150.00 shall be imposed for each additional alarm up to a total of six, after which time the fee shall be $300.00 for each alarm during the same three-month time frame. 
(c)  Whenever four or more alarms in any 30-minute period are received on the control panel at the fire department, which subsequently turn out to be false alarms, the same shall be conclusive evidence of natural disturbances (such as electrical storms, etc.), city-wide and no charge shall be imposed by the city nor shall alarms occurring during such period be counted toward the allowance above. 
(d)  Where substantiated by written evidence satisfactory to the fire chief from a third party that the false alarm was not caused by the alarm owner/subscriber or the installing alarm company, such a false alarm will not be included in the monthly statistics. 
(e)  A 30-day grace period, during which no alarms will be counted, shall be permitted for each new installation. 
(f)  "False alarm" means an alarm signal or recorded message indicating a fire in a structure, when in fact no evidence of fire exists upon inspection of the premises upon response to such alarm. 
(g)  The fire fighters responding to an alarm shall determine if the alarm is a false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 98-21, § 2, 12-22-98; Ord. No. 2006-01, 1-24-06) 
Sec. 4-2-10. - Emergency medical services; fees. 
(a)  The charges for emergency medical treatment and/or services shall be levied and set by resolution. 
(b)  The emergency medical technician assigned responsibility for city emergency medical service delivery shall maintain a record of all transports subject to charges being levied and shall promptly submit them to the fire chief for approval who shall submit them to the administrative office (city clerk) for billing purposes. All charges must be clearly stated and costs enumerated generally in accordance with latest price listings as they may be changed from time to time and shall not include any costs otherwise reimbursed to the city. 
(c)  Those persons served by the Morrow Fire Department Ambulance who are nonresidents of the city will be assessed a penalty of ten percent of their service bill if it is not paid within 60 days from the date of the bill. 
(Ord. No. 88-08, 10-25-88; Ord. No. 89-07, § 2, 5-8-89; Ord. No. 90-12, § 1, 10-23-90; Ord. No. 91-12, § 1, 12-10-91) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-07, § 2, adopted May 8, 1989, did not specify manner of codification, but is included herein as § 4-2-10(c) by the editor. 
Sec. 4-2-11. - Firearms in the fire stations. 
(a)  Purpose. To prevent possible theft of an employee's handgun from their personal vehicle while on duty. 
(b)  Divisions affected. All fire department personnel. 
(c)  Responsibilities. 
(1)  All officers are responsible to comply with and ensure that personnel under their command are adequately trained, fully understand and comply with this policy. 
(2)  All fire department personnel have the responsibility to learn and follow this policy. 
(d)  Procedure. 
(1)  An employee may choose to store one (1) handgun that they own or that they have been issued by an approved governing body within the fire station while on duty. 
(2)  Employees are prohibited from bringing any ammunition into the fire station whether it is loaded in a firearm, in a magazine or loose, regardless of caliber. 
(3)  The firearm can only be stored at the fire station while the owner is on duty. 
(4)  The firearm can only be stored in the fire station the employee is assigned to on that particular shift. 
(5)  The firearm shall never be visible outside of the employee's vehicle except while placing it in the employee's locker to stow or removing it from the employee's locker to transport it to their vehicle. 
(6)  Anytime the firearm is stored in the employee's locker the employee must secure the locker with their own padlock unless the owner has visual sight of the locker. 
(Ord. No. 2017-09 , § 1(Exh. A), 6-27-17) 
Secs. 4-2-12—4-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— By Res. No. 83-06, passed May 10, 1983, the city assumed responsibility for enforcement of the state fire safety regulations as provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12. 
Cross reference— Fire department created, § 2-3-11. 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4. 

Sec. 4-2-21. - Fire prevention code. 
The following rules and regulations affecting fire prevention are hereby adopted in their entirety as the fire prevention code of the city and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. Copies of all fire prevention regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk where they shall be available for public inspection. In case of conflict between the codes, enforcement priority will be given to the regulation which contains the most stringent conditions, stipulations or requirements. 
(1)  Rules and Regulations of the Office of Insurance and Safety Fire Commissioner, chapter 120-3-3 entitled "Rules and Regulations for the Prevention of Loss of Life and Property from Fire, Panic from Fear of Fire, Explosions or Related Hazards" in its entirety; more specifically chapter 120-3-3 entitled "Rules and Regulations for the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards" in Buildings, Structures, Occupancies and Facilities as specified in the 1949 Georgia Fire Act, as amended, by reference; volumes 1 through 12 of the 2012 edition of the National Fire Codes; the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 30, section 30-3-3, regarding accessibility to buildings and facilities by physically disabled persons; and the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 25, concerning state fire laws. 
(2)  Any other provisions of the City Code of Ordinances which do not adopt state law by reference and which are more restrictive than the rules of the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner shall be controlling. 
(3)  The fire prevention personnel shall be vested with the necessary power and authority to carry out all adopted codes and ordinances of the City of Morrow. Said persons shall be administered an oath of office to uphold the laws of the State of Georgia and the City of Morrow, Georgia. The fire prevention personnel may be vested with full authority and authorized to write citations; investigate fires; and appear in court for the purpose of providing sworn testimony. 
(4)  National Fire Protection Association Codes and Standards, 2012 Edition, shall include referenced publications and their appendices in their entirety. 
(5)  To provide for the designation of fire lanes; for the manner, method and language for the posting of signs; to establish the penalty for violation of the same; to prohibit parking in designated fire lanes; and provide an alternative for emergency vehicle parking. 
(6)  If there are any provisions of the City Code of Ordinances which are in conflict with this section, this section shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, § 1, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 2007-01, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 2014-01 , 4-22-14) 
Sec. 4-2-22. - Definitions. 
As used in the fire prevention code, the following shall mean: 
(1)  Fire official: Chief of the city fire department or the city fire marshal. 
(2)  Fire authority: Mayor and council of this city. 
(3)  Fire prevention bureau: Fire department of this city. 
(4)  Board of appeals and adjustments: Mayor and council of this city. 
Secs. 4-2-23—4-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-11, § 2, adopted Apr. 27, 1999, provided that Art. C be deleted in its entirety and replaced with §§ 4-2-31—4-2-37 herein set out. Formerly, Art. C pertained to the same subject matter and contained substantive §§ 4-2-31—4-2-49, derived from Ord. No. 91-02, adopted Feb. 26, 1991. 

Sec. 4-2-31. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1, adopted July 28, 2015, repealed § 4-2-31 in its entirety. Former § 4-2-31 pertained to automatic sprinkler systems and derived from Ord. No. 99-11, § 2, adopted April 27, 1999; and Ord. No. 07-12, adopted Nov. 27, 2007. 
Sec. 4-2-32. - Automatic sprinkler system not to be disabled. 
No person shall shut off or disable any automatic fire sprinkler system, and no owner, occupant, or resident of any building shall disarm such system. Provided, however, a sprinkler system may be shut off in order to perform maintenance work on the system during the time that qualified maintenance personnel are on the premises performing necessary maintenance work. Such maintenance work shall be conducted after notice to and approval by the fire department. 
A fire watch may be required during the time the water-based fire protection system is removed from service as outlined above. If required by the fire officials, the fire watch shall remain in place until such time as the system(s) are returned to their full capacity. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, § 2, 4-27-99) 
Sec. 4-2-33. - Fire alarm systems. 
No person shall shut off or disable any fire alarm system, and no owner, occupant, or resident of any building shall disarm such system. Provided, however, an alarm system may be shut off in order to perform maintenance work on the system during the time that qualified maintenance personnel are on the premises performing necessary maintenance work. Such maintenance work shall be conducted after notice to and approval by the fire department. 
A fire watch may be required during the time the fire alarm system is removed from service as outlined above. If required by the fire officials, the fire watch shall remain in place until such time as the system(s) are returned to their full capacity. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, § 2, 4-27-99) 
Sec. 4-2-34. - Residential sprinkler system. 
Residential sprinkler system (shall mean: [The system in] multifamily dwellings and other residential occupancies up to and including three stories in height). 
Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in all newly constructed dwellings regardless of the type of construction or square feet as listed above. 
"New," for the purpose of this section, shall include any addition to existing buildings, whether vertical or horizontal, or any existing building or structure which shall be deemed to be new in the event such building or structure is subject to substantial renovation or a fire or other hazard of serious consequence. For the purpose of this section, the term "substantial renovation" shall mean any construction project involving exits or internal-external features of such building or structure costing more than or equal to 35 percent of the building's or structure's gross assessed value according to county tax records at the time of such renovation, repair, remodeling, or replacement thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, § 2, 4-27-99) 
Sec. 4-2-35. - Standpipe systems. 
(a)  Buildings of two or more stories in height with more than 3,500 square feet per floor area or buildings with more than 5,000 total square feet shall be protected throughout by a Class I wet standpipe system in accordance with NFPA 14, Standard for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems. 
(b)  Buildings of three or more stories in height, or greater than 30 feet in height, shall be protected throughout by a Class I wet standpipe system in accordance with NFPA 14. 
(c)  Buildings in which the nearest point of fire department vehicle access is 200 feet or more to the building entrance or which would otherwise prohibit the nozzle from reaching the seat of the fire shall be protected throughout by a Class I wet standpipe system in accordance with NFPA 14. 
(d)  Existing buildings, when required to have standpipe systems by subsections (a), (b), and (c) above, shall be retrofitted for standpipe systems as required by the fire official in accordance with NFPA 14, when the cost of renovation exceeds 35 percent of the latest approved assessed value of the building. These buildings shall be required to upgrade in the renovation to meet all current codes, standards, and ordinances as applicable to required fire protection and life safety systems. Historical buildings may require an equivalency concept and working through of the process in conjunction with the historical society. 
(e)  A standpipe system shall be installed in all new or renovated multi-tenant dwellings with or without multiple classification of occupancy(s) regardless of size and shall be installed per NFPA 14 guidelines as a minimal code. The fire official may modify these requirements as necessary for cause. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, § 2, 4-27-99) 
Sec. 4-2-36. - Key boxes. 
Key boxes shall be required on all new and existing building sites to allow the fire and police departments to enter a building quickly in case of an emergency. The key boxes shall be marked, conspicuous, and accessible. Reference Standard Fire Prevention Code, Chapter 6 entitled Fire Protection, section 603.18. The fire officials shall approve the key boxes used. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, § 2, 4-27-99) 
Sec. 4-2-37. - Smoke exhaust devices. 
Roof vents or other approved smoke/heat exhausting/ventilation devices or systems shall be required in commercial buildings and be installed to conform to the following codes and standards as determined by the fire official: NFPA 101, 204M, 92A, 92B, and 90A. 
Existing buildings shall be retrofitted for roof vents or other approved smoke and heat venting devices as required by the fire official when the cost of renovation exceeds 35 percent of the latest approved assessed value of the building. These buildings shall be required to upgrade in the renovation to meet all current codes, standards, and ordinances as applicable to required fire protection and life safety systems. Historical buildings may require an equivalency concept and working through of the process in conjunction with the historical society. 
(Ord. No. 99-11, § 2, 4-27-99) 
CHAPTER 3. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Cities of over 1,000 population authorized and directed to establish local organization for emergency management, O.C.G.A., § 38-3-27. 

Sec. 4-3-1. - Emergency and disaster operations plan. 
The Clayton County Emergency and Disaster Operations Plan, dated March 4, 1983, as now or hereafter amended, is accepted for the emergency management of the city. 
CHAPTER 4. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 4-4-1. - Central alarm monitoring board. 
(a)  All electronic fire, rescue or police alarms in the city which are designed to notify the city's central communications center of an emergency via a dedicated line shall be connected to a central alarm monitoring board. 
(b)  The alarm monitoring board shall be installed and monitored by the city. The individual and/or organization who wishes to utilize the board must bear the cost of connecting their system to the board. Also, the individual and/or organization will bear the cost of any maintenance fee and/or repair cost plus any service charge as required by the repair company. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 1, 5-8-90) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-05, § 1, adopted May 8, 1990, pertaining to a central alarm monitoring board, did not specify manner of codification, but has been included as § 4-4-1 by the editor. 
Title 5 - PUBLIC WORKS 
CHAPTER 1. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Parades and demonstrations, § 10-2-1 et seq.; heavy vehicles moved across curbs, § 10-1-8; debris dropped onto streets from uncovered loads, §§ 10-1-5, 11-1-43; mud tracked onto streets from tires, § 11-1-43. 
State Law reference— Constitutional powers regarding streets, Ga. Const. of 1983, Art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); authority of municipalities to own, operate and maintain streets, O.C.G.A., § 36-34-3; street obstructions, O.C.G.A., § 36-30-10; municipal street administration, O.C.G.A., § 32-4-90 et seq.; assessments for improvements, O.C.G.A., Title 36, Ch. 39. 

Sec. 5-1-1. - Cuts, excavations, etc.; permit required. 
(a)  No person shall in any way remove, cut, dig into or tear up any portion of any paved street or sidewalk of the city for any purpose, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city manager or his designee, and without also complying with any conditions, including posting of a bond, established by the city manager, to ensure completion of the work in a manner acceptable to the city. 
(b)  All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or sidewalk, as set forth in subsection (a), shall make written application therefor to the city manager, which application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. 
Sec. 5-1-2. - Same—City indemnified. 
Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in section 5-1-1 agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit to indemnify and hold harmless the city against any claims or expenses, including attorney's fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising out of the person's operations. 
Sec. 5-1-3. - Street repair; maintenance of site. 
When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the city shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making that excavation or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the excavation or opening. Provided, that where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut, a grantee shall replace the full width of the existing walk and length of the section or sections cut, a section being determined as that area marked by expansion joints or scoring. In addition to restoring the site of the excavation, all excess debris, including but not limited to, excess pavement, concrete, bricks and lumber shall be removed from the site by the permit holder. 
Sec. 5-1-4. - Excavations; leaving unprotected. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains a permit under the preceding sections of this chapter to do any excavation of any kind which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley, sidewalk or public place of the city without placing and maintaining proper guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the work, sufficient to warn the public of any excavation or work, and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of work. 
Sec. 5-1-5. - Obstructions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained, in any of the streets or in any of the easements, or on any of the public sidewalks of the city any obstruction of any kind or character whatever, except by consent of the mayor and council or a designated officer of the city. 
State Law reference— Municipality's power to permit street obstructions limited, O.C.G.A., § 36-30-10. 
CHAPTER 2. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Litter control, § 11-1-41 et seq. 

ARTICLE A. - COLLECTION OF RESIDENTIAL REFUSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, adopted March 27, 2018, amended Art. A in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. A, §§ 5-2-1—-5-2-10, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1977, §§ 5-2005(a)—(e); Ord. No. 89-07, § 1, adopted May 8, 1989; Ord. No. 2000-14, § 1(A), adopted Nov. 14, 2000; and Ord. No. 2006-05, adopted April 25, 2006. 

Sec. 5-2-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Bulk items: "Bulk items" shall mean (1) white goods; and (2) household furniture items, such as sofas, chairs, tables, desks, mattresses, box springs and other large household items, which cannot reasonably be placed in a 95-gallon rollout cart. 
Cart: "Cart" shall mean a rollout receptacle for residential recycling with a capacity of not less than 65 gallons, constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for lifting, and having a tight-fitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by vectors. 
C & D materials: "C & D materials" shall mean waste materials generated by the construction, remodeling, repair or demolition of residential, commercial or other structures. 
City: "City" shall mean the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
Collector: "Collector" shall the City and the Contractor. 
Container: "Container" shall mean and include a durable, rust-resistant, non-absorbent, rodent-proof, watertight plastic or metal container with handles or bails, having a tight-fitting cover. 
Contractor: "Contractor" shall mean any person, firm, corporation, organization or entity with which the City has executed a contract for the collection of residential refuse and its duly authorized representatives. 
Curbside: "Curbside" shall mean the location adjacent to the traveled portion of a publicly owned roadway designated by the Contractor for the placement of recycling carts or bins and other solid waste for collection. 
Garbage: "Garbage" shall mean solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling and sale of produce and other farm products. 
Hazardous waste: "Hazardous waste" shall mean material in a solid or semi-solid state resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides or drugs (other than normal household use), pathological wastes, chemical wastes, flammable or explosive materials, and similar waste material in a solid or semi-solid state, that the city manager may consider a likely hazard to the public health or safety, except radioactive waste materials, as provided in rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Chapter 270-6-1, entitled "Radioactive Materials." 
Industrial waste/industrial solid waste: "Industrial waste" or "industrial solid waste" shall mean the solid waste materials from factories, processing plants and manufacturing enterprises; and includes food processing wastes, meat and poultry processing waste, hatchery waste, construction and demolition waste, condemned food, ashes and cinders from power plants, agriculture products waste, land clearance waste and similar waste. 
Litter: "Litter" shall mean "rubbish" as defined in this section, and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
Premises: "Premises" shall mean land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, or parts thereof, upon or in which solid waste is stored. 
Recyclable materials: "Recyclable materials" means those materials, including, but not limited to, aluminum, tin, glass, plastic, paper and cardboard, which have known use, reuse or recyclable potential and can be feasibly used, reused or recycled. The term does not include: food, liquids, clothes hangers, Styrofoam, batteries, light bulbs or medical waste. 
Recycle bin: "Recycle bin" means any cart, can or other receptacle that is used by the occupant of a residential premises to provide recyclable materials to the city or a contractor for collection from said premises. 
Residential premises: "Residential premises" shall mean a dwelling within the incorporated area of the city occupied by a person or group of persons, including single family homes, duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes, and mobile homes whether such mobile homes are registered as vehicles or assessed as real property. 
Residential solid waste: "Residential solid waste" shall mean all garbage and rubbish generated by a residential premises, excluding automobile parts, tires, C & D materials, yard trash, white goods, hazardous waste or other unacceptable materials. 
Rubbish: "Rubbish" shall mean non-putrescible solid waste consisting of paper, rags, cardboard, cartons, wood, rubber, plastics, glass, crockery, metal cans or other such waste. Small items such as carpet cut into four foot by four foot sections and small in-home similar building materials as long as it is under three cubic yards and materials will not damage Contractor's truck. 
Scavenge: "Scavenge" shall mean uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
White goods: "White goods" shall mean refrigerators, ranges, washers, water heaters and other similar domestic appliances. 
Yard trash: "Yard trash" shall mean leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrubs and tree pruning, and other vegetative materials from the maintenance of yards, lawns and landscaping at a residential premises. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-2-2. - Administration. 
(a)  The city manager or his or her designee shall implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Collection by the city. The city shall have the exclusive right, within its corporate limits, to operate and to maintain, either through its own forces or through the use of a Contractor, a solid waste removal system for the purpose of providing solid waste removal services for the use and benefit of its residences. No person or entity other than the city or a contractor shall engage in the business of solid waste removal or disposal for any residence within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Each property that contains a single family residence shall employ the service of a solid waste disposal system in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  The city shall promulgate and establish rules and regulations governing the operation and maintenance of the solid waste removal system. These rules and regulations shall be kept on file, open to the public, at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-2-3. - Collection. 
(a)  The collector shall collect garbage from each residential premises one time per week from the back door or side door at a point no more than ten feet away from the back of the house. Collection is limited to a container capacity of 150 gallons and all content must be bagged and placed inside containers constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass, having handles of adequate strength for lifting, and having a tight fitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by vectors. Collection is limited up to five residential 30 gallon garbage cans or bags on the designated collection day. The occupant of the Residential Premises shall place garbage out by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day and not before 6:00 p.m. on the day before collection. 
(b)  The Collector shall collect Yard Waste from each residential premises one time per week at Curbside. The occupant of the residential premises shall cut tree limbs no more than six feet in length and four inches in diameter. Leaves, grass clippings, tree clippings, shrubbery clippings and other small pieces shall be placed in a paper bags up to a limit of ten paper bags per week not to exceed 40 pounds per bag in weight. This definition does not include whole trees taken down by residents or a professional landscaper. Yard Waste does not include earth, gravel, stones or ornamental landscaping features. The occupant of the Residential Premises shall place Yard Trash at Curbside by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day but not before 6:00 p.m. on the day before collection. 
(c)  The Collector shall collect Recyclable Materials from each Residential Premises one time per week from the back door or side door at a point no more than ten feet away from the back of the house. The occupant of the Residential Premises shall place the Recycle Bin at the side door or back door at a point no more than ten feet away from the back of the house. The occupant of the Residential Premises shall place the cart or bin out by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day and not before 6:00 p.m. on the day before collection. 
(d)  The Collector shall collect bulk items curbside from residential premises once per week at a limit of two items of bulk items per week. Freon must be removed from white good items before collection occurs. Automotive parts, combustible items and large construction demolition debris are not considered bulk items and the collector will not be responsible to collect such items curbside. However, for small in-house home repairs, the collector will collect small items such as carpet cut into four foot by four foot sections and small in-home similar building materials as long as it is under three cubic yards and materials will not damage the truck employed by the collector to collect bulk items. The occupant of the residential premises shall place bulk items in the curbside location by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day and not before 6:00 p.m. on the day before collection. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-2-4. - Solid waste acceptable for collection. 
The following shall constitute waste acceptable for collection by the collector: 
(1)  Garbage; 
(2)  Rubbish; 
(3)  Litter; 
(4)  Bulk items; 
(5)  White goods; 
(6)  Yard waste; and 
(7)  Residential solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-2-5. - Solid waste unacceptable for collection. 
(a)  The following shall constitute waste unacceptable for collection by the collector: 
(1)  Hazardous materials; 
(2)  Industrial waste; 
(3)  Materials such as earth, paint, plaster and other materials resulting from the repair, excavation or construction of buildings; 
(4)  Trees, bushes, brush and any and all types of vegetation cut by commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors; 
(5)  Vehicles parts, including, but not limited to, tires and batteries; and 
(6)  All other forms of refuse not specifically authorized in section 5-2-3. 
(b)  Waste products and other items placed for pick-up by the Collector shall originate from the serviced address only and may not include items delivered or brought over from another address in or out of the city limits. 
(c)  Any person responsible for any waste products and other items not acceptable for collection by the Collector shall make such arrangements as may be necessary for the collection and disposal of the unacceptable refuse. In no case shall the unacceptable refuse be stored for more than seven days by any person prior to its disposal and at no time will the unacceptable refuse be stored in a way that is visible from the right of way or that poses or creates a nuisance to neighbors. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-2-6. - Preparation and storage of acceptable solid waste. 
(a)  Solid waste. 
(1)  Maintenance of containers. Owners of single dwelling units shall store all acceptable solid waste standard containers which shall be provided by the owner or occupant of each residence and which shall at all times be maintained in a good state of repair. Except when trash or garbage is being loaded into containers, or pick-up of the same is being affected, lids of containers shall be kept closed. Each owner shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of solid waste upon the property occupied by him or any public place adjoining his property. 
(2)  Preparation. All solid waste shall be free from liquid. Waste shall be placed into secured bags and then shall be placed inside watertight containers. All bags and containers must be of a type, size and material designed for waste storage and disposal. Small plastic shopping bags from retailers or grocers are not permitted for bagging solid waste. The bags shall be unbroken, securely sealed and placed in the container in a manner so that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. Total collection shall be no more than 150 gallons. A maximum number of five containers can be used. 
(b)  Place of collection. 
(1)  Containers must be stored and placed beside or behind and within ten feet of the house for waste removal. The Collector shall not pick-up garbage within fences, enclosed carports or other enclosed areas. 
(2)  Grass clippings, pine straw, leaves and similar items will be picked up if at the curb on pick-up day and only when bagged appropriately. The items must be secured in disposable paper bags of a type, size and material designed for yard waste storage and disposal. Disposable bags shall be unbroken and securely sealed and loaded in a manner that normal handling will not cause the bag to open. The limit is ten bags per curbside pick-up day; not to exceed 40 pounds per bag. The occupant of the Residential Premises shall cut tree limbs no more than six feet in length and four inches in diameter and total no more than three cubic yards. Yard waste shall not include earth, gravel or stones. 
(3)  Bulk Items from in-home repair waste materials shall be free of nails and other sharp objects and will be collected only when the materials are neatly bundled. The maximum amount of in-home repair materials to be placed at the curb for pick-up is three cubic yards. 
(4)  On yard waste/bulk waste pick-up days, the total of both types of wastes shall not exceed three cubic yards on any given day. 
(c)  Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within such reasonable time, as may be fixed by written notice of the city manager, shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-2-7. - Scavenging. 
No person other than the Collector or the occupant of the Residential Premises from which solid waste is to be collected shall neither interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste pending collection nor remove or take any of the contents thereof, nor remove any such container from the location where the container has been placed by the owner thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-2-8. - Collection. 
(a)  All collections from residential property in the city shall be made by the Collector. 
(b)  Collections from residential property shall be made two times weekly and shall conform to the schedule approved by the city manager. 
(c)  The Contractor shall maintain such state permits, insurance coverage and vehicle and service standards as established by the city manager and approved by the Mayor and Council. 
(d)  Collection service shall be discontinued for any Residential Premises where the standard or special containers used by the occupant of such Premises are inadequate or unfit and the occupant of such premises has failed or refused to correct the situation within ten days after notice of the inadequacy or unfitness has been given. 
(e)  No garbage collections, whether commercial or residential, shall be made between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. north of Interstate 75. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-2-9. - Collection charges. 
(a)  The fees for solid waste collection shall be as fixed from time to time by ordinance of the mayor and council and shall be billed by the city. 
(b)  The city shall maintain all records of pick-ups and shall have the responsibility for collecting the fees required by this section from each of its citizens benefiting from the garbage pick-ups by the collector. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-2-10. - Smoke controls. 
No person shall set fire to or burn waste in the city except as permitted by the city fire marshal in accordance with EPA and EPD restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 5-2-10.5. - Control of private disposal sites. 
There shall be no solid waste disposal sites within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2018-05 , § 1, 3-27-18) 
ARTICLE B. - COLLECTION OF COMMERCIAL REFUSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-03, § 1, adopted Jan. 12, 1999, provided that Art. B, §§ 5-2-11—5-2-13 be added to Ch. 2, and those sections in the chapter numbered 5-2-11—5-2-16 be renumbered accordingly; hence, such sections were renumbered as 5-2-14—5-2-19. 

Sec. 5-2-11. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Commercial container: A manufactured container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the public works director. 
Commercial establishment: Any hotel, motel, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a residential unit. 
Recyclable materials: Plastic beverage bottles and jugs, glass bottles and jars, corrugated cardboard, newspaper, bimetal and aluminum cans, magazines, telephone books, automobile batteries, used motor oil, dry paint cans, metal, and large appliances. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 5-2-12. - Collection of commercial refuse generally. 
(a)  All commercial refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the contractor designated by the city, except as otherwise expressly authorized in this article. At the expiration of each contract currently held by an individual business establishment in the city, each business shall report the same to the city and add their business name, location, phone number, and the owner's or manager's name to the city's list of commercial sanitation customers. The city manager shall be authorized to adopt and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations concerning commercial refuse collection, conveyance and disposal. Such rules and regulations shall have the force of law, but they shall not be contrary to anything in this article but shall be supplementary thereto. 
(b)  The contractor designated by the city will collect commercial refuse in accordance with a schedule as established from time to time by the city and kept on file in the public works department and the office of the city clerk. 
(c)  Commercial collection service may, at the option of the city, be discontinued where commercial containers are inadequate. Before discontinuing service, the owner or occupant of the premises served shall be given written notice by the public works director or other city official of the unacceptable condition. The owner or occupant shall have ten days from the mailing or delivery by hand of the notice within which to correct such defect. 
(d)  Commercial collection service may, at the option of the city, be discontinued for the nonpayment of sanitation charges and fees as provided for in this article. 
(e)  The contractor designated by the city shall be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt, broken concrete, bricks, rocks or debris resulting from repairs, remodeling or construction. 
(f)  The contractor designated by the city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers, grading contractors or building contractors, except on a special fee basis by agreement with the city and the designated contractor. 
(g)  Commercial refuse shall be stored in garbage containers as approved by the public works director. Each commercial customer is responsible for maintaining the receptacle in good condition. 
(h)  All recyclable materials shall be collected by the contractor designated by the city, unless other approval is received from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 1, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2001-12, § 1, 6-12-01) 
Sec. 5-2-13. - Charges for the collection of commercial refuse. 
(a)  Charges for the collection of commercial refuse shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council and shall be billed by the city. Each business establishment in the city is required to use the collection contractor designated by the city, in accordance with section 5-2-12(a); provided, if the solid waste created by any commercial entity is in such form, size or bulk that it cannot be physically handled by the equipment employed by the designated city contractor for the removal of such waste, then, upon application to the city for a plan of private removal, and upon the approval of such a plan, such commercial establishment may be allowed to remove such oversized solid waste material, along with any other waste normally generated by such establishment. The application for permission to make private disposition of such solid waste shall be made through the public works director, who shall approve any plan designed to make orderly and timely disposition of such outsized solid waste. Such permit must be renewed annually. 
(b)  Failure to pay any charges will be a violation of this Code. Citation(s) for violation(s) of this article will be issued by the city, and said citation(s) will be returnable to and tried before the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-03, § 1, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2000-14, § 1(B), 11-14-00) 
Sec. 5-2-14. - Screening of dumpsters and other commercial waste containers, coolers, refrigeration equipment, and HVAC equipment. 
Business, commercial, educational, and other nonresidential buildings and any multifamily residential building for which the use of a commercial or multi-user dumpster, any other commercial waste container, cooler, refrigeration equipment, and HVAC equipment has been authorized by the city shall screen any portion of the dumpster, any other commercial waste container, cooler, refrigeration equipment, and HVAC equipment, which is visible to an average person from a public street, parking lot, or residential building, which is within 500 feet of such dumpster, any other commercial waste container, cooler, refrigeration equipment, and HVAC equipment. Said screening shall be constructed of building or masonry materials that are of sufficient opacity to conceal the dumpster, any other commercial waste container, cooler, refrigeration equipment, and HVAC equipment from view. Evergreen shrubs, or evergreen trees may be used for screening of public-use, recyclable dumpsters placed by governmental entities or nonprofit organizations recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as exempt from federal income taxation, when a plan for such screening has been approved in writing by the city manager or his designee. Individual lots zoned LM (Light Manufacturing District) or HM (Heavy Manufacturing District) are exempt from the screening requirements, if the properties on each side and in front or across the street from the front of said lots are also zoned LM or HM. However, dumpsters or other commercial waste containers in these zoning districts should be located behind the building, or if there is no room behind the building, on the side of the building. 
(Ord. No. 98-14, § 1, 11-24-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 5-2-15. - Restaurant containers. 
Restaurant containers shall be placed on a poured concrete pad. Screening materials for these containers will be architecturally compatible with the building, either block or brick, and must match the building color. Drain plugs are required in dumpsters, and restaurant containers shall be maintained in accordance with the Clayton County Health Department requirements. These containers must be placed out of sight, preferably in the back of the building, with a gate. Each restaurant shall have its own container or share a container with another restaurant, but shall not share a container with another type of business. Restaurant containers must be maintained so as to be free of rodents, odors, and other nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 98-14, § 1, 11-24-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 5-2-16. - Certain matter not to be placed in containers. 
Dead animals, feces, explosives, dangerous and corrosive materials, clothing taken from persons with infectious diseases, heavy metals, or any substance deemed to be a hazardous or toxic waste by any agency of the state or federal government shall not be placed in any trash or garbage receptacle. Produce, meats, poultry, and food preparation oils shall be placed in sealed bags prior to being placed in any trash or garbage receptacle in such a manner as to minimize noxious or offensive odors emanating therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 98-14, § 1, 11-24-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 5-2-17. - Doors and lids to be kept closed. 
Except when trash or garbage is being loaded into containers, or pickup of the same is being effected, all doors for screening, doors or lids of containers shall be kept closed. 
(Ord. No. 98-14, § 1, 11-24-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 5-2-18. - Inspection. 
The city manager or his designee, after identifying himself, shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-14, § 1, 11-24-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 5-2-19. - Penalties for violations. 
The penalties for any violation of this article will be as stated in section 1-1-8 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 98-14, § 1, 11-24-98; Ord. No. 99-03, § 1, 1-12-99) 
CHAPTER 3. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, adopted June 13, 1995, enacted provisions pertaining to stormwater management, designated as Ch. 3, §§ 5-2-12—5-2-25. In order to conform to the numbering system established in this Code, such sections have been redesignated as §§ 5-3-1—5-3-14. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, § 4-2-1 et seq.; soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 8-3-1 et seq.; flood damage prevention, § 8-4-1 et seq.; subdivision regulations, § 8-6-1 et seq. 

Sec. 5-3-1. - Authority. 
The authority for this chapter is based on home rule provisions of the Georgia Constitution, Article IX, Section II, Chapter 2-49. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 5-3-2. - Findings. 
Recent federal regulations (1987 Clean Water Act Amendments) require maintenance and management of municipal stormwater systems and discharges. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 5-3-3. - Objectives. 
It is the objective of this chapter to comply with state and federal stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 5-3-4. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accidental discharge shall be defined as a discharge prohibited by this chapter into the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
City of Morrow separate storm sewer system shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances which is located within city owned rights-of-way and designed and used only for collecting or conveying stormwater runoff or other approved surface water discharges. 
Clean Water Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.). 
Conveyance shall mean stormwater features designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, catch basins, curbs, gutters, storm drains, etc. 
Director shall mean the director of the City of Morrow Public Works Department or the director's designated representative. 
Development activity shall mean man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Discharge shall mean the release of treated or untreated stormwater runoff or other material to the city separate storm sewer system. 
Drainage system shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances designed and used for collecting or conveying stormwater runoff. 
Hazardous material shall mean a flammable, highly corrosive, acidic or toxic material as identified in the Official Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 12-14-1) in the "Oil and Hazardous Materials Spill Reporting" requirements. 
Illicit discharge shall mean a discharge to the city's separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the city's separate storm sewer). 
Maximum extent practicable shall mean best management practices, control techniques, system design or engineering methods and any other provisions which can be economically and reasonably implemented to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
Person shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial and includes any individual, firm, corporation, government agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity. 
Pollution shall mean the contamination or other significant alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Private shall mean property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by city, county, state, or federal government. 
Stormwater management shall mean the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management facility shall mean constructed or natural components of a stormwater drainage system, designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions, including but not limited to, pipes, swales, ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catch basins, oil/water separators, sediment basins, natural systems and modular pavement. 
Stormwater runoff shall mean the direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff, that enters a stormwater conveyance system or other concentrated flow during and following a precipitation event. 
Water quality shall mean those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 5-3-5. - Scope of responsibility. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout the City of Morrow. 
(b)  The director of the city public works department shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. This chapter shall control where ordinances actually conflict. However, if another ordinance or statute requires further or more stringent action, this chapter does not conflict. All persons must take necessary actions to meet other statutes and ordinances not in conflict with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 5-3-6. - Powers of the director. 
The director shall: 
(1)  Have the authority to administer and enforce all regulations and procedures adopted to implement this chapter, including the right to issue notices of noncompliance and requests for corrective actions; 
(2)  Oversee the administration, coordination, acquisition, design, construction, operation, or maintenance of the city separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Approve new connections to the city's separate storm sewer systems by other persons; 
(4)  Examine, with the property owner's permission, separate storm sewer systems, stormwater management facilities, or other drainage systems which discharge to the City of Morrow's separate storm sewer system. The director may take all legal action necessary to examine such systems when the property owner cannot be located, contacted, or fails to give his or her permission to inspect same. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 5-3-7. - Minimum requirements to reduce pollutant discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system from areas of new developments. 
(a)  Application for a clearing or grading permit shall be made to the director on forms furnished by him or her prior to commencing any development activities which direct stormwater runoff or other discharges to the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system. Such application may require plans prepared by a registered professional engineer or other qualified professional to be submitted in triplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the development vicinity; existing and proposed structures; existing and proposed drainage systems; and proposed activities on the site. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  A plan to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of pollutants to the city's separate storm sewer system from areas of new development. Plans may include but are not limited to structural and source control measures to reduce pollutants in stormwater runoff, management practices, or other appropriate provisions approved by the director. 
(2)  Plans shall also address controls to reduce pollutants in discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system after construction is completed. 
(3)  A plan to ensure that the post-developed peak stormwater runoff rate is no greater than the predeveloped peak stormwater runoff rate and minimize downstream erosion and property damage. The director may waive this requirement if appropriate information is submitted that documents downstream impacts are not significant. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from obtaining a development permit unless such activities are identified by the director as possible pollutant sources. These exemptions do not relieve such activities from compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Minor land-disturbing activities such as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences provided that construction of any such residence conforms to the minimum standards as set forth in the City of Morrow Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Chapter [section 8-3-1 et seq.] and that such standards may be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural activities; 
(6)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(7)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the Georgia Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; construction and maintenance, or either, by any water or sewerage authority established by the general assembly of the state; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in the City of Morrow Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Chapter [section 8-3-1 et seq.] and that such standards may be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(8)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electric system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 5-3-8. - Prohibition. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to throw, drain, run, or otherwise discharge to any component of the city separate storm sewer system or to cause, permit or suffer to be thrown, drained, run, or allow to seep or otherwise discharge into such system all matter of any nature excepting only such storm or surface water as herein authorized. It shall be the responsibility of the discharger to provide to the director appropriate certifications that discharges to the city separate storm sewer system meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The director may exempt the following discharges from the prohibition provision above unless such discharges are identified by the director as possible pollution sources: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, and unpolluted ground water infiltration. 
(2)  Unpolluted pumped ground water. 
(3)  Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and street wash water. 
(4)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting. 
(5)  Other unpolluted water. 
(c)  In the event of an accidental discharge or an unavoidable loss to the city separate storm sewer system of any hazardous material, the person concerned shall notify the fire department through the 911 system immediately after the event is discovered. If the material discharged is not considered a hazardous material but is other than unpolluted stormwater runoff, then it should be reported to the public works department as soon as practicable. Notification shall include the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. The person concerned shall take immediate steps to stop the discharge and contain, treat, or take other actions to minimize effects of the discharge on the city separate storm sewer system. The person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge. A written report describing the occurrence, its impact on water quality and the cleanup, shall be prepared by the person concerned and submitted within 15 days of the occurrence to the fire and public works departments. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 5-3-9. - National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Objectives: 
a.  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system by any person; 
b.  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system; 
c.  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system; and, 
d.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this section. 
(2)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply throughout the incorporated area of the city. 
(3)  Compatibility with other regulations. This section is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, other provision of law. The requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(4)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section. 
(5)  Responsibility for administration. The public works director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this section which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
City of Morrow Separate Storm Sewer System means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in subsection (c) of this section. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) storm water discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this section, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(c)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
a.  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
b.  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the public works director as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
c.  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal environmental protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system. 
(2)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
a.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
b.  A person violates this section if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
c.  Improper connections in violation of this section must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the Clayton County Water Authority 
d.  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the public works director requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the public works director. 
(d)  Industrial or construction activity discharges. Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the public works director prior to allowing discharges to the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system. 
(e)  Access and inspection of properties and facilities. The public works director shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this section. 
(1)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the public works department. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall allow the public works department ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination, and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(3)  The public works department shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the public works director to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(4)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the public works department. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the public works director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the public works department access to a facility is a violation of this section. 
(7)  If the public works department has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the public works director is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this section, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this section or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(f)  Notification of accidental discharges and spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the City of Morrow separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone, facsimile or in person no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity, and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above is a violation of this section. 
(g)  Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the public works department is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (g)(5). 
(2)  Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a violation of this section has occurred, the public works director may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
a.  The notice of violation shall contain: 
1.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
2.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
3.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this section and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
5.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
6.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
b.  Such notice may require without limitation: 
1.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
2.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
3.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
4.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
5.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and, 
6.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(3)  Appeal of notice of violation. Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the public works director. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the mayor and council or their designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the appropriate authority or their designee shall be final. 
(4)  Enforcement measures after appeal. If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within five days of the decision of the appropriate authority upholding the decision of the mayor and council, then representatives of the public works department may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(5)  Costs of abatement of the violation. Within five days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within five days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(6)  Civil penalties. In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate, after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(7)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this section, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(8)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this section is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(9)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this section are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. 
The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this section, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 2004-08, §§ 1—8, 4-27-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-08, § 1, adopted April 27, 2004, repealed the former § 5-3-9, and enacted a new § 5-3-9 as set out herein. The former § 5-3-9 pertained to illicit connections and derived from Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, adopted June 13, 1995. 
Sec. 5-3-10. - Maintenance and inspection. 
(a)  Private storm sewer systems shall be operated and maintained by the property owner so as to prevent, to the maximum extent practicable, pollutant discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  The director, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter, in accordance with state and federal law, all properties for regular inspections, periodic investigations, observation, measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, in accordance with provisions of this chapter. The director shall duly notify the owner of said property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(c)  Measurements, tests and analyses required of any discharger to the city separate storm sewer system shall be in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, unless another method is approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 5-3-11. - Penalties. 
(a)  Upon determination that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the director shall notify the violator. This notice shall specify the nature and evidence of violation and the amount of time in which to correct deficiencies. 
(b)  A violation of this chapter, including any noncompliance for correction or alleviation of violations specified in the director's first notice within the specified time for the alleviation in the notice, shall constitute a misdemeanor. In the absence of a time specified for the correction or alleviation in the first notice, all violations must be corrected or alleviated as specified in the first notice within 30 days from the date of said notice. Failure to comply shall constitute a misdemeanor also. The maximum penalty and punishment for any single violation of this chapter may not exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment in the County jail for 60 days or both. Each day the noncompliance or violation is not corrected constitutes a separate violation. The city may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this chapter or to correct violations of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief. 
(c)  Upon notice from the issuing authority or its agent, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, the owner's authorized agent, the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 5-3-12. - Variances from requirements. 
(a)  The director may grant a variance from requirements of this chapter if exceptional circumstances applicable to a site exist such that strict adherence to the provisions of the chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and will not fulfill the intent of the chapter. 
(b)  A written request for a variance shall be required and shall state the specific variance sought and the reasons, with supporting data, a variance should be granted. The request shall include all information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance. 
(c)  The director will conduct a review of the request for a variance and may approve, deny, or request additional information for the variance. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 5-3-13. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director (including any decision with reference to the granting or denial of a variance from the terms of this chapter) may appeal same by filing a written notice of appeal with the director within seven days of the issuance of said decision by the director. A notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the decision of the director is alleged to be in error. 
(b)  The director can reverse his or her decision or prepare and send to the mayor and council and appellant a written response to said notice of appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. All appeals shall be heard by the mayor and council in accordance with the Morrow City Code. The hearing shall be held within the next two meetings of the mayor and council or a date mutually agreed upon in writing by the appellant and the mayor of the City of Morrow, Georgia. The mayor and council shall then make their findings within 30 days of the appeal hearing. The appellant shall not be relieved of his or her obligations during the appeal process. 
(c)  If the appellant is dissatisfied with the mayor and council's decision, he or she can appeal said decision to the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
Sec. 5-3-14. - Property owner liability; supplemental charges. 
Any person in violation of any portion of this chapter shall pay for all costs associated with the violation, including, but not limited to, sampling, testing, containment, cleanup, injury, legal and other costs. 
(Ord. No. 95-06, § 1, 6-13-95) 
CHAPTER 4. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 5-4-1. - Findings. 
The mayor and council makes the following findings: 
(a)  Stormwater management is needed throughout Clayton County. While specific service and system demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the City of Morrow is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(b)  Addressing the stormwater management needs in Clayton County is essential to protecting the public health, safety, and welfare. Provision of stormwater management programs and systems results in both service and benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of Clayton County in a variety of ways. 
(c)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater runoff can result in flooding, streambank and ditch erosion, property damage and degradation of water quality, aquatic habitat and biological communities. Failure to manage these impacts can put Clayton County's ability to receive state and federal grants and permits at risk. 
(d)  The volume and quantity of stormwater generated by a development has been proven to be most closely associated with the amount of impervious surface on the property, therefore, the square footage of impervious surface is the most appropriate factor for calculating stormwater utility fees. 
(e)  Clayton County, Forest Park, Jonesboro, Lake City, Lovejoy, Morrow, and Riverdale, presently own and operate stormwater management systems which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by these entities, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the entities to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems in Clayton County in concert with the management of other water resources in the county. In order to do so, there must be adequate and stable funding for Clayton County's stormwater management program's operating needs and capital. 
(f)  The feasibility report submitted to the county, cities, and Clayton County Water Authority (CCWA) properly assesses and defines the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the stormwater utility. 
(g)  As a result, the county's governing authority finds that a utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering storm water management services and the county's governing authority finds that a utility fee provides the most practical and appropriate means of funding storm water management services in Clayton County. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-4-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this article. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in the Code of Ordinances shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Credit shall mean a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility or the provision of a service or activity by property owner, which system, facility, service, or activity reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater services and facilities. The basis of such credits, if granted, will be defined by a specific written agreement at the determination of the stormwater official in accordance with the stormwater utility. 
Customer shall mean all persons or entities to whom the stormwater service charge is billed. 
Detached dwelling unit shall mean developed land containing one structure which is not attached to another dwelling and which contains one or more bedrooms, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities, designed for occupancy by one family. Detached dwelling units may include houses, manufactured homes, and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land. Developed land may be classified as a detached dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports, or small storage buildings, or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional impervious areas such as parking spaces, playgrounds, or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship, or similar non-residential uses. Detached dwelling unit shall not include developed land containing: structures used primarily for non-residential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple dwelling unit residential properties. 
Developed land means real property which has been altered from its "natural" state by addition of any improvements, such as grading, paving, compaction, construction of structures or impervious surfaces greater than 200 square feet, or drainage works so that hydrologic response of the property is changed from that which would occur in the natural undeveloped conditions. For new construction, property shall be considered developed pursuant to this ordinance upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or upon completion of construction or final inspection if no such certificate is issued. 
Hydrologic response of a property is the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. It is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious area; the size, shape, topographic, vegetative, and geologic conditions of a property; antecedent moisture conditions; and groundwater conditions on a property. 
Impervious surfaces shall mean those areas, which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. The following types of surfaces will be considered "impervious surfaces" for purposes of the stormwater utility: the projected area of buildings; asphalt-, concrete-, brick-, or stone-paved areas; improved vehicular drives and parking areas; compacted gravel and soil surfaces; fabric or plastic coverings; and other surfaces that prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff or that change the hydrologic response of the property that existed prior to development. 
Multi-family residential shall mean developed land where more than one attached or detached residential dwelling units are located, including, but not limited to apartment houses, condominiums, townhomes, attached single-family homes, boarding houses, group homes, hotels and motels, retirement centers, and other structures in which more than one family groups commonly and normally reside or could reside. 
Service charges shall mean the stormwater management service charges applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be reflective of the service provided by CCWA stormwater utility. The charge shall be used to fund the Clayton County stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and systems. Service charges are based on measurable parameters that influence the stormwater utility's cost of providing services and facilities, with the most important factor being the amount of impervious area on each parcel of land. The use of impervious area as a service charge rate parameter shall not preclude the use of other parameters, or the grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate charges for one or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service charges may also include special charges to the owners of particular properties for services or facilities uniquely related to stormwater management of that property, including but not limited to charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced level of stormwater services above those normally provided by CCWA. 
Single-family residential shall mean a developed lot containing one dwelling structure with its principal use being residential. 
Stormwater development guidelines are those guidelines established by CCWA which specify approved design criteria, construction materials and construction methods for components of the stormwater management system. 
Stormwater management system means any one or more of the various devices used in the collection, treatment, or conveyance of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including all manmade structures or natural watercourse for the conveyance or transportation of runoff, such as: detention areas, lakes, berms, swales, improved watercourses, open channels, streams, culverts, pipes, catch basins inlets; collection, or drainage. 
Stormwater official is the CCWA General Manager or his/her appointee that has direct responsibility for the management of the CCWA stormwater utility. 
Stormwater unit (SU) shall mean the unit of measure which provides the basis for comparing the runoff generated by customer's developed land with that generated by another's. An SU shall be the average impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of single-family residential lots in Clayton County. A stormwater unit has been determined through engineering and analysis to be 2,950 square feet of impervious surface. This unit will be used to determine and compute the service charge for all developed land served by the CCWA stormwater utility. 
Stormwater Utility Guidebook shall mean the document that defines the basis for the stormwater utility, policies and procedures for operating the utility, and other necessary information determined to help document how the utility was developed and how it is operated. 
Undeveloped land is land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures in excess of 200 square feet which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-4-3. - Establishment of a utility. 
(a)  The City of Morrow hereby consents to the establishment of a county-wide stormwater utility (the "stormwater utility") by the CCWA which shall be responsible for stormwater management county-wide, and shall provide for, the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management systems. Specific areas of regulation and maintenance are established in the Stormwater Utility Guidebook so long as they are not in conflict with the terms of this ordinance or that certain Intergovernmental Agreement dated June 14, 2005, as amended from time to time, between CCWA and the City of Morrow. 
(b)  Pursuant to the terms of this ordinance and that certain Intergovernmental Agreement dated June 14, 2005, as amended from time to time, between CCWA and the City of Morrow, the CCWA shall carry out and perform on behalf of the City of Morrow, all of the City of Morrow's duties and responsibilities with respect to stormwater management services, enforcement, and systems heretofore owned and operated by the City of Morrow. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-4-4. - Scope of responsibility for the stormwater utility. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall monitor the design, operation, maintenance, inspection, construction, and use of all stormwater management systems in the county. The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the design and construction of public stormwater facilities owned by the county and shall inspect, operate, and maintain them as prescribed herein. The stormwater utility shall provide services which relate to the: 
• Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through Clayton County; 
• Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing city or county owned stormwater management systems; 
• Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
• Maintenance and/or improvement of water quality in waterways throughout Clayton County; 
• Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems; and 
• Complying with the Federal and State regulations related to stormwater management including the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District (MNGWPD) watershed management requirements. 
• Education of the public regarding stormwater issues. 
The stormwater utility shall not provide stormwater services related to Erosion and Sedimentation Control (E&SC). 
(b)  The stormwater utility shall be responsible for plan approval and construction inspection of both private stormwater systems and public stormwater systems not owned by the county. Design and construction of public or private stormwater management facilities will be governed by the CCWA's Stormwater Development Guidelines which specify design criteria, construction materials and construction methods. The CCWA Stormwater Development Guidelines will supersede any previously adopted stormwater design or construction guidelines. Additionally, the stormwater utility may accept the responsibility for the operation and maintenance of private stormwater systems only when such services have been agreed to, contracted for, and approved by the governing authority of the utility. 
(c)  The stormwater utility shall provide for inspection of private stormwater systems to ascertain that the stormwater systems are functioning as designed and approved. The MNGWPD post-development stormwater ordinance has been adopted by Clayton County, Forest Park, Jonesboro, Morrow, Lake City, Lovejoy, and Riverdale. Property owners who fail to maintain their stormwater systems will be notified of the violation. If within 30 days (or 24 hours if there is an immediate danger to public safety), no actions are taken, the CCWA may enter the property and correct the failure. The cost for the repair work may be a charge on the customer's water, sewer and stormwater bill or a lien on the property that may be placed on the tax bill. 
(d)  The CCWA owns or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
1.  Within public road rights-of-way and easements; 
2.  On public land which is owned by the county, cities, or other governmental entity, and to which CCWA has agreements for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system; 
3.  Operation, maintenance, and/or improvement of stormwater management systems which are located on private or public property not owned by the county or cities, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to CCWA for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management systems, shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise provided for by the laws of the state and the United States; and 
4.  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the county or cities. CCWA has expressly reserved the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the CCWA, its directors, and employees arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(e)  The stormwater utility shall provide for effective management of a uniform stormwater plan and program throughout the City of Morrow and provide compliance with the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer NPDES Permit issued to each jurisdiction including but not limited to the following components: 
• Public education and outreach on stormwater issues; 
• Public involvement and participation; 
• Illicit discharge detection and elimination; 
• Post-construction stormwater management; 
• Pollution prevention; 
• Floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-4-5. - Stormwater service charges authorized. 
The CCWA is authorized to impose a service charge on each customer of the stormwater system, provided that such charge is closely associated with the amount of impervious surface associated with a particular property for which the service charge is imposed. The Stormwater Utility Guidebook shall provide for the rate structure which shall determine overall charges for properties served by the stormwater utility, based in part on the number of stormwater units each property is determined to consist of. The stormwater service charge and rate structure may be amended from time to time by official action of the CCWA Board of Directors. The CCWA shall review the stormwater service charge and rate structure on an annual basis and any rate changes will be approved by the CCWA Board of Directors. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-4-6. - Effective date of stormwater service charges. 
The CCWA may begin collecting the stormwater service charge on or after September 1, 2006, and but shall bill more frequently than monthly thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-4-7. - Exemptions. 
The following properties are exempt from stormwater utility fees: 
(1)  Undeveloped land; 
(2)  All public road rights-of-way; and 
(3)  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks). However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-4-8. - Credits. 
(a)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to CCWAs standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities or to private stormwater management systems which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems 
(b)  Property owners of developed land may receive a stormwater service charge credit. The specific credits will be determined based on the guidelines in the Stormwater Utility Guidebook. Credits for structural controls will be based on best management practices performance as defined by the design criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, First Edition, August 2001. 
(c)  Credits may be partial or full credits and property owners can receive a maximum 40 percent credit. 
(d)  Property owners seeking stormwater service charge credits must apply for stormwater service charge credits through completion and submittal to the CCWA of a stormwater service charge credit application. 
(e)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the CCWA shall review the application and make a determination as to whether the applicable criteria for a credit have been met. All decisions regarding the approval or disapproval of a stormwater credit shall be made within 45 days of the date the completed application was received by CCWA. 
(f)  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on (1) continuing compliance with the CCWAs design and performance standards as may be updated or amended from time to time; and (2) upon continuing provision of the systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. The CCWA may revoke any credit at any time for non-compliance with this article. 
(g)  Stormwater utility fees may be adjusted retroactively to the date that CCWA received the completed application. 
(h)  Applicants receiving credit for a structural control as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual must have an approved maintenance plan on file with CCWA and the applicant's property must have on-site stormwater management and treatment facilities. 
(i)  A customer shall reapply every five years for the credit granted, however, CCWA may terminate the credit if CCWA finds the facility does not comply with the original approved credit application. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-4-9. - Inspection of private facilities. 
Continuing compliance with the CCWA's design and performance standards may be verified by CCWA inspection of the systems or facilities upon which the credit is based. No credit shall be given under this article unless the property owner agrees in writing in its application that the CCWA shall have the right for its designated officers, representatives, agents, and employees to enter upon private and public property, upon reasonable notice to the owner of such property, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering testing, on such property in order to assure compliance with the design and performance standards and the applicant's credit application. On-site systems or facilities determined to no longer comply with the county's design and performance standards or the applicant's original credit application shall subject the property owner to revocation of all, or a portion of, stormwater service charge credits based on the CCWA inspectors' estimate of capacity reduction for a period of not less than one year. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-4-10. - Stormwater service charge, billing, delinquencies and collections. 
The CCWA is authorized to establish and/or utilize its own policies with respect to the billing and collection of the stormwater utility service charge and the treatment of delinquent accounts. The stormwater utility service charge may be billed separately, or on a customer statement and collected along with other utility services provided by CCWA, at the CCWA's sole discretion. The CCWA is authorized to apply partial payments proportionately among the water, sewer, and stormwater fees charged by the CCWA. The CCWA is authorized to use existing CCWA procedures for shutting off water with respect to non-payment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-4-11. - Stormwater utility enforcement. 
(a)  Every owner of developed real property located in the City of Morrow, and every person who serves as a contractor or developer for the purpose of developing real property located in the City of Morrow shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, treat, control and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all the City of Morrow ordinances and development regulations, and the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. 
(b)  When the stormwater official determines that a public nuisance exists, the stormwater official shall send a notice of violation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner or owners of the property described, as their name and address are shown on the latest ad valorem tax records of the county property appraiser. This notice shall be deemed complete and sufficient when so addressed and deposited in the United States mail with proper postage prepaid. The notice of violation shall inform the property owner that a violation of this ordinance exists on the identified property with the description of the public nuisance, that the property owner is responsible for maintaining the identified private storm water system, that the property owner may allow the city access to the property to abate the nuisance at the expense of the property owner, and that formal enforcement action will be taken if the violation is not corrected within the time period indicated on the notice. The stormwater official shall determine a reasonable period of time for correction of the nuisance. In determining a reasonable period of time, the stormwater official shall consider the following: practicality and ease of correction; the owner's ability to correct the violation; the severity of the violation; the nature, extent, and probability of danger to the public, and other relevant factors. 
Notice, as required under this provision, shall not be required: (a) when the stormwater official determines that the public nuisance presents an imminent endangerment to persons or property; (b) when a notice of violation has been sent to the same property owner or owners for the same violation within the previous three months; or (c) when notice by certified mail cannot be effected on the owners of record. 
The notice of violation shall contain substantially the following information and may be in the following form or other appropriate form: Notice of violation: name of owner; address of owner; description of property; inspection date; determination made by the stormwater official that the condition on the property is creating adverse conditions so as to constitute a violation of the this ordinance; describe the conditions that caused the property to be in violation and any recommended actions that may be necessary to remedy the nuisance; specify a reasonable time period to proceed and remedy the nuisance; or provide written permission to the city to enter the site and abate the nuisance at owner's expense. 
Within the reasonable period of time for compliance specified in the notice of violation, the property owner shall either abate the nuisance or file a written request with CCWA for a hearing before the stormwater official to show that the condition alleged in the notice does not exist or that such condition does not constitute a public nuisance in violation of the ordinance. 
(c)  Any failure to meet the obligation set forth in this section shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by any damaged party or Clayton County in any court of competent jurisdiction. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the CCWA may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner or developer, if any, on a joint and several basis. From the date of the filing of such action, the CCWA shall have lien rights, which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the General Execution Docket of the Superior Court of the City of Morrow or City Court. CCWA shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 5-4-12. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the stormwater official within 30 days of the decision that is appealed. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  The CCWA shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 30 days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal the CCWA may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(4)  All decisions by the CCWA shall be final. 
(b)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the stormwater official may be appealed by application for writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Clayton County or City Court, filed within 30 days of the date of service of the decision of the chief executive officer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § I, 4-11-06) 
Title 7 - PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Establishment of recreation systems authorized, O.C.G.A., 36-64-1 et seq. 

CHAPTER 1. - CITY PARKS AND FACILITIES 

Sec. 7-1-1. - Use of parks generally. 
The following regulations govern the use of all city parks: 
(1)  Areas are to be left clean. Users shall pick up and dispose of all trash in receptacles provided for that purpose. 
(2)  No alcoholic beverages are permitted. 
(3)  Parks are open for use by the public during daylight hours only, unless posted otherwise. 
(4)  Children under ten years of age must be accompanied by an adult. 
(5)  No bicycles are allowed on the jogging track. 
(6)  Barbecuing shall be done only in city provided pits or in portable above ground grills. No fires may be built directly on the ground or pavement. 
(Ord. No. 96-11, § 1, 9-10-96) 
Sec. 7-1-2. - Group use of facilities. 
(a)  Park facilities are available on a "first come—first served" basis. 
(b)  Groups wishing to reserve use of the park pavilion or community room may do so by contacting the city hall. 
(c)  No charge to the public may be made by any group using the community room. 
(d)  Nonprofit groups wishing to use the park as part of a fund-raising activity may do so only after securing prior approval of the city manager. 
(e)  No commercial use of the park shall be permitted. 
Title 8 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
CHAPTER 1. - PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(A), adopted Feb. 9, 1999, provided that references to "planning commission" be changed to read "planning and zoning board" throughout the Code. 

Sec. 8-1-1. - Authority; creation. 
Pursuant to the powers granted by Ga. Const. of 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. IV, there is hereby established a planning and zoning board for the city. 
(Code 1977, § 1-4012(a); Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(A), 2-9-99) 
Sec. 8-1-2. - Members. 
(a)  The planning and zoning board shall be composed of five citizens of the city, who shall hold no other public office in the city. Each appointment shall be for a term of five years, which terms shall be staggered with one seat open for appointment each year. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term. Appointments shall be made by the mayor and council who shall have the authority to remove any member of the commission for cause after written notice and a public hearing. 
(b)  The compensation of the members, if any, shall be determined by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1977, § 1-4012(b), (h)) 
Sec. 8-1-3. - Officers. 
(a)  The planning and zoning board shall elect one of its members as chairperson, and one of its members as vice chairperson, each of whom will serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. 
(b)  The planning and zoning board shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or an employee of the city or a member of the planning and zoning board. 
(Code 1977, § 4012(c), (d)) 
Sec. 8-1-4. - Meetings; records. 
The planning and zoning board shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairperson and at any other times as the chairperson or board may determine, shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Code 1977, § 1-4012(e)) 
State Law reference— Georgia Sunshine law, O.C.G.A., § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 8-1-5. - Powers and duties. 
The planning and zoning board shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council a zoning ordinance or resolution and map for the city. All proposed amendments to the zoning ordinance shall be first submitted to the planning and zoning board for its consideration and recommendation to the mayor and council. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council regulations for the subdivision of land within the city, and to administer the regulations that may be adopted in accordance with sections 8-6-5 and 8-6-7. 
(3)  Perform such other duties as directed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
CHAPTER 2. - BUILDING REGULATION AND CODE ENFORCEMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local control of building codes, Ga. Const., 1983, Art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE A. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, adopted June 23, 1998, provided for the deletion of §§ 8-2-1—8-2-23, substantive sections thereof being §§ 8-2-1—8-2-9, 8-2-21—8-2-23, which pertained to the adoption of various construction and maintenance technical codes, temporary buildings, construction permits and TV antenna dishes, derived from the 1977 Code, §§ 7-1002, 7-1009, 7-1010; and: 

 
Several sections bore no history note, but were adopted with the adoption of the Code. Ord. No. 98-02 further provided that new §§ 8-2-1—8-2-3, 8-2-4—8-2-12, be added as Arts. A and B, herein set forth. Inasmuch as §§ 8-2-24 and 8-2-25 were not specifically repealed, they have been retained and designated by the editor as Art. C. 

Sec. 8-2-1. - State minimum standard codes. 
(a)  Adoption; enumeration. There is hereby adopted within the City of Morrow the state minimum standard codes enumerated in subdivisions (9)(B)(i)(IX) through (XIII) of section 8-2-20 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated: 
(1)  International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) 2006 edition, with Georgia amendments; 
(2)  1997 Standard for Amusement Devices; 
(3)  SBCCI Excavation and Grading Code, 1975 edition; 
(4)  International Existing Building Code (IEBC), with Georgia Amendments; 
(5)  Uniform Swimming Pool Spa and Hot Tub Code; 
(6)  Chapter 1. Administration, Sections 101 through 107 of the 2006 International Building Code, specifically excluding Appendix A. Employee Qualifications; 
(7)  Part "X" of ANSI A17.1-1984, the American National Standard Practice for Inspection of Elevators, Escalators and Moving Walks, Inspector's Manual ANSI A17.2, the Safety Standards for Manlifts ANSI A90.1a-1976, the Safety Standard for Construction Hoists ANSI A10.4-1981 and ANSI A10.5-1981, the Safety Standard for Conveyors and Related Equipment ANSI B20.1-1984, or the latest revised rules and regulations adopted by the Georgia Commissioner of Labor; 
(8)  Part 3, Fire Escapes, of O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2 (sections 8-2-50 through 8-2-52) shall apply to all buildings within the city which are not used as private residences and which are three or more stories in height; and 
(9)  Article 3 of O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2, "The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings" (sections 8-2-200 through 8-2-222) is hereby incorporated by reference and shall be used by the building official whenever there exists the need to utilize compliance alternatives to any provisions of the rules, regulations, codes, or standards herein imposed or adopted. 
(b)  Codes which are to be enforced by building official. The rules, regulations, codes, or standards heretofore adopted, together with those state minimum standard codes enumerated in subdivision (9)(B)(i)(I) through (VIII) of section 8-2-20 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated: 
(1)  International Building Code (IBC), with Georgia amendments; 
(2)  National Electrical Code, with Georgia amendments; 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC), with Georgia amendments; 
(4)  International Mechanical Code (IMC), with Georgia amendments; 
(5)  International Plumbing Code (IPC), with Georgia amendments; 
(6)  International Residential Code (IRC) for One- and Two-Family Dwelling, with Georgia amendments, specifically excluding section(s), entitled Smoke Detectors. 
The following regulations pertaining to smoke detectors, previously contained in the IRC One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, and new regulations pertaining to residential sprinklers are hereby adopted: 
Smoke detectors required. Smoke detectors shall be installed in every sleeping room, outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and on each additional story of the dwelling, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels, a smoke detector need be installed only on the upper level, provided the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level, except that if there is a door between levels, then a detector is required on each level. All detectors shall be interconnected such that the actuation of one alarm will actuate all the alarms in the individual unit and shall provide an alarm which will be audible in all sleeping areas. All detectors shall be approved and listed and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
Residential fire sprinklers required. An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed in all new one- and two-family dwellings regardless of the type of construction. The system shall conform to the NFPA 13D, 2006 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes. Modifications: None. 
Reference: Rules of the Safety Fire Commissioner State Minimum Fire Safety Standards, 120-3-3.04. 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), with Georgia supplements and amendments; 
(8)  International Fire Code (IFC), with Georgia amendments; 
(9)  National Green Building Standards (NGBS), with Georgia amendments. 
Codes which have statewide application and do not require adoption by local ordinance, shall be enforced by the building official or his designee(s) in accordance with the procedures hereinafter set forth. 
The edition of such codes as currently adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs shall be used and enforced, except where a subsequently published edition of any such code has been adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, with approval of its board, or such code has been amended or revised as provided in section 8-2-23 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(c)  Application, interpretation and enforcement of IECC. Except in regard to buildings owned by the State of Georgia, the design, erection, construction and alteration of any building to which the IECC for Buildings, with Georgia amendments, shall apply shall be accomplished so that the building or applicable portions thereof shall meet or conform to such code. The IECC for Buildings shall not apply to exempted buildings; and, with respect to renovated buildings, such code shall apply only to portions or systems of the building which are directly involved in the renovation. Interpretation and enforcement of such code shall be solely within the province of the building official; provided, however, the commissioner of the Department of Community Affairs or his designated representative shall hear appeals relating to the interpretation, enforcement and administration of such code and may remand any case to the city with instructions to take such action as he directs. 
(d)  Availability of codes; public inspection and copying. Copies of the current edition of all applicable codes shall be maintained in the building official's office at City Hall for public inspection and copying during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 99-11, § 3, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 2001-01, § 1, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2001-22, §§ 1, 2, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 2003-03, § 1(A), (B), 1-28-03; Ord. No. 2007-01, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 2014-02 , 4-22-14; Ord. No. 2018-02 , 2-13-18) 
Sec. 8-2-2. - Duties and responsibilities of building official. 
(a)  The building official, and his designated representatives, shall have and exercise the following duties and responsibilities in the enforcement of state minimum standard codes: 
(1)  To interpret, enforce, and administer the state minimum standard codes within the city in accordance with the provisions and procedural requirements of this chapter; 
(2)  To inspect all existing buildings and structures as required by such codes and to permit and inspect new construction and the renovation, alteration, modification and repairs to existing structures to assure compliance with applicable state minimum code standards; 
(3)  With consent of the city manager, under the budgetary and personnel regulations of the city, to employ inspectors and other personnel necessary for the proper enforcement of such codes and to provide for the authority, functions, and duties of such inspectors; 
(4)  To bring enforcement actions, prosecute complaints and citations in the appropriate court and to appeal those decisions adverse to the best interest of the city; 
(5)  To study and make recommendations to the city manager relating to the administration and enforcement of state minimum standard codes; and 
(6)  To perform all other duties and functions imposed upon the chief administrative officer, by whatever name or title referred, in the state minimum standard codes. 
(b)  Pursuant to the authority contained in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 8-2-26, self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors shall not be applicable in the City of Morrow. 
(c)  The duties and responsibilities of the building official, set forth in this section, may, by private or intergovernmental contract approved by the mayor and council, be exercised and performed by an independent contractor or by the building official of any county or other municipal corporation of this state. When such contract has been entered and spread upon the official minutes of the council, the acts of such contractor shall be deemed the acts of the city building official as if fully performed directly by the city, its officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 8-2-3. - Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created. 
It is the intent of this chapter to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the City of Morrow in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that such property has been constructed, maintained, or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation, or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 6-23-98) 
ARTICLE B. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 8-2-4. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. No person, firm or corporation shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, convert or demolish any building or structure within the city, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a permit for such building or structure from the building official. Separate permits are required for grading, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and low-voltage. However, a homeowner is exempted from obtaining a building permit for remodeling and/or improving his or her dwelling or property as long as the cost of the construction materials does not exceed $1,000.00, and the work is begun and completed solely by the homeowner. This exemption applies only to nonstructural changes (refer to the definition of "Structure" in the city zoning ordinance) and does not apply to any activity which changes the square footage of a structure. 
(b)  Fees. Permit fees shall be established in accordance with a schedule approved by the mayor and council, as may be revised from time to time. 
(c)  Term. Permits shall generally be good for six months from date of issuance; provided, that if the work is not completed within the initial permit term, but has been diligently pursued, the permit may be extended, without additional charge, for successive three-month terms, so long as the work continues to be diligently prosecuted. 
(d)  Revocation for suspension or abandonment. If work authorized by a permit is suspended or abandoned, after the initial term, for a period of 30 days, without good cause shown to the building official, the permit may be revoked upon written notification to the permit holder. Revocations of permits for abandonment are not appealable to the mayor and council. 
(e)  State licensing required. No person shall engage in electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or low-voltage contracting on any work within the city unless licensed by the State of Georgia. Where a state license is required, every applicant for a permit shall furnish proof, at time of application, that he or the person contracted to do the work holds a valid state license in good standing. Failure to meet this requirement may be grounds for revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 6-23-98; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1(B), 10-10-00) 
Sec. 8-2-5. - Written documentation; payment of fee required for issuance. 
Prior to issuance of any permit, in addition to the information requested on the permit application, the building official may require tests, plans and specifications, plats, and other written documentation from engineers, architects, surveyors, and other professionals to assure that full compliance with all permitting requirements of the state minimum standard codes and applicable laws have been met. No permits shall issue on any project where the structure to be built or improved thereon is a "special hazard structure" or the use to be conducted therein is a "special hazard use," without first obtaining the approval of building plans by the state fire marshal's office. Where a project is subject to permitting under the Georgia Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Law, no permit shall issue for any land-disturbance activity unless approved plans are received from the district soil conservation office and all required stabilization facilities are in place, and ready for inspection. All buildings and structures intended for human occupancy shall have a safe source of drinking water and sanitary disposal; no permit shall issue for any building or structure which does not have access to public water and sewer unless plans for a well and/or septic tank have been approved by the county health department. All permits shall be conditioned upon the application and supporting data, which is deemed incorporated into and made a material part or term of the permission granted. No permit shall issue until all requisite fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 8-2-6. - Cessation of work. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, system or component therein, that is being done contrary to the provisions of the state minimum standard codes, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, or in violation of any other applicable law, rule, or regulation, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be given in writing, directed to the owner of the property and to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency situation exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 8-2-7. - Revocation of permit for false statement or misrepresentation. 
The building official may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in the event he finds there has been a false statement or misrepresentation as to any material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. The building official may also revoke a permit upon determining that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, or demolition of the building or structure for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of state minimum standard codes; provided, the work was stopped in accordance with section 8-2-6 and the permittee has not met the conditions for resuming the work after a reasonable period for compliance has been granted. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 8-2-8. - Inspections; right of entry. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the state minimum standard codes, or whenever the building official has probable cause to believe that there exists in any building or structure or upon any premises within the city any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, or premises, unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official, or his designee(s), may enter such building, structure, or premises, at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed by this chapter; provided, if such building, structure, or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry from the building's owner or occupant. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or person having charge or control of the building, structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official may apply to the judge of the municipal court for an administrative search warrant. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 8-2-9. - Service of orders. 
All decisions, orders and rulings of the building official shall be in writing and served upon the applicant, permit holder, owner of property affected or his agent, and, if applicable, persons in possession or occupancy of affected premises. Where such decisions cannot be personally served, service shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the party's last known address as shown on official government records. Any party aggrieved by a decision, order or ruling of the building official may appeal such decision to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal, within 30 days, with the city clerk; provided, however, in any case where the building official has issued an order for the repair, closing or vacating of a building or structure on grounds it is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous so as to constitute a public nuisance, no appeal shall be taken and the aggrieved party will be summoned to appear for hearing before the municipal court. A ruling by the mayor and council shall be deemed final. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 8-2-10. - Variances. 
In those limited cases where the state minimum standard codes allow a local variance based upon hardship, the mayor and council may, upon finding that strict enforcement of the state minimum standard codes would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of such codes and the public interest, grant a variance, subject to finding, in writing, all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure, or system involved and which are not applicable to others similarly situated; 
(2)  That the special condition and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant; 
(3)  That granting a variance will not confer on the applicant any special privileges that are denied by the codes to other buildings, structures, or service systems; 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure, or service system; and 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of such codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
In granting a variance, the mayor and council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the codes, including a reasonable time limit in which the variance is required to be commenced or completed, or both. Each decision of the mayor and council shall recite the factual findings underlying its decision and the reasons for such decision. A copy of the mayor and council's written decision shall immediately be filed in its minutes of the hearing at which the variance was considered and a copy promptly served upon all affected parties. Decisions of the mayor and council shall be final, subject to all applicable remedies afforded by law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 8-2-11. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate any provision of the state minimum standard codes, or the permissive codes and construction standards adopted by this chapter, or fails to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished any building, structure, or system therein in violation of this chapter shall be cited to appear before the municipal court. Upon trial, if convicted, such violation shall carry a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. Each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of this chapter is committed or continued shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. Violations of this chapter are hereby further declared to be public nuisances, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare; and, in addition to all other remedies provided by law, are subject to abatement or injunction in a court of appropriate jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 6-23-98) 
Sec. 8-2-12. - Definition of terms. 
For purposes of interpretation of the state minimum standard codes, the definitions of terms found in section 8-2-20 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall control over the definitions of the same or similar terms as found in such codes or this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-02, § 1, 6-23-98) 
Secs. 8-2-13—8-2-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - ADDITIONAL BUILDING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 8-2-24. - Exterior construction materials for commercial and industrial buildings. 
(a)  On all major arterial and collector streets as defined in the current land use plan of Morrow Georgia, all exposed exterior wall sidings shall be composed of the following maximum and minimum percentages of materials in each classification. The percentages apply to the side on each exposed exterior wall of each building visible from the street(s) on which such building is located. 

 
Type A material: To consist of face brick, granite, stone, marble, terrazzo, architecturally treated reinforced concrete slabs either fluted or with exposed aggregate, insulated window wall panels or stainless steel, porcelain treated steel, anodized or other permanently finished aluminum. 
Type B material: To consist of metal panels with a baked-on enamel or acrylic finish which must be expected to retain its appearance without substantial maintenance for a period of ten (10) years. 
Type C material: To consist of plain reinforced concrete slabs, stucco, concrete block with either sculptured treatment or stack bond with either sculptured treatment or stacked bond and raked joints. 
Type D material: To consist of corrugated steel and aluminum without finish prescribed in "B", plain concrete block, redwood or other decorative wood, masonite, particle board. 
(b)  Materials not listed may be presented to the permits and license section for classification. 
(c)  Building having walls over twenty (20) feet high may be given special material percentages by the permits and license section where warranted. 
(d)  The exterior construction of all nonresidential buildings which exceed ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area shall be of a high grade masonry. Other building materials, including stucco, synthetic stucco, decorative wood, and masonite, may be approved, provided that all combustible surfaces, including attic spaces, are sprinklered with an NFPA 13 sprinkler system. 
(Ord. No. 89-03, § 1, 3-28-89; Ord. No. 97-08, § 1, 10-28-97) 
Editor's note— Inasmuch as Ord. No. 89-03, § 1, adopted Mar. 28, 1989, did not specify manner of codification, such provisions have been codified as § 8-2-24 by the editor. 
Sec. 8-2-25. - Plumbing fixtures, minimum efficiency standards. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to require the use of ultra-low-flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction, or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings; to require the certification of plumbing fixtures regarding flow rates and serviceability standards; to promote compliance with Georgia State Laws for the purpose of conserving water; to maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies and to reduce wastewater flows. 
(b)  Definitions. [As used in this section, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
(1)  Plumbing fixtures shall mean any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators. 
(2)  Toilet shall mean any fixture consisting of a water flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
(3)  Urinal shall mean any fixture consisting of a water flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
(4)  Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(5)  Commercial building means any type of building other than residential. 
(c)  Standards. No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in subsection (c)(1). This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in subsection (e). The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be April 1, 1992, and for commercial buildings shall be July 1, 1992. 
(1)  All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to above should not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 
a.  Toilets, gallons per flush ..... 1.6 
b.  Urinals, gallons per flush ..... 1.0 
c.  Showerheads, gallons per minute ..... 2.5 
d.  Kitchen faucets, gallons per minute ..... 2.5 
e.  Bathroom and lavatory faucets, gallons per minute ..... 2.0 
(2)  The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and an integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (c)(1). 
(3)  Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (c)(1). 
(4)  The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.1M-1989, Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in subsection (c)(1) herein. 
(5)  All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for "low consumption" water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990, Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME A112.19.6-1990, Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended. 
(d)  Product certification. The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards listed in subsection (c) by labeling the fixture and packaging as described below and providing upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the proper building and/or plumbing inspector. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled by the manufacturer to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in section 8 of said standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
(e)  Exceptions. The following fixture uses or applications shall be exempt from the standards established in subsection (c): 
(1)  Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc. 
(2)  Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for use by the physically handicapped. 
(3)  Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in correctional institutions which may require more water for proper operation. 
(4)  Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate lower flows or for specialized purposes which cannot be accommodated by existing technology. 
(5)  Instances of building renovation where drainage lines are to be replaced and/or in new construction when the attainable fall or drop would be inadequate for ultra-low-flow fixtures to properly function. 
(6)  Permission for the exceptions listed here must be obtained from the permits administrator of the city. 
(f)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense and each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Any building or plumbing contractors, developers, etc., who violate the provisions of this section shall be subject to suspension of their business license for a period of up to 90 days. 
(g)  Compliance and enforcement. In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (f), the city may take other actions as described below to compel compliance and may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this section: 
(1)  Compliance with the requirements for installation and labeling at the time of installation in subsection (c) shall be determined by the building and/or plumbing inspector in cases of new or replacement plumbing fixture installations and compliance shall be a condition for receipt of any occupancy permit. 
(2)  The appropriate water authority or water service agency may deny any service connection to an establishment which does not comply with the standards set forth in subsection (c). 
(3)  Compliance with the requirements in subsection (d), regarding the labeling of plumbing fixtures offered for retail sale, shall be determined by the building and/or plumbing inspector for the city. The agency shall have access to all establishments which offer for sale or sell these plumbing fixtures at retail for purposes of determining compliance with subsection (d). 
(Ord. No. 90-13, §§ 1—7, 11-13-90; Ord. No. 91-07, § 1, 7-9-91; Ord. No. 92-04, §§ 1—7, 3-10-92) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-13, §§ 1—7, adopted Nov. 13, 1990, pertaining to minimum efficiency standards for plumbing fixtures, did not specify manner of codification; hence, such provisions have been designated by the editor as § 8-2-25. 
Secs. 8-2-26—8-2-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - UNFIT BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES. 

Sec. 8-2-100. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
(a)  Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2, as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. Title 25, Chapter 2; and any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2, after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
(c)  Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Title 16, Chapter 13, Article 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act". 
(d)  Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
(e)  Governing authority means the Mayor and Council of the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
(f)  Municipality means the City of Morrow, Georgia, a municipal corporation. 
(g)  Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
(h)  Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a fifty-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
(i)  Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures, or use of private property within the city. 
(j)  Public officer means the city manager, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by article D, and any officer or employee of the city to whom he delegates such authority. 
(k)  Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
(l)  Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, § 2, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 8-2-101. - Duty of owners of real property and structures thereon. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or private property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the City of Morrow, Georgia, or such laws and ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property. It is hereby declared to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or use property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, § 2, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 8-2-102. - Complaint in rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. Such officer shall be guided in his investigation by documenting conditions, which include but are not limited to: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation or disrepair by failure to conform to applicable codes and ordinances; 
(4)  Structural defects which render the structure unsafe for human habitation or occupancy; and 
(5)  Uncleanliness. 
(b)  If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall file a Complaint In Rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the Complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court in Clayton County at the time of filing the complaint in the municipal court. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factors in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. Title 43, Chapter 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, within the time period set forth in the order, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(f)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(g)  The lien provided for in subsection (f) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court in Clayton County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (a). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48, O.C.G.A.; provided, however, that the limitation of Code Section 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the municipality whose ordinance is being enforced. Thirty (30) days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(h)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering the lien. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(i)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(j)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. Code Section 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, § 2, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 8-2-103. - Powers of city manager or his designee. 
In carrying out his duties pursuant to this article, the city manager or his designee to whom his authority is assigned shall, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him by the Charter and other ordinances of the city, be empowered to: 
(1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this article. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists. 
(2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants, and attorneys. 
(3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, § 2, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 8-2-104. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. 
(a)  Complaints shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three (3) business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by article D to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the county or municipality whose ordinance is being enforced; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 4 of Title 48; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax filings and mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this Code section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, § 2, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 8-2-105. - Prior ordinances relating to repair, closing, or demolition of unfit buildings or structures. 
Ordinances and code sections of this Code relating to the subject matter of this article and in effect prior to January 14, 2003, being the effective date of this article, shall continue in force and effect for actions commenced thereunder and have the same force and effect after said date as this article. All new actions commenced on or after January 14, 2003 shall be brought pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2002-10, § 2, 1-14-03) 
Sec. 8-2-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-03, adopted April 4, 2009, repealed § 8-2-106 which pertained to the urban development plan and derived from Ord. No. 2006-13, adopted Dec. 12, 2006. 
CHAPTER 3. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Jan. 10, 2017, amended Ch. 3 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 3, §§ 8-3-1—8-3-10, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-23, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 2010. 
Cross reference— Stormwater management, § 5-3-1 et seq.; flood damage prevention, § 8-4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-3-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as "The Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance of the City of Morrow." 
(Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-17) 
Sec. 8-3-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
(1)  Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(2)  Board: The board of natural resources. 
(3)  Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
(4)  Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
(5)  Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
(6)  Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
(7)  CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
(8)  Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
(9)  Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
(10)  Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
(11)  Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
(12)  District: The Clayton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(13)  Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
(14)  Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
(15)  Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
(16)  Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., that includes, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 8-3-4(c) of this chapter. 
(17)  Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
(18)  Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
(19)  Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
(20)  Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
(21)  Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
(22)  Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 8-3-3(5) of this chapter. 
(23)  Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
(24)  Local issuing authority (LIA): The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. For purposes of this chapter, the LIA is the City of Morrow. 
(25)  Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
(26)  Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
(27)  Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
(28)  NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
(29)  NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
(30)  Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
(31)  Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
(32)  Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
(33)  Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
(34)  Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
(35)  Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
(36)  Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
(37)  Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
(38)  Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
(39)  Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
(40)  Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Clayton County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(41)  Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
(42)  State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq., and subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30. 
(43)  State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
(44)  Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(45)  Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org . Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
(46)  Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(47)  Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
(48)  Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-17; Ord. No. 2018-01 , 2-13-18) 
Sec. 8-3-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "Definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 8-3-4(c)(15) and (16) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-17) 
Sec. 8-3-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of § 12-5-30, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section § 12-5-30, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The local issuing authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in sections 8-3-4(c)(15), (16) and (17) in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in sections 8-3-4(c)(16) and (17), there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280 et seq., the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970. And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph, maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015, if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a minor buffer impact as defined in EPD 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent the local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for a project for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall not constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-17) 
Sec. 8-3-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  Generally. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Morrow without first obtaining a permit from the local issuing authority to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of sections 8-3-4(b) and (c) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by sections 8-3-4(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in sections 8-3-4(b) and (c), or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the inter-relationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary, and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by sections 8-3-4(c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-17) 
Sec. 8-3-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The local issuing authority will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The local issuing authority shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-17) 
Sec. 8-3-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 8-3-5(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-17) 
Sec. 8-3-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-17) 
Sec. 8-3-9. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Municipal Court of the City of Morrow within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the municipal court rendered under this section shall have the right to review by certiorari to the Superior Court of Clayton County. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-17) 
Sec. 8-3-10. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the date of its adoption. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter, shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2017-02 , § 1(Exh. A), 1-10-17) 
CHAPTER 4. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Sept. 27, 2016, amended Ch. 4 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 4, §§ 8-4-1—8-4-8, 8-4-31—8-4-34, 8-4-61—8-4-66, 8-4-101—8-4-110, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2007-08, adopted Aug. 28, 2007. 
Cross reference— Stormwater management, § 5-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE A. - INTRODUCTION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-4-1. - Floodplain management/flood damage prevention; findings of fact. 
It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of Morrow are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(3)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
a.  Protect human life and health; 
b.  Minimize damage to private property; 
c.  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
d.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(4)  Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Morrow, Georgia, does ordain this chapter and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction provisions for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-2. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-3. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Morrow. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-4. - Designation of chapter administrator. 
The city manager or other authorized designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-5. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics—Flood area maps and studies. 
For the purposes of defining and determining "areas of special flood hazard," "areas of future-conditions flood hazard," "areas of shallow flooding," "base flood elevations," "floodplains," "floodways," "future-conditions flood elevations," "future conditions," "floodplains," potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this chapter, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
(1)  The Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated February 16, 1983 and September 5, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. For those land areas acquired by the city through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Clayton County and the City of Morrow are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Morrow; and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology and approved by the City of Morrow. 
(3)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Morrow; and 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA-approved methodology approved by the City of Morrow. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the City of Morrow City Clerk's Office. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-6. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-7. - Severability. 
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-8. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Morrow or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
ARTICLE B. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 8-4-9. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and terms used herein shall be defined and interpreted as follows; all other words or terms not defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions: 
Accessory structure or facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the zoning administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood-prone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
Building has the same meaning as structure. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before 1973. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before 1973. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other 0than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this chapter the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after 1973 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after 1973. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including, but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Morrow to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Repetitive loss means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank), that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes repetitive loss. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official. The term does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
ARTICLE C. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 8-4-10. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City of Morrow a permit application on a form provided by the City of Morrow for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-11. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20 foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site. 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 8-4-21(2); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in subsection 8-4-20(5); and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including, but not limited to, permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-12. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the zoning administrator a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the flood proofing measures. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The zoning administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. 
Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-13. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the zoning administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including, but not limited to, Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the zoning administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions in articles D. and E. of this chapter; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the zoning administrator or designee shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (GA DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the zoning administrator or designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the planning and zoning board and mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
ARTICLE D. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 8-4-14. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the City of Morrow. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the City of Morrow, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Morrow. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-15. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the City of Morrow. If floodway data is not available from the City of Morrow, it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Morrow. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-16. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under subsection 8-4-16(1) shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-conditions flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 8-4-17; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City of Morrow using the FEMA community concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-17. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the City of Morrow prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the City of Morrow. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-18. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the City of Morrow until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the City of Morrow. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-19. - Maintenance requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The City of Morrow may direct the property owner (at no cost to the City of Morrow) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the City of Morrow. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
ARTICLE E. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 8-4-20 - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of section 8-4-16, section 8-4-17, and section 8-4-18 have been met; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of flood water. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of flood water in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood-resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City of Morrow to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(9)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(10)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(11)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding; 
(12)  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding; 
(13)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
(14)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future-conditions elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
(15)  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future-conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this chapter; and 
(16)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-21. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
In addition to the requirements in section 8-4-20, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 8-4-16, section 8-4-17, and section 8-4-18 have been met. If all of the requirements of section 8-4-16, section 8-4-17, and section 8-4-18 [have been met], all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 8-4-20(5)(a). 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8-4-20(5)(a). 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal non-residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 8-4-16, section 8-4-17, and section 8-4-18 have been met. If all of the requirements of section 8-4-16, section 8-4-17, and section 8-4-18 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8-4-20(5)(a). New construction that has met all of the requirements of section 8-4-16, section 8-4-17, and section 8-4-18 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city manager or his or her designee using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the public works director or designee to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8-4-20(5)(a). Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the public works director using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of section 8-4-16, section 8-4-17, and section 8-4-18 and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with subsection 8-4-20(5)(a) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (subsection 8-4-21(1)(b)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 8-4-16, section 8-4-17, and section 8-4-18 have been met. If all of the requirements of section 8-4-16, section 8-4-17, and section 8-4-18 have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8-4-20(5)(a). 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with the standards of subsection 8-4-20(7). 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-22. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
For purposes of this chapter, the term "adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain" includes all structures and buildings on a property that contains (partially or entirely) an area of special flood hazard and all structures and buildings on a property that shares a common property line with another parcel that contains (partially or entirely) an area of special flood hazard. Structures and buildings adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with the standards in subsection 8-4-20(5)(a). 
(2)  Non-residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8-4-20(5)(a). Non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-23. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-zones). 
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the public works director shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood-prone enclosures in accordance with subsection 8-4-20(5)(a). 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-24. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8-4-20(5)(a); 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the public works director using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide flood water around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-25. - Standards for subdivisions of land. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; and 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with subsection 8-4-11(2). 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
ARTICLE F. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 8-4-26. - Variance procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the planning and zoning board of the City of Morrow. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the planning and zoning board. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning board may appeal such decision by certiorari to superior court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(3)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(5)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(6)  In reviewing such requests, the planning and zoning board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(7)  Conditions for variances. 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage provided. 
d.  The city clerk shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(8)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the planning and zoning board shall deem necessary for the consideration of the request. 
(9)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the planning and zoning board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(10)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
ARTICLE G. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 8-4-27. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-28. - Notice of violation. 
If the City of Morrow determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner of the responsible party in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may appeal such decision by certiorari to superior court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
Sec. 8-4-29. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Morrow shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Morrow may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The City of Morrow may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible party to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City of Morrow may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City of Morrow may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City of Morrow may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the City of Morrow shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the City of Morrow has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City of Morrow may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the City of Morrow may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2016-07 , § 1(Exh. A), 9-27-16) 
CHAPTER 6. - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Annotation— Official map, approval and establishment in the City of Morrow, see Young v. Sweetbriar, 222 Ga. 264, 194 S.E. 2d 476 (1966). 
Cross reference— Stormwater management, § 5-3-1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority to plan, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. IV. 

Sec. 8-6-1. - Title purpose; intent. 
(a)  This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Morrow, Georgia." 
(b)  This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(2)  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to land developments; 
(3)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments; 
(4)  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; and 
(5)  To assure that land is developed in conformity with the master plan of the city. 
The development of all lots and subdivisions in the city will be in accordance with the provisions of title 8, chapter 6, and the standards and specifications for the same as maintained in the office of the public works director. 
(c)  Whenever the provisions of this chapter and those of some other ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, that provision requiring the highest, or more strict, standard shall govern. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2001; Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(B), 2-9-99) 
Sec. 8-6-2. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. The term "shall" is mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. 
(1)  Lot is a portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description, as on a subdivision plat or record of survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of this chapter, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
(2)  Planning and zoning board is the City of Morrow Planning and Zoning Board. 
(3)  Street is a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley, or other way, and for the purpose of this chapter, streets are divided into the following categories: 
a.  Limited access freeway: A major divided highway for through traffic with full control of access and generally with grade separations at major intersections. 
b.  Major arterial: An arterial highway with intersections at grade and direct access to abutting property (minimum of four lanes (11-foot width) and 70-foot right-of-way). 
c.  Minor arterial: Any street to which access for vehicular traffic from another street is required by law to stop or yield before entering or crossing (minimum of two (2) lanes (26-foot pavement), 50-foot right-of-way, and if desired, addition of sidewalks). 
d.  Collector-distributor: A local street that functions as a collector of restricted traffic and distributes traffic to major or minor arterials (minimum of two lanes and 50 feet of right-of-way). 
e.  Local-residential: A street or road primarily for access to residences, businesses or other abutting property (minimum of two lanes and 50 feet of right-of-way). 
f.  Cul-de-sac: A minor street with only one outlet, sometimes called a dead-end street. 
(4)  Subdivider is the person, firm or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide the land under this chapter, or the authorized agent of that person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under this chapter. 
(5)  Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development; and includes all division of land into two or more lots involving a new street, or a change in existing streets; or divisions of land involving the extension of water, sewer, or gas lines and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2002; Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 8-6-3. - Platting jurisdiction; enforcement; opening streets; erection of building. 
(a)  No plat of lands located within the city shall be entitled to record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Clayton County unless it shall have the approval of the mayor and council inscribed thereon. If two or more lots are being combined, planning and other pertinent city staff shall conduct an administrative review and final approval shall be obtained by the mayor and council. At that time, the applicant can record his/her approved survey plat. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street or lay any utility lines in any street which had not attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of this chapter, unless the street corresponds to the street location shown on an approved subdivision plat, the Morrow Thoroughfare Plan, or on an official street map adopted by the mayor and council; provided, however, that the mayor and council may accept, layout, open and improve any street not so platted if it first submits the proposed action to the planning and zoning board for its review and recommendation. 
(c)  No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in the city unless the street giving access thereto has been accepted as a public street in accordance with this chapter, or unless the street had attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of this chapter, or on a street accepted by the mayor and council as herein provided. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2003; Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(A), (C), 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2014-03 , 5-27-14) 
Annotation— Street dedication, Young v. Sweetbriar, 222 Ga. 262, 149 S.E. 2d 474 (1966). 
Sec. 8-6-4. - Preapplication review. 
Whenever a subdivision of a tract of land within the city is proposed, the subdivider is urged to consult early and informally with the secretary or a designated member of the planning and zoning board. The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. No fee shall be charged for the preapplication review and no formal application shall be required. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2004; Ord. No. 2014-03 , 5-27-14) 
Sec. 8-6-5. - Procedure for tentative approval of preliminary plat of subdivision. 
(a)  Following the preapplication review of a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the secretary of the planning and zoning board, at least 15 days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning and zoning board, the following: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning and zoning board on the preliminary plat shall be sent; and 
(2)  Ten copies of the preliminary plat and other documents, as specified in section 8-6-7. 
(b)  The secretary of the planning and zoning board shall check the plat for conformance to the rules and regulations of this chapter and report the findings and recommendations to the planning and zoning board and the mayor and council, who shall arrange a hearing on the preliminary plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary of the planning and zoning board by mail to the person designated in the letter requesting preliminary plat review and approval, not less than five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Thereafter, the planning and zoning board shall recommend to the mayor and council their approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat. A notation of the action taken by the planning and zoning board shall be made on two copies of the preliminary plat. A statement by the planning and zoning board concerning their recommendations shall be given to the subdivider or developer or their agent and one copy of the preliminary plat shall be returned to the subdivider or developer showing the suggested and recommended changes of the planning and zoning board. Another copy with the same information thereon shall be made available to the secretary for presentation to the mayor and council for their review which shall take place at the next regularly scheduled meeting of that body. A third copy shall be retained by the secretary for inclusion in the records of the planning and zoning board. 
(d)  Approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. It indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. Tentative approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one year unless an extension of time is approved by the planning and zoning board. 
(e)  If action on a preliminary plat is not taken within 30 days of the date of submission, the preliminary plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
(f)  Approval of the preliminary plat and grading and drainage plans shall constitute authorization to proceed with the installation and construction of all improvements. Provided, however, no installation of improvements shall be made, and no work commenced in connection with said preliminary plat, or subdivision thereof, until the said subdivider shall furnish to the city a bond in a penal sum equal to the full cost of required improvements, as estimated by the mayor and council on recommendation of a designated engineer, conditional upon the completion of required improvements within such reasonable period as may be set by said mayor and council, and a further bond in the penal sum of one-third of such estimated construction cost, for the maintenance of such improvements in their original condition for one year after completion. 
(g)  The subdivider shall install improvements in accordance with the preliminary plat, the grading and a drainage plan, and the specifications and standards required by this chapter. The subdivider shall notify the designated engineer, and the public works director of the need for inspection as the improvements are constructed and installed. In no case shall the subdivider continue the installation of improvements and construction, if such action would pre-empt inspection by covering improvements before their approval by the public works director or designated engineer. Upon completion of all improvements, the public works director or the designated engineer shall inspect the completed improvements and verify the fact that they have been built to city specifications and standards, and in accordance with the preliminary plat. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2005, as amended by Ord. No. 86-06, 8/26/86; Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(D), 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2014-03 , 5-27-14) 
Sec. 8-6-6. - Preliminary plat specifications. 
(a)  The preliminary plat submitted for consideration by the planning and zoning board shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than 100 feet to one inch for four or more subdivided lots and 50 feet to one inch for three or less subdivided lots. 
(b)  Sheet size of preliminary plats shall be 11" x 17" for up to a three-lot subdivision, and 20 x 20 inches for a subdivision of four or more lots. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(c)  The preliminary plat shall show ground elevations, based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey. 
(1)  For land that slopes less than approximately two percent spot elevations shall be shown at all breaks in grade, along all drainage channels or swales, and at selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions. 
(2)  For land that slopes more than approximately two percent: 
a.  If the ground slope is regular, contours shall be shown with an interval of not more than five feet; or 
b.  If the ground slope is irregular, contours shall be shown with an interval of not more than two feet; and 
c.  A tie to one or more bench marks shall be shown. 
(d)  The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider; 
(2)  Proposed name of subdivision and its acreage; 
(3)  North point and graphic scale and date; 
(4)  Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the subdivision; 
(5)  Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearings and distances; 
(6)  Names of owners of record of adjoining land; 
(7)  Existing streets, utilities and easements on and adjacent to the tract; 
(8)  Proposed layout including streets, sidewalks and alleys with proposed street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses, and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings; 
(9)  Block numbers and lot numbers; 
(10)  Provisions for water supply, sewerage and drainage; 
(11)  Minimum building front, side, and rear yard setback lines; 
(12)  Any street cross-sections and center-line profiles as may be required by the city engineer or planning and zoning board; and 
(13)  Minor streets will be included in subdivision plats where applicable. 
(e)  Whenever the property proposed for subdivision contains a stream or drainage way and has any area susceptible to flooding once every 100 years or contains areas zoned FP, a grading and drainage plan, prepared by a currently state-registered professional engineer, shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. The plan shall: 
(1)  Contain provisions for erosion control measures which will prevent the deposit on private property, public property and streets, or natural drainage ways of site generated waterborne silt and debris during development, construction or use of property. 
(2)  Include a complete hydrologic study to evaluate the total effects the development under review may have upon drainage facilities and systems. It shall include an analysis of stormwater runoff under existing site conditions and under proposed developed site conditions. It shall include a determination of the channel cross-section area required to carry the affected stream at the 100 year flood stage level. It shall show provisions to insure conformance with the requirements of this section. It shall show the projected 100 year flood level after the development is completed. It shall include the details of providing and maintaining equivalent flow and storage capacity as required by section 8-6-10(k). The grading and drainage plans shall be approved by the public works director or his designee to insure conformance with all applicable requirements of this chapter and other city code provisions prior to the preliminary plat approval. 
(f)  A certificate of tentative approval of the preliminary plat shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
"Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Morrow, Georgia; all the requirements of tentative approval having been fulfilled, this preliminary plat was given tentative approval by the Mayor and Council of the City of Morrow on _______/_______/_______, 19_______. This tentative approval does not constitute approval of a final plat. This certificate of tentative approval shall expire and be null and void on _______/_______/_______, 19_______." 

 
(Code 1977, § 7-2006; as amended by Ord. No. 86-06, 8/26/86; Ord. No. 2014-03 , 5-27-14) 
Sec. 8-6-7. - Final plat procedure. 
(a)  After the preliminary plat of a proposed land subdivision has been given approval by the planning and zoning board, the subdivider shall have within one year from the approval date to submit all recommended changes back to the secretary of the planning and zoning board to provide to the mayor and council for final approval. The following shall be required of the subdivider: 
(1)  A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat and giving the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing by the mayor and council on the final plat shall be sent. 
(2)  Ten copies of the final plat and other documents, as specified in section 8-6-5 the origin of which shall be drawn in permanent ink on cloth. 
(b)  The secretary of the planning and zoning board shall confer with the appropriate city staff departments to ensure the final plat for conformance with the approved preliminary plat, and with the rules and regulations of this chapter and report the findings and recommendations to the mayor and council, which shall afford a hearing on the final plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary of the planning and zoning board by mail to the person designated in the letter requesting final plat review and approval, not less than five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Thereafter, the planning staff and appropriate city staff shall review the final plat and either recommend approval or disapproval to the mayor and council who will further review the final plat and recommendations of the planning and zoning board and approve or disapprove the final plat as presented or modified, to include their own changes. A notation of the action shall be made on the original tracing and two prints of the final plat, including a statement of the reasons therefore if the final plat is disapproved. If action on a final plat is not taken by the mayor and council within 30 days of the date of the submission, the final plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2007, as amended by Ord. No. 86-06, 8/26/86; Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(F), 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2014-03 , 5-27-14) 
Sec. 8-6-8. - Final plat specifications. 
The final plat shall conform to and meet the specification of the preliminary plat and shall be clearly and legibly drawn in permanent ink on tracing cloth. Sheet sizes shall be 20 × 20 inches, and where more than one sheet is required an index map shall be required on the same size sheet. It shall show: 
(1)  Bearings and distances to the nearest existing street lines or bench marks or other permanent monuments (not less than three) shall be accurately described on the plat. 
(2)  Municipal, county and land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when the lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
(3)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth ( 1/10 ) foot and angles to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one to 5,000. 
(4)  Name of the subdivision, exact locations, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat. 
(5)  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents. 
(6)  The location and size of any sidewalks. 
(7)  Location, size and design of any stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, bank stabilizers, ditches, and other natural or man-made facilities for carrying off stormwater. All drainage improvements shown on the drainage plans approved by mayor and council shall be constructed and properly functioning prior to approval of the final plat. As evidence of compliance, "as built" drawings, certified by a currently state registered professional engineer, shall be submitted by the owner to the mayor and council for final approval. 
(8)  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth ( 1/10 ) foot and bearings. 
(9)  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
(10)  Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
(11)  Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers. 
(12)  A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants. 
(13)  The following certifications: 
a.  An engineer's or surveyor's certification, directly on the final plat as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as `future,' and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Morrow, Georgia, have been fully complied with." 
By: 
Registered C.E. No. 
By: 
Registered Georgia  Land Surveyor No. 
b.  An Owner's Certification, directly on the final plat, as follows: 
"Owner's Certification:  State of Georgia, County of Clayton" 
"The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, and that all state, city, and county taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid." 

 
c.  Certificate of Dedication. A certificate by the owner setting forth the description of the areas and improvements he dedicates to the public and the extent of the title which he is dedicating should be attached to the final plat. Because of the legal consideration here, this certificate should be approved as to form by the city attorney. 
1.  Acceptance of streets, roadways, and drainage systems. The developer will provide a statement on the final plat that certifies that all streets, curbing, shoulders, and drainage systems will be maintained by the developer for a period of 24 months. The costs of providing these maintenance services will be the developer's responsibility for the two-year period that begins on the date the final plat is accepted by the mayor and council. 
The statement on the final plat shall be worded as follows: 
The developer warrants the streets, curbing, drainage systems, and shoulders within the right-of-way to be free from defects in materials and workmanship for a period of 24 months from the date of acceptance by the City of Morrow. 
When the developer submits the final plat and the streets have been paved, the public works director or his designee will conduct a pre final inspection of the subdivision and prepare a punch list of items which need to be completed or repaired. All construction items, drainage systems, signage, and erosion control measures should be in place and completed before the public works director recommends approval of the final plat. No building permits can be obtained until the final plat has been approved. 
2.  Certificates of occupancy for commercial projects. Certificates of occupancy are issued by the zoning administrator after all departments involved in the construction process have signed off; this includes the public works department. The following items are inspected by the public works department and must be completed before the certificate of occupancy is approved: 
•  Curbing and paving improvements in the city right-of-way; 
•  Sidewalk improvements within the city right-of-way; 
•  Concrete driveway apron; 
•  Drainage improvements that are within or connect to the city right-of-way; 
•  Detention pond (including certification by a professional engineer); 
•  Buffers; 
•  Stabilization of all disturbed areas; 
•  Tree protection plan and landscaping plan; 
•  Parking requirements; 
•  Signage; and 
•  Pavement markings. 
3.  In addition to the above requirements for the issuance of certificates of occupancy for commercial projects, the following requirements apply to the issuance of both commercial and residential certificates of occupancy: 
(a)  Occupancy permit required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or agent thereof to occupy or use, or to permit the occupancy or use of any premises for any purpose, including the movement of furniture, equipment or other personal property into said premises, until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the fire official. The certificate so issued shall state that occupancy complies with all of the provisions of this code as far as can be determined by a visual inspection of the premises and a review of the records. 
(2)  There shall be imposed by the city a charge of $50.00 for each application. In addition, there may be imposed by the city additional fees as determined by the applicable inspector. 
(b)  Application, residential. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement on an application for an occupancy permit for a dwelling unit as to the names, relationships, ages or number of occupants who will occupy the dwelling unit. 
(c)  Application, other than residential. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false statement on an application for an occupancy permit for a nonresidential unit as to the name of the person, firm, company or institution which will occupy the premises, the type of use, the type or quantity of materials that will be stored on the premises or the floor area of the portion of the premises that will be occupied. 
(d)  Action on an application. The fire official shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits within a reasonable time after filing. No action shall be taken to issue a permit until an inspection of the premises is completed unless there is a current city-conducted property maintenance inspection report on file with the city. 
(e)  Issuance of permit. If all fees are paid and the fire official is satisfied that the premises and its occupancy are in compliance with this code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the fire official shall issue the occupancy permit as soon as practicable. No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this code for premises which have been newly constructed, newly altered, or on which a change in use is proposed unless a certificate of use and occupancy has first been issued under the provisions of the building code. 
(f)  Conditional permit. Occupancy may be permitted on a conditional basis when in the judgment of the fire official practical difficulties interfere with completing all repairs required to bring the premises into full compliance with this code prior to permitting occupancy. However, no conditional permit shall be issued when there is a condition on the premises which can threaten the health or safety of an occupant. No conditional permit shall be issued under the provisions of this code for premises which have been newly constructed, newly altered or on which a change in use is proposed unless a certificate of use and occupancy has first been issued under the provisions of the building code. 
(g)  Rejection of application. If the application does not comply with the requirements of all pertinent laws, the fire officials shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. 
(h)  Suspension of permit. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the occupancy is not commenced within six months after the issuance of the permit or if the occupancy is terminated. 
(i)  Revocation of permit. The fire official may revoke a permit in case of any false statement or misrepresentation of facts in the application on which a permit was based, or in the event a structure or part thereof is condemned pursuant to this code. 
(j)  Existing residential occupancies. The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to any residential occupancy in existence prior to February 9, 1999, unless there is a change in the occupancy of any person after said date. 
(k)  In multifamily residential developments, a 60 percent change in tenants, after the first four years of initial construction, shall cause said developments to be required to update to the current residential construction and development standards. By no later than February 15 of each year, the owner and/or manager of multifamily residential developments shall file an affidavit with the zoning administrator stating the percentage of the change of tenants for the preceding calendar year. 
d.  Copy of Official Action of Governing Body. A copy of the ordinance adopted by the mayor and council accepting the streets, improvements, easements and any other property dedicated by the owner for public use, as indicated by the owner for public use, as indicated on the final plat, shall be attached to the final plat before recording. 
e.  A Certificate of Approval of the Final Plat by the mayor and council, directly on the plat, as follows: 
"Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Morrow, Georgia; all the requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was given final approval by the City of Morrow, Mayor and Council on ________, 19___. 
(date) 
Secretary  City of Morrow  Planning and zoning board 
(Code 1977, § 7-2008, as amended by Ord. No. 86-06, 8-26-86; Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(G), 2-9-99) 
Sec. 8-6-9. - General design requirements. 
(a)  Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use which will increase existing hazards to health, safety, or property destruction, or cause or create these hazards, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. 
(b)  The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the planning and zoning board. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
(c)  Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a public street. 
(d)  All streets and other features of the Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Morrow, Georgia, shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimensions indicated on the major street plan adopted by the planning and zoning board. 
(e)  When features of other plans adopted by the planning and zoning board (such as schools or other public sites, parks, or other land for public uses) are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within one year by the appropriate public agency. 
(f)  Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the planning and zoning board finds not required or not suitable for that public use, the planning and zoning board shall refuse to approve the plat, and shall notify the mayor and council of the reasons for the action. 
(g)  The requirements of this chapter may be modified in the case of a large-scale community or neighborhood unit, such as a housing project or shopping center which is not subdivided into customary lots, blocks, and streets, if the development is approved by the planning and zoning board and if it is in conformity with the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(h)  As-built drawings are to be submitted as electronic files for all dedicated streets as a part of the final plat process. Contact the city information technology manager, Morrow City Hall, for format requirements. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2009; Ord. No. 2002-01, § 1, 2-12-02) 
Sec. 8-6-10. - General requirements for streets and other rights-of-way. 
(a)  Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width indicated in the Morrow Thoroughfare Plan. 
(b)  Street names shall require the approval of the planning and zoning board. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already existing and named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets. 
(c)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be permitted. 
(d)  Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, cul-de-sacs, or dead-end streets, shall not be greater in length than 800 feet. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a property line radius of at least 50 feet with an outside pavement radius of at least 40 feet. 
(e)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains a major street, a limited-access highway, or a railroad right-of-way, the planning and zoning board may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of the right-of-way either as a marginal access street or, at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land, with a non-access reservation suitably planted. Due regard should be given requirements for approach grades and future grade separations in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to a major street (or limited access highway), but only to access streets. 
(f)  Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multi-family, commercial, or industrial developments but shall not be provided in one-family and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning and zoning board of the need for alleys. 
(g)  High back curbs and gutters shall be installed on both sides of all streets. 
(h)  Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys, and public grounds shall not be permitted unless their control is placed in the hands of the mayor and council, under conditions approved by the mayor and council. 
(i)  Sidewalks shall be required as in section 8-6-15. 
(j)  Easements having a minimum width of ten feet located along the side or rear lot lines shall be provided, as required for utility lines, and underground mains and cables. 
(k)  In those cases where a hydrologic study is required and if the required hydrologic study reveals that filling or grading within a flood plain drainage easement would overload the capacity of the channel downstream or increase flood stages upstream, preliminary plat approval shall be denied, unless equivalent flow and storage capacity is replaced and maintained by the owner within the flood plain drainage easement. In addition, if the required hydrologic study reveals that development or building would generate an increase of stormwater runoff in excess of one cubic foot per second during a 100-year frequency storm, preliminary plat approval shall be denied unless improvements are made to provide storage on the site of the increased runoff and a method for regulating the flow in order that the rate of runoff from the site will not be increased. 
(l)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage right-of-way of adequate width, and facilities for that drainage shall be provided by the subdivider at his or her own expense, according to standards and practices as are required below. Parallel streets may be required by the planning and zoning board in connection therewith. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2010; Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(H), 2-9-99) 
Sec. 8-6-11. - Street design requirements. 
Specifications. Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for street construction shall conform to the latest edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, including all amendments. 
(1)  The right-of-way widths shall be the distance across a street from property line to property line. Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
a.  Major arterial—Minimum of four lanes (11 foot width) and 70 feet of right-of-way. 
b.  Minor arterial—Minimum of two lanes (26 foot pavement) and 45 feet of right-of-way and desired addition of sidewalks. 
c.  Collector-distributor—Minimum of two lanes and 50 feet of right-of-way. 
d.  Local-residential—Minimum of two lanes and 50 feet of right-of-way. 
(2)  Street pavement widths shall be 27 feet from face of curb to face of curb on all local-residential, collector-distributor, and minor arterial streets. 
(3)  Maximum and minimum street grades shall be as follows: 
a.  Minor streets and dead-end streets and alleys, not in excess of 14 percent. 
b.  No street grade shall be less than one-half of one percent. 
(4)  The minimum radii of centerline curvature shall be for minor streets and dead-end streets and alleys, 100 feet. 
(5)  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersections shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees, unless required by unusual circumstances. 
(6)  The curb-line radius at street intersections shall be at least 15 feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, a longer radius may be required. 
(7)  Street lighting. The developer shall provide a street lighting standard at each street intersection and at an interval not exceeding 200 feet. Costs of such installation shall be borne by the developer and shown on all plats for approval by the planning and zoning board. Upon notification that the street light systems are approved as to adequacy by the Georgia Power Company, the city will furnish to the developer and the Georgia Power Company the city's intent to pay future energy bills on said approved system. 
(8)  All collector and minor streets within a subdivision shall be improved by the subdivider in accordance with the specifications found in section 8-6-14 of this chapter. 
(9)  Acceleration/deceleration lanes. Except as indicated, acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided for new street and driveway connections to existing streets. The lanes will not be required if any of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The driveway is for a one- or two-family residence; 
b.  Total traffic on the existing roadway is less than 2,000 vehicles per day (count of existing traffic must have been made within one year of the development plan submittal date); 
c.  The driveway is for a small business with ingress/egress of less than 100 vehicles per day; or 
d.  Construction costs of the lanes exceed 25% of the estimated development cost. 
(10)  Improvements along state and federal highways. For any development which abuts a state or federal highway, improvements to the highway and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access from the highway shall comply with the standards and requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation. A copy of the approved Georgia DOT permit shall be provided to the city prior to the issuance of building permits. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2011; Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(I)—(M), 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 1, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 8-6-12. - Design standards for blocks and lots. 
(a)  Block size specifications. 
(1)  Blocks shall be not greater than 1,800 feet nor less than 600 feet in length, except in unusual circumstances. 
(2)  Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where abutting upon major streets, limited-access highways, or railroads or where other situations make this requirement impracticable. 
(b)  Lot sizes. 
(1)  Residential lots shall meet the lot width and lot area requirements of the zoning chapter. 
(2)  Residential lots, other than in the Planned Residential Development District, shall have a depth of not less than 100 feet, unless unusual circumstances make these limitations not practicable. 
(3)  Where individual septic tanks are used, the planning and zoning board shall prescribe that minimum lot sizes conform to health standards prescribed by the county health officer. 
(4)  The development of all lots shall be adequate to provide off-street parking suitable for the use intended as prescribed in the zoning ordinance, and to provide service areas. 
(5)  Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building setback requirements from both abutting streets. 
(c)  All lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines, unless not practicable because of topographic or other features. 
(d)  A building line meeting the front yard setback requirements of the zoning chapter shall be established on all lots. 
(e)  In residential districts not less than 70 percent of the minimum lot area as established by the applicable district shall be above the 100 year flood contour elevation. 
(f)  Each lot shall abut upon a dedicated public street. 
(g)  Double-frontage and reverse-frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least 10 feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other incompatible use. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2012; Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(N), (O), 2-9-99) 
Sec. 8-6-13. - Required improvements. 
(a)  Prior to the approval of the final plat an agreement shall be reached between the subdivider or agent and the city government with regard to the installation of any street improvements or utility construction called for on the subdivision plat. In certain cases, where the city government deems necessary, the subdivider shall be required to have installed by the appropriate city agency, at his expense, or, with approval of the agency concerned, to install, the following street improvements and utilities: 
(1)  Streets, street grading, street paving, and concrete curbs and gutters. 
(2)  Sanitary sewer lines and manholes, storm drainage facilities, sidewalks (when determined by the planning and zoning board to be essential for the safety of pedestrians), and monuments and markers. 
(3)  If the required sewer line cannot be connected to a trunkline sewer at the time of the development of the subdivision, septic tanks shall be installed by and at the expense of the subdivider or lot purchaser for interim use, in conformity with the requirements of the county health department. 
(4)  Water mains within the subdivision with connections to each lot. The minimum diameter of water pipes shall normally be six inches, except that pipe of a lesser size may be used if properly looped and/or adequate water pressure is maintained in accordance with standards established by the Southeastern Fire Underwriters Association. Pipes of less than four inches shall not be used except in unusual cases. 
(b)  All required street improvements, utilities and monuments shall be built to standards specified in sections 8-6-14 and 8-6-15 or by the agency responsible for each, whichever standards are higher. All utilities to be installed in the streets shall be placed and compacted prior to paving. 
(c)  Notwithstanding all other provisions hereof, the mayor and council may disapprove any final plat involving improvements required by this chapter or by the mayor and council if the subdivider shall fail to furnish to the city a bond in a penal sum equal to the full cost thereof, as estimated by the mayor and council, conditioned upon the completion of required improvements within a reasonable period as may be set by the mayor and council, and a further bond in the penal sum of one-third ( 1/3 ) of the estimated construction cost, for the maintenance of the improvements in their original condition for one year after completion. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2013) 
Sec. 8-6-14. - Required street improvement specifications. 
(a)  Pavement base thickness. Required thickness of pavement bases for different loads shall be as follows (this does not include the surface course): 

 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Crushed stone base course. 
(1)  Description. This item shall consist of a base course of a minimum compacted thickness of six inches, composed of crushed stone, crushed gravel or crushed slag on a prepared subgrade in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades and typical cross-sections as shown on the drawings approved by the city. 
(2)  Materials. All materials shall be secured from approved sources and the crushed stone shall consist of hard, durable particles or fragments of stone, free from an excess of flat, elongated, soft or disintegrated pieces, dirt, dust or other objectionable matter and shall be graded as follows: 

 
(3)  Construction methods. 
a.  Preparation of subgrade. All boulders, organic material, soft clay, spongy material and any other objectionable material shall be removed and replaced with approved material. The subgrade shall be properly shaped, rolled and uniformly compacted to conform with the lines, grades and typical cross-section as shown on the drawings approved by the city. 
b.  Placing and rolling aggregate: All base course material shall be deposited and spread by means of spreader boxes, or approved mechanical equipment, or from moving vehicles equipped to distribute the material in a uniform layer. Each layer shall not be more than three inches in thickness after compaction and shall be constructed as follows: 
1.  Immediately following the spreading of the coarse aggregate all material placed shall be compacted to the full width by rolling with a smooth wheel power roller weighing seven to ten tons. Rolling shall progress gradually from the sides to the center, parallel with the centerline of the street and lapping uniformly each preceding track by one-half (½) the width of that track, and shall continue until all the surface has been thoroughly keyed, the interstices of the stone reduced to a minimum, and until it ceases to creep or wave ahead of the roller. 
2.  Any irregularities or depressions that develop under such rolling shall be corrected by loosening the material at these places and adding or removing material until the surface is smooth and uniform. 
3.  After the coarse aggregate has been thoroughly keyed and set by the rolling described above, screenings in an amount that will completely fill the interstices shall be applied gradually over the surface and rolling shall be continued while the screenings are being spread, so that the jarring effects of the roller will cause the screenings to settle into the voids of the coarse aggregate. 
4.  The screening shall not be dumped in piles on the coarse aggregate but shall be spread in thin layers, either by spreading motion with hand shovels, by mechanical spreading or directly from trucks. In no case shall the screenings be applied so fast or thickly as to cake or bridge on the surface in such manner as to prevent the filing of all voids or prevent the direct bearing of the roller on the coarse aggregate. 
5.  Hand brooms shall be used to sweep the screenings into unfilled voids and to distribute the stone where needed. The spreadings, sweepings and rolling shall continue until no other screenings can be forced into the void. 
6.  Shaping and rolling shall be performed alternately as required to maintain a uniform compacted base until a surface or treatment has been applied to the base. 
7.  Along curbs, headers, and walls and at all places not accessible to the roller, the base course material shall be tamped thoroughly with mechanical tampers or approved hand tampers. 
c.  Seasonal limits: No base material shall be deposited or shaped when the subgrade is frozen or thawing or during unfavorable weather conditions. 
(e)  Reserved. 
(f)  Bituminous prime. 
(1)  Description. This item consists of the application of bituminous prime on a previously prepared base course. It includes cleaning of the surface to be primed. 
(2)  Materials. The type of bituminous material used shall be cut-back asphalt, tar, or cut-back asphalt emulsion. The grade and amount of material used will depend on the surface texture and condition of the base and weather variations. 
(3)  Weather limitations. Bituminous prime shall not be placed on any day when the temperature of the air at 7:00 a.m. is below 40 degrees F., nor when the temperature of the air is below 60 degrees F. in the shade, except that if cut-back asphalt emulsion is used, it shall not be applied when the temperature of the air is less than 50 degrees F. in the shade. Prime shall not be applied when rain threatens. 
(4)  Condition of surface. The base to which the prime is to be applied shall have been finished to the approved line, grade and cross-section. The base shall be compact and bonded, and shall not show any deformation after the times of the distributor have passed. 
a.  Cleaning: All loose material, dust, caked clay and all other material likely to prevent bonding of the prime with the base shall be swept and blown from the street for the full width of the prime and two feet more on each side, with mechanical sweepers and blowers and where necessary, by hand. 
b.  Moisture: The surface of the base shall be only slightly damp. If it is too wet, it shall be allowed to dry. If it is too dry, it may be sprinkled lightly, just before it is primed. 
(5)  Amount and extent of prime. The exact amount of bituminous material to be used will be from 0.10 to 0.30 gallons per square yard, depending on the nature and condition of the surface and the prime shall be applied to the full width of the proposed wearing surface of the street. 
(6)  Heating and applying bituminous prime. The exact temperature for applying bituminous prime will be determined by the type of material used. In any case the temperature shall not be less than 80 degrees F. or more than 160 degrees F. regardless of type used. 
(7)  Protection, curing and maintenance. 
a.  Closing to traffic: The primed surface shall be closed to all traffic and left undisturbed for so long as necessary for the prime to cure and until it does not pick up under traffic. 
b.  Rolling: If the base becomes soft after it is primed, the surface shall be rolled longitudinally with a pneumatic tired roller at not more than six miles per hour until the whole surface is firmly set. 
c.  Sanding: If necessary to prevent the prime from being picked up, clean, dry, sharp sand shall be spread by hand or mechanically over the surface. Sand shall only be applied to places that are tacky, and the amount shall be the least needed to prevent picking up. 
d.  Opening to traffic: After rolling and sanding (if it is required) have been done, the primed base may be opened to ordinary traffic. The primed surface shall be maintained until it is covered with a wearing surface. 
(g)  One course bituminous plant mix surface course. 
(1)  Description. This item shall consist of a wearing course of a compacted minimum thickness of one and one-half inches composed of aggregate and bituminous material mixed in a central plant, constructed on an approved type prepared base in accordance with these specifications and in conformity with the lines, grades and typical cross-sections as shown on the drawings approved by the city. 
(2)  Materials. All materials shall be secured from approved sources and as follows: 
a.  Asphalt cement to be used in the asphaltic cement shall be uniform in character, free from water and shall not foam when heated to 350 degrees F. and shall meet the following requirements for penetration: penetration at 77 degrees F., 100 grams, 5 seconds—85 to 100. No mineral matter other than that naturally contained in the asphalt shall be present. 
b.  Aggregate shall consist of fine gravel and sand, disintegrated granite, crushed stone, crushed slag or other similar granular materials. The portion of the material retained on a No. 4 sieve shall be known as coarse aggregate and that portion passing a No. 4 sieve shall be known as filler. 
c.  The materials shall be graded and proportioned as follows: 

 
(3)  Mixing. Mixing shall be done in a suitable pug mill or continuous mixer. Minimum time of mixing shall be 35 seconds, and mixing shall be sufficient to coat all particles. The temperature of the materials when mixed shall be as follows: 
a.  Aggregates—150 degrees to 325 degrees F. and never more than 25 degrees F. above temperature of bituminous material. 
b.  Asphalt—225 degrees to 350 degrees F. 
(4)  Construction methods. 
a.  Cleaning and filling holes. Immediately before placing the bituminous mixture, the existing primed base shall be cleaned of loose or deleterious material by sweeping with a power broom or hand broom. Small depressions or pot holes are to be filled and thoroughly compacted to conform to the surrounding surface. If necessary, a tack coat of cut-back asphalt or asphalt cement of 0.03 to 0.12 gal. per square yard may be required. 
b.  Spreading and finishing: The bituminous material shall be delivered on the job at a temperature between 225 degrees F. and 325 degrees F. and within 20 degrees F. of the temperature set at the mixing plant. Whenever practical the mixture shall be spread by mechanical spreaders. Only in inaccessible locations shall the mixture be spread by hand. 
1.  Placing of the mixture shall be as continuous as possible and the roller shall pass over the unprotected edge of the fresh laid mixture only when the laying of the course is to be continued for such length of time as to permit the mixture to become chilled. 
2.  Longitudinal and transverse joints shall be well bonded and seated. If necessary to obtain this result, the joints shall be cut back to the full depth of the previously laid course, painted with hot asphalt and heated. Before placing the mixture against them, all contact surfaces of curbs, gutters, headers, manholes, etc. shall be painted with a thin uniform coating of hot asphalt cement or cut-back asphalt. 
3.  After spreading, the mixture shall be thoroughly and uniformly compacted by rolling with a seven to ten ton tandem roller as soon after being spread as it will bear the roller without undue displacement. Rolling shall start longitudinally at the sides and proceed toward the center of the pavement overlapping on successive trips by at least one-half the width of the rear wheel. Along curbs, headers, manholes and similar structures and at all places not accessible to the roller, thorough compaction must be secured by means of hot tampers, and at all contacts of this character the joints between these structures and the surface mixture must be effectively sealed. Rolling shall be continued until all creases have been removed and 92 percent to 98 percent density obtained. 
c.  Seasonal limits: Bituminous mixture shall not be produced or placed during rainy weather, when the subgrade or base course is frozen or shows any evidence of excess moisture nor when the moisture on the surface to be paved would prevent proper bond, nor when the air temperature is less than 45 degrees F. in the shade away from artificial heat. 
d.  Tolerances: The surface shall be true to the established grade. The thickness shall not vary more than one-fourth inch from that shown on the plan. The finished surface shall not vary more than one-fourth inch to 10 feet from the true profile and cross-section. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2014; Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(P), 2-9-99) 
Sec. 8-6-15. - Sidewalk specifications. 
(a)  All sidewalks shall be of concrete, not less than four inches thick, over a base compacted and prepared in conformity with best construction practices, and shall be of a minimum width of five feet, with expansion points at intervals of six feet. 
(b)  Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of streets where the approved plat shows lots or building sites upon both sides of a proposed or existing street, unless the construction on one side, or portion thereof, be waived by the mayor and council upon the recommendation of the planning and zoning board. 
(c)  All sidewalks shall be located no closer to the curbing than two feet where right-of-way permits. The two foot strip between back of curb and edge of sidewalk shall be planted with grass and serve as a safety zone for vehicles as well as pedestrians. 
(d)  Handicap curb ramps meeting the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) shall be installed at each intersection and driveway having curb returns. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(Q), 2-9-99) 
Sec. 8-6-16. - Signing. 
(a)  All roadway signing must be installed to meet city standards and specifications prior to street acceptance by the mayor and council. 
(b)  All signs must meet or exceed minimum reflectivity, standards of shape, size, color, legend size, and style as set forth in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). 
(c)  Sign locations shall be reviewed by the public works director on the construction plans. Upon completion of construction, the developer must manufacture and install his own sign plates and posts to city specifications. This should be noted on the approved construction plans. 
(d)  All traffic signage to be placed in the city right-of-way is to be made of retro-reflective sheeting, high intensity material or equivalent, and must meet the MUTCD standards. Plans should indicate the type of signage to be used. Plans should also indicate the approximate location and type of signage for each development. 
(e)  Developer installed (custom signage). When the final plat is submitted, the public works director or his designee will inform the developer of the location and type of signage required. The developer must then install the signage to city specifications before the streets can be accepted by the city. 
(f)  For residential developments, minimum traffic control devices shall consist of a street name sign at each intersection, a stop or yield sign at each intersection, one speed limit sign per block, school or pedestrian crossing signs where appropriate, and limited pavement markings such as cross walk lines for school or pedestrian crossings. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(R), 2-9-99) 
Sec. 8-6-17. - Pavement markings. 
All pavement markings are to be in accordance with the MUTCD standards and shall meet the requirements of the standard details and the Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, Georgia Department of Transportation. The selection of pavement marking material to be used (i.e., paint, thermoplastic, preformed, etc.) shall be determined by the city and shall be indicated on the construction plans. All long lines (i.e., center, lane and edge lines) are to be five inches in width and the centerline should have a four-inch space between lines. Striped long lines (more than 150 linear feet) are to be applied by a highway type truck-mounted machine. All pavement markings are to be pre lined by the contractor and inspected by the city prior to the application of paint or thermoplastic. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(S), 2-9-99) 
Sec. 8-6-18. - Stormwater management and design. 
(a)  Stormwater management plan meeting the criteria in the "Georgia Stormwater Management Manual". An effective stormwater management plan must be prepared for all developments. This plan should insure that adequate drainage facilities are provided for the site and that impact on downstream properties are minimized. The plan should be prepared under the direction of a registered professional engineer with a current license in Georgia. All plans and hydrology studies associated with drainage design must be stamped by the engineer. The plan should outline existing and proposed drainage conditions and downstream drainage receiving systems. A plan should be developed which minimizes downstream flooding and erosion impacts by evaluating pre developed versus post developed peak flows and velocities. For developments of five acres or more, a plan should be developed to minimize the impact of the development on stormwater quality. This can be achieved by minimizing impervious surfaces and/or the use of stormwater structural controls. The city requires all new development designs to utilize the "Wise" model to insure that runoff from the development meets the city's target for total suspended solids (TSS) loading. The "Wise" model can assist the design professional in the selection of the most efficient best management practices for achieving the TSS loading criteria. 
(b)  Hydrologic methods. There are a variety of hydrologic methods which can be used to design stormwater management facilities. The following table lists the methods, which are generally accepted by the City of Morrow; if other methods are proposed, documentation must be provided that assures the method has been calibrated to local conditions and tested for accuracy and reliability. When designing stormwater storage devices, the impact on downstream properties or structures should be evaluated. 
TABLE 1 - RECOMMENDED HYDROLOGIC METHODS 

 
1.  Design storm information. All drainage facilities should be designed for the 25-year storm. All culverts, open channels and storage facilities should be checked for 100-year storm conditions for emergency overflow facilities and flooding potential. Storage facilities should be checked to insure they will adequately detain the 2, 5, 10 and 25-year storms. 
The rainfall intensities for the City of Morrow (Atlanta, Georgia) used for determining peak flows when utilizing methods such as the Rational Equation are found in the Weather Bureau Technical Paper No. 25. The 24-hour rainfall totals for different storm frequencies for the City of Morrow from U.S. Weather Bureau TP-40 are given below. 

 
(c)  Drainage design. Drainage systems should be designed to accommodate the 25-year peak discharge. Pipes and structures should be designed according to appropriate Georgia DOT standards. 
(1)  Pipe systems. A drainage schedule or pipe chart will be required and should contain adequate information to assure that all drainage systems are properly identified, sized and located. Pipe charts should include the following information: 

 
The following criteria also apply to the design of drainage systems in residential subdivisions and any commercial system which connects to the city's right-of-way system. 
a.  In residential subdivisions, stormwater pipes carrying water from the street must extend to a minimum of: 1) to within ten feet of the rear property line or vegetated buffer, if required; 2) 140 feet from the back of the curb; or 3) the 100-year floodplain boundary. 
b.  All inlet and outlet points must contain concrete head wall or flared end sections. 
c.  All discharge points are to have rip-rap for energy dissipation and for any discharge in excess of five fps. Velocity dissipaters should also be included in the design. 
d.  Junction boxes are required where there are changes in direction, slope, size or material of pipes. All junction boxes should contain access covers (metal ring and cover) for maintenance purposes. 
e.  Minimum pipe size in the city's right-of-way is 18 inches, except for residential driveway pipes, which may be 15 inches. 
f.  Pipe systems should be designed to maintain a minimum velocity of three feet per second. 
g.  Only reinforced concrete pipe (rcp) may be placed under the roadway pavement. 
The following pipe types are accepted for use within the city right-of-way or as part of a system that connects to the city's right-of-way. 
Type 1 bituminous coated corrugated metal pipe. 
Reinforced concrete pipe. 
Corrugated metal pipe with aluminized coating. 
Polyethylene pipe, corrugated with smooth inside walls (not under road surface). 
All pipes located outside the right-of-way must be contained in a drainage easement. The easement must be a minimum of 20 feet or two times the depth of the bottom of the pipe in feet. No permanent structure can be built in this easement. 
(2)  Open drainage ditches. Open drainage ditches must be designed with maximum side slopes of 3:1 unless the slopes are stabilized with rock, then the maximum side slope may be 2:1. Velocities should be estimated for open channels to determine if additional stabilization is required. Open ditches located outside the right-of-way should be contained in a drainage easement at least 20 feet in width. The drainage easement should be wide enough to contain the ditch and side slopes. 
(3)  Roadway drainage design. Only high-back curb and gutter are accepted in the city. Catch basins should be located no more than 400 feet apart or a distance that will allow no more than an eight-foot gutter spread from the face of the curb for 25-year peak flows. All other requirements are discussed above. 
(d)  Stormwater storage facilities. Stormwater storage facilities are required if the hydrology study determines that detrimental downstream impacts will result after development without storage facilities. Detrimental downstream impacts could include flooding of existing stormwater structures, flooding of structural property, increased flooding of private property below the development site, increased stream bank erosion because of high velocity flows. The hydrology study should evaluate the downstream system to a point where the proposed developed area being studied is one-tenth of the overall watershed for the downstream system. The hydrology study should also consider the areas upstream of the point of analysis to be fully developed based on their current zoning classification. 
If it is determined that storage is necessary, then the structure should be designed and built to insure that the post developed rate of runoff will not exceed the pre developed rate of runoff for storm frequencies of 2, 5, 10 and 25 years. The need for emergency overflow facilities for the 100-year storm should be evaluated. 
The storage ponds should be designed with side slopes of 3:1 or flatter. The pond should be included in the landscaping plan for the development. Storage facilities with a maximum ponding depth of four feet or more must be enclosed behind a five-foot security fence. In residential developments, they should be contained within a drainage easement that extends 20 feet outside the 100-year ponding elevation and includes access to a public right-of-way. 
The property owner must maintain ponds located on commercial property. Future inspections may be conducted by the city to insure the pond is being maintained to design conditions. An as-built certification prepared by a professional engineer must be submitted for each storage facility before the site can be accepted. Underground and parking lot storage facilities are also acceptable on commercial property. Underground facilities must include appropriate access structures for future maintenance and cleaning. Parking lot storage should not pond water deeper than two feet. 
Centralized or regional detention may be approved for multiple sites provided that the facility is constructed and certified before a certificate of occupancy is issued for any development. Regional or centralized storage facilities should be contained in an easement similar to residential facilities. 
(e)  Stormwater quality management. Development sites of five acres or greater must provide a plan for minimizing the discharge of pollutants in stormwater runoff. This can be achieved by minimizing the amount of impervious surfaces directly connected to drainage systems, by utilizing structural controls or a combination of both. 
Structural controls can be multipurpose facilities, which provide both water quantity and water quality benefits and even recreational opportunities. Structural controls for water quality control should not be used as temporary sediment basins during construction because this can damage their efficiency by clogging filtering devices with silt. When limiting impervious surface percentages to avoid the need for structural controls, deed restrictions will be required to insure these areas are not developed later without stormwater quality structural controls. Structures built on commercial properties are required to maintain these controls and are subject to future inspections by city personnel. 
For more information regarding the design of stormwater quality structural controls, refer to the Clayton County Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
(1)  Residential developments. The table below shows the type of stormwater quality management plan required based on the zoning classification. 

 
(2)  Commercial/industrial developments. 

 
Note: Only runoff from developed areas must be treated. It may be necessary to separate runoff from these developed areas from other runoff and water from off-site to minimize the size of structural controls. 
(f)  Several federal and state water quality programs require that local governments take the initiative to control water quality conditions in their local streams, rivers, and lakes. The streams and rivers in the city also serve as our source of drinking water. The city, in coordination with Clayton County and the Clayton County water authority, has conducted detailed assessments of water quality conditions of our streams and rivers and identified how these conditions will change in the future. In order to meet the goals of federal and state water quality programs and to maintain the water quality of our drinking water supplies, a pollutant loading target was developed to control the runoff from new development. Other watershed management programs are aimed at correcting problems in areas of existing development. Total suspended solids (TSS) runoff is the parameter used to evaluate new developments. Total suspended solids is a good indicator of most other pollutants because they usually are attached to the soil particles that are suspended in the runoff during rain events. The pollutant loading target for the city for TSS is 65 lbs./per acre/year. 
The city requires all new development designs to utilize the "Wise" model to insure that runoff from the development meets the city's target for total suspended solids (TSS) loading. The "Wise" model can assist the design professional in the selection of the most efficient best management practices for achieving the TSS loading criteria. The "Wise" model is a simple spreadsheet tool that calculates TSS loadings based on proposed land use for the development site. The model can demonstrate the value of minimizing impervious and disturbed areas by reducing the need for structural stormwater controls. The model and guidance can be downloaded free of charge from the city web site, www.cityofmorrow.com, departments, public works. 
Once it has been determined what kind, if any, of structural controls will be required to meet the TSS loading criteria, the designer should refer to the Georgia Stormwater Design Manual for guidance on designing these structures. 
(g)  [Post-development stormwater management for new development and redevelopment.] 
(1)  Applicability. 
a.  This section shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection b. below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
2.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
3.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city manager to be a hotspot land use; or, 
4.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items a. and b. above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
b.  The following activities are exempt from this section: 
1.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
2.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
3.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
4.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city manager. 
(2)  Designation of section administrator. The public works director is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1(T), 2-9-99; Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 5-9-00; Ord. No. 2002-01, § 2(A)—(C), 2-12-02; Ord. No. 2004-05, § 1, 4-27-04) 
Sec. 8-6-19. - Construction and placement of fences in areas of the city zoned residential. 
Fences are structures as defined in the City Zoning Ordinance. Refer to Appendix A - Zoning Ordinance, Article VII. Exceptions, Modifications and Encroachments, Section 703 Fences and hedges, general rule. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 1, 4-13-99; Ord. No. 99-14, § 1, 6-8-98; Ord. No. 2014-07 , § 2, 8-12-14) 
Sec. 8-6-20. - Pedestrian lighting. 
Pedestrian lighting is required to be installed to increase the aesthetic appeal of newly developed property, as well as to provide for safer pedestrian thoroughfares. The pedestrian lighting must be approved by the city based on development guidelines maintained in the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 1, 11-28-00) 
Sec. 8-6-21. - Conservation subdivisions. 
(a)  Purposes. 
(1)  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(2)  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(3)  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(4)  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(5)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(6)  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(7)  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(8)  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(9)  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(10)  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(11)  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(12)  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
(b)  General regulations. 
(1)  Applicability of regulations. This conservation subdivision option is available in the list of applicable zoning districts and conditions as a use by right. Applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
(2)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(3)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the local jurisdiction: 
a.  Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
1.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
2.  The 100-year floodplain; 
3.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or, 
5.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
b.  Yield plan. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(c)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall included the following features: 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
c.  Topographic contours of no less than ten-foot intervals; 
d.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in this section; 
e.  General vegetation characteristics; 
f.  General soil types; 
g.  The planned location of protected open space; 
h.  Existing roads and structures; and, 
i.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(2)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit 
(3)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(4)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and the subdivision code. 
(d)  Open space. 
(1)  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(2)  Standards to determine open space. 
a.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
b.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
1.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
2.  Buffer zones of at least 75 feet in width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
3.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
5.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and, 
6.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
c.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible. 
1.  Important historic sites; 
2.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
3.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
4.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
5.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and, 
6.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
d.  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
e.  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
f.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(3)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
a.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
b.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
c.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
d.  Passive recreation areas; 
e.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
f.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
g.  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
h.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
i.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this section. 
(4)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
a.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
b.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and, 
c.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(5)  Ownership and management of open space. 
a.  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowners association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
b.  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
1.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
2.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
3.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the board of commissioners; and, 
4.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
c.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowner's association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowner's association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(6)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
a.  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
1.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
(i)  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
(ii)  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this section. If the entity accepting the easement is not the city, then a third right of enforcement favoring city shall be included in the easement; 
2.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or, 
3.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by city. 
b.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. No. 2004-07, § 1, 4-27-04) 
Sec. 8-6-22. - Stream buffer protection. 
(a)  Findings and purposes. 
(1)  Findings. Whereas, the mayor and council of the city finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
a.  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources. 
b.  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater. 
c.  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation. 
d.  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks. 
e.  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff. 
f.  Maintaining base flow of streams. 
g.  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem. 
h.  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat. 
i.  Providing riparian wildlife habitat. 
j.  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity. 
k.  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(2)  Purposes. It is the purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
a.  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and, 
b.  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(b)  Definitions. 
Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by subsection (d)(1)a. below), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land disturbance activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the permit issued by the City of Morrow required for undertaking any land development activity 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area, or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by subsection (d)(1)b. extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the public works director may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Stream bank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(c)  Applicability. This section shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in subsection (b) above. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(1)  Grandfather provisions. This section shall not apply to the following activities: 
a.  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this section. 
b.  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening, and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
c.  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this section. 
d.  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this section. 
(2)  Exemptions. The following specific activities are exempt from this section. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
a.  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
• A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
• Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
• Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
• Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
• Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
• Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
b.  Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents, and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (c)(2)a., above. 
c.  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this section takes effect or approved under the terms of this section. 
d.  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this section takes effect or approved under the terms of this section, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents, and valve structures. 
e.  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the public works department on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the public works department to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
f.  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
After the effective date of this section, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to subsection (d)(2) below. 
(d)  Land development requirements. 
(1)  Buffer and setback requirements. All land development activity subject to this section shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
b.  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
c.  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(2)  Variance procedures. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this section, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this section, and the public works director finds and determines that the requirements of this section prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the planning and zoning board and the mayor and council of the city may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance require mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
b.  Except as provided above, the mayor and council of the city shall grant no variance from any provision of this section without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the mayor and council. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within Clayton County. The public works director shall post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. 
Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
1.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this section prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
2.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in this section would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this section, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
c.  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
1.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
2.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
3.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
4.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
5.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
6.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
7.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and, 
8.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
d.  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
1.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
2.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
3.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; and, 
4.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
5.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
6.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(e)  Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this section should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(f)  Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and, 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and, 
(3)  Any other documentation that the public works director may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the buffer zone ordinance is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(g)  Responsibility. Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this section shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(h)  Inspection. The city may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(i)  Violations, enforcement, and penalties. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this section or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(1)  Notice of violation. If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan, or the provisions of this section, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this section without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this section and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
a.  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
b.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
c.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
d.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
e.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this section, the code enforcement officer may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(j)  Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(1)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of may appeal in writing within five days after the issuance of such decision or order to the city manager of the city and shall be entitled to a hearing before the mayor and council of the city within ten days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(2)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the mayor and council, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the court system of Clayton County. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, §§ 1—11, 4-27-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-10, §§ 1—11, adopted April 27, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as § 8-6-21. At the editor's discretion, inasmuch as a § 8-6-21 previously existed, said provisions have been redesignated as § 8-6-22. 
CHAPTER 7. - LAND USE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of local governments to adopt plans and zone, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. IV; zoning procedures act, O.C.G.A., § 36-66-1 et seq. 

Sec. 8-7-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Formerly, § 8-7-1 provided for the incorporation of the zoning ordinance by reference. Inasmuch as such ordinance has been set out as App. A to this Code, § 8-7-1 was deleted. 
Sec. 8-7-2. - Land use plan incorporated by reference. 
The "1995 Land Use Plan, City of Morrow, Georgia," with the 1998 amendments, is hereby adopted and incorporated into this Code as fully as though set out at length herein. Copies of the land use plan are maintained on file in the office of the city clerk where they are available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 98-16, § 1, 12-8-98) 
CHAPTER 8. - TREE AND VEGETATION PROTECTION 
ARTICLE A. - TREE PROTECTION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly, Art. A, §§ 8-8-1, 8-8-2, pertained to tree harvesting and was derived from Ord. No. 94-90, adopted Aug. 23, 1994. Such provisions were deleted by Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, adopted Nov. 24, 1998, and new provisions were enacted by such ordinance to read as set out in §§ 8-8-1—8-8-10. 

Sec. 8-8-1. - Definitions. 
The following definition of terms shall apply to this article: 
Buffer: That portion of a lot set aside with adequate natural or planted vegetation to accomplish visual and sound screening to separate residential zoning districts from other zoning districts as required in the city zoning ordinance. 
Clearing: An activity which removes or disturbs the vegetative cover, including trees. 
Crown dripline: A vertical line extending from the outer surface of a tree branch tip to the ground. 
Deciduous tree: Any tree which drops its leaves at the end of a growing season. 
Dripline area: The total area underneath a tree which would encompass all crown driplines. 
DBH: Diameter-at-breast height is a standard measure of tree size, and is the trunk diameter measured in inches at a height of four and five-tenths feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and five-tenths feet, each trunk is measured separately, and the total trunk diameters are added together. A tree which splits into multiple trunks above four and five-tenths feet is measured as a single tree at four and five-tenths feet. 
Evergreen: Any tree which retains its foliage throughout the year. 
Landscaping: Any additions to the natural features of a plot of ground to restore construction disturbance and to make it more attractive, as by adding lawns, trees and shrubs, etc., to the natural environment. 
Landscape area: An area set aside for the installation and maintenance of planting materials. 
Landscaping ordinance: A document which establishes requirements as to the number, size and type of vegetation for landscaping improvements. 
Land and vegetation disturbance permit: A permit issued to authorize the cutting, transporting and clearing of vegetation. 
Natural vegetation: A generally undisturbed, maintenance-free, self-perpetuating stand of vegetation comprising indigenous shrubs, flowers, and wild grasses and trees. 
Natural vegetation area: The area within the boundaries of a given lot which is devoted to natural vegetation. 
Protection area: All land which falls outside the buildable area of a parcel, all areas of the parcel required to remain in open space, the dripline areas beneath a tree or clusters of trees to be retained, and/or all areas required to remain landscape strips or buffers according to the city zoning ordinance or conditions of zoning approval. 
Shrub: A woody plant or bush of relatively low height (two to six feet), distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk. 
Specimen tree or stand: Any tree or grouping of trees which has been determined to be of high value because of its species, size, age or location. General criteria for the determination of specimen trees or stands are as follows: 
(1)  Any deciduous tree whose DBH equals or exceeds 30 inches. 
(2)  Any evergreen tree whose DBH equals or exceeds 24 inches. 
(3)  Any understory tree whose DBH equals or exceeds ten inches. 
(4)  Any tree which has a significant historical value and can be documented through historical records or otherwise, and any tree which has exceptional aesthetic value. 
Tree harvesting: The cutting of more than 15 trees per year for purposes not related to immediate land development or in conjunction with an ongoing development project. 
Understory tree: Any tree or woody plant which is of lesser height and spread than the surrounding evergreens or deciduous trees but which still provides shade and a degree of protection to the earth and vegetation beneath it. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-2. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to any activity which involves the removal of trees in the city. 
Exemptions from the tree protection ordinance [this article] are: 
(1)  Dead, diseased or infested trees as determined by the Georgia Forestry Commission and/or its local representative(s). 
(2)  Orchards and tree nurseries in active commercial operation. 
(3)  The homeowner of a developed, single-family residential lot removing a tree or trees will be required to obtain a permit but will be exempt from paying a permit fee. In the case of a tree contractor removing a tree or trees in a residential area, the contractor will not be required to submit a site plan. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-3. - Land and vegetation disturbance permit required. 
Unless specifically exempted from this article, all owners, developers of land, or contractors, must secure a land and vegetation disturbance permit prior to the removal, relocation or transportation of any trees in the incorporated city limits. 
(1)  Procedure: Four copies of a tree protection plan (TPP) must be submitted to the city public works director, or his designee, for review to ascertain conformance to the tree protection ordinance prior to application for a land and vegetation disturbance permit and/or application for development plan and preliminary plat approval. It is advised that a qualified landscape architect, Georgia Forestry Commission (GFC) Certified Urban Forester, or Arborist prepare the TPP. 
The TPP must include: 
a.  The exact location of all existing trees and specimen trees more than ten inches in diameter clearly indicating those which will be retained to meet the tree protection requirements, their size, dripline area and species. 
b.  The location, size and species of all replacement trees. 
c.  The boundaries of all required buffer areas. 
d.  The boundaries of all existing and proposed landscaped areas. 
e.  The boundaries of all existing and proposed buildings. 
f.  The boundaries of all vehicle and pedestrian use areas. 
g.  All existing and proposed utilities (i.e., water, sewer, stormwater drainage and retention facilities, etc.), and all existing and proposed utility poles and/or light poles. 
Upon submittal of the TPP, the public works director, or his designee, shall: 
a.  Conduct a preliminary review of the TPP. 
b.  Conduct an on-site inspection to determine if there are any trees of exceptional aesthetic or historical value. 
c.  Return the TPP either approved or with changes which must be made prior to the issuance of a land and vegetation disturbance permit. 
After final approval of the TPP by the public works director, or his designee, development plans and plats can be forwarded for review, or the land and vegetation disturbance permit can be issued. Plans will be considered approved if no decision is made by the city within 30 days of the submission of the TPP. 
(2)  Compliance. It is the responsibility of the public works director, or his designee, to review the TPP to ascertain compliance with the provisions of the tree protection ordinance before a land and vegetation disturbance permit will be issued. It is also the responsibility of the public works director, or his designee, to conduct a final inspection for compliance with the tree protection ordinance before a certificate of occupancy or acceptance of streets will be granted. 
(3)  Appeal procedure. Any applicant for a land and vegetation disturbance permit who is aggrieved by any decision of the public works director, or his designee, relating to the application of this article shall have the right to appeal to the city manager. Such appeal shall be requested in writing no less than ten days after the decision has been made. The appeal shall be heard by the city manager within 30 days after the receipt of the appeals request. The city manager shall have the right to overturn, modify or affirm the decision made by the public works director, or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-4. - Tree protection requirements. 
Property subject to the Morrow Tree Protection Ordinance shall retain a minimum of 20% of all trees more than ten inches in diameter. Trees which fulfill this preservation requirement shall be exclusive of the required buffer areas. Every five caliper inches of trees preserved shall count one caliper inch toward the density requirements of the city landscaping ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-5. - Guidelines for tree protection. 
Listed below are guidelines for tree protection to be followed during the grading and construction process, and for the continued maintenance of trees: 
(1)  All individual standalone trees to be retained on a site must be marked with orange engineering tape, tied around the trunk of the tree at a height of five feet above the ground. 
(2)  The tree protection area (dripline area) of standalone trees and stands of trees will be marked with standard construction fencing (orange) or four foot silt fence with stakes placed every ten feet. 
(3)  If initial development is limited to streets, drainage easements and utilities, a TPP indicating only trees equal to or in excess of ten inches DBH which are to be removed must be submitted. During street and utility construction, the grading permit shall be limited to the areas needed for street right-of-way. 
(4)  If it is determined that irreparable damage has been done to a tree in a tree protection area, the developer, the builder and/or owner shall be responsible for the replacement of that tree as provided for in this article under "Guidelines for replacement." 
(5)  All areas not devoted to structures, access ways, dumpsters, storage, roads, parking lots and natural vegetation shall be landscaped. 
(6)  The city zoning department may require landscaping in conjunction with the issuance of a building permit not requiring plat or site approval. 
(7)  All trees planted in accordance with this article shall be of a species approved by the city. 
(8)  The planting of trees to meet the requirements of this article shall be on the front or side of the developed areas and plantings behind a building shall not be counted in determining the minimum requirements of this section unless specifically authorized by the city. 
(9)  The care and maintenance of trees shall be the responsibility of the current owner. Trees which become diseased or dysfunctional shall be replaced. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-6. - Guidelines for tree replacement. 
(a)  If the tree preservation requirements of this article make reasonable use of a property impossible or if a tree in a tree protection area is irreparably damaged, the following replacement requirements shall be followed after the construction process is complete: 
(1)  The trees shall be replaced diameter inch for diameter inch with a minimum of three-inch DBH trees of the same species. If the species of the existing tree is unsuitable for replacement (refer to section 8-8-6(b)) or is unavailable, an inch for inch replacement of minimum three-inch DBH trees of a suitable species (refer to section 8-8-6(b)) shall be planted. 
(2)  All trees selected for replacement must be quality specimens free of disease, injury or infestation, and must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing area (refer to section 8-8-6(b)). 
(3)  All replacement trees must be planted before a certificate of occupancy is issued or streets and easements will be accepted. 
(4)  Replacement trees planted shall fall under the maintenance provisions of the City of Morrow Landscaping Ordinance. 
(5)  Specimen trees shall be replaced with specimen trees and understory trees shall be replaced with understory trees (refer to section 8-8-6(b)). 
(6)  Where the minimum tree diameter cannot be met due to natural site constraints, the developer or builder shall provide the remaining balance of the required trees for planting on public property. 
(b)  Trees suitable for replacement trees and unsuitable as replacement trees: 
(1)  Trees suitable as replacement for specimen trees: 

 
Other specimen trees may be allowed with the approval of the public works director or his designee. 
(2)  Trees suitable for the replacement of understory trees: 

 
Other understory trees may be allowed with the approval of the public works director or his designee. 
(3)  Trees unsuitable for replacement: 

 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-7. - Tree harvesting prohibited. 
Tree harvesting is not allowed in a residentially zoned area or within 100 yards of residentially zoned property. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-8. - Fees. 
(a)  All permits and licenses shall be obtained through the business licensing and permits department at City Hall and shall be in accordance with the business license ordinance prior to commencement of any type of operation. A permit fee of $50.00 shall be paid annually by any tree contractor removing a tree or trees. 
(b)  A plan review fee of $25.00 shall be paid at the time of submittal of plans for review. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-9. - Variances. 
The city council may authorize in specific cases such variances from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest when, due to special conditions: 
(1)  Granting a variance is determined to be a greater public benefit than the literal enforcement of the article; and 
(2)  The tree replacement requirements of the article could be met on site but, due to the location of the replacement trees they would not be in keeping with the intent and goals of the tree protection and/or landscaping ordinances of the city. 
The affected property owner must make application for the variance request to the city manager no less than 14 days prior to the next scheduled city council meeting. The variance request shall not be placed on the council agenda if the city manager determines that the request does not meet the variance criteria listed above. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-10. - Penalties. 
Citation(s) for violation(s) of this article will be issued by the city. The citation shall be returnable to and tried before the municipal court of the city. Any person, firm, or corporation found guilty of violating this article shall upon conviction be fined up to $1,000.00. Each day such violation remains unresolved to the satisfaction of the city shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to any imposed fines, the responsible person may be required to replace a removed tree with a number of smaller trees of the same species, provided the combined caliper measurements of the smaller trees are at least equal to the measurement of the tree which was removed. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 11-24-98) 
ARTICLE B. - PRESERVATION AND CONSERVATION OF PLANT LIFE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, adopted Nov. 24, 1998, deleted §§ 8-8-11—8-8-19, the substantive provisions of Art. B, derived from Ord. No. 92-01, §§ 1—9, adopted Feb. 11, 1992. Ord. No. 98-15 enacted new provisions pertaining to development standards and landscaping requirements for certain lots, as set forth in §§ 8-8-11—8-8-17. 

Sec. 8-8-11. - Landscaping plan required. 
Industrial, commercial, office and institutional, business park, and multifamily developers shall be required to provide a landscaping plan and submit the landscaping plan for review and approval by the public works director or his designee with the submittal of the site plan for development approval. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-12. - Minimum requirements for trees. 
The landscaping plan shall provide a minimum of one specimen tree with a minimum diameter of two inches and an understory tree with a diameter of two inches for every 2,000 square feet of impervious surface for which a development permit is sought. All trees must be planted in areas large enough to accommodate a full-grown tree of the species planted. 
Where the minimum tree diameter and shrub count cannot be met due to natural site constraints, the developer or builder shall provide the remaining balance of the requirement for all planting on public property. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, 11-24-98; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 1(A), 5-13-03) 
Sec. 8-8-13. - Minimum requirements for shrubbery. 
The landscaping plan shall provide for one bush per 500 square feet of impervious surface of an industrial, commercial, office and institutional, business park and multifamily site. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-14. - Minimum requirements for ground cover. 
Areas on the site which are not covered by trees and/or shrubbery shall be planted with grass or other ground cover. 
Where appropriate, other permeable ground cover, such as mulch and stones, may be used as an alternative to the ground cover listed in this section. However, alternative forms of ground cover must be specifically approved by the mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-15. - General regulations for landscaped areas. 
There are no prescribed criteria for design or formation of the landscaped area. However, it should be consistent with the architectural scheme of the building and surrounding area and should complement the plan for sediment and erosion control of the site. 
The requirements of the previous paragraphs shall be in addition to buffer zones and tree protection areas; however, some relief of the above described requirements may be granted, by the mayor and council, for saving existing trees, shrubbery and ground cover on the site. 
Industrial, commercial, office and institutional, business park and multifamily sites one acre or less must be landscaped entirely. 
All guard rails must be primed and painted a beige color and/or screened from view by additional landscape material. 
Parking lot islands. For every fifty parking spaces, a landscape island having a minimum dimension of ten feet by 38 feet shall be installed, and at each end of the parking aisle a landscape island having a minimum dimension of 20 feet by 38 feet shall be installed in order to separate the last space from any adjacent travel ways. One in every four parking rows must be divided by a minimum fifteen foot wide landscape strip (for landscape purposes). 
Irrigation system. The landscaping plan must include an irrigation plan to sustain plant life. Any and all plant materials that fail to survive must be replaced by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, 11-24-98; Ord. No. 2003-05, § 1(B), 5-13-03) 
Sec. 8-8-16. - Specifically approved trees, shrubbery and ground covers. 
The following trees, shrubbery and ground covers are specifically approved; however, developers may, at the discretion of the public works director and the city manager, substitute other varieties as deemed appropriate. 

 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 8-8-17. - Enforcement and penalties. 
The foregoing requirements shall be mandatory for all industrial, commercial, office and institutional, business park and multifamily developments constructed in the city. 
Failure to provide and adhere to the industrial, commercial, office and institutional, business park and multifamily landscaping requirements shall be grounds for denial of a building permit for such developments, the issuance of a Stop-Work Order for such developments, the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or the revocation of the business licenses of the builder and/or tenants of the development. 
Furthermore, the maintenance of the landscaping, including the replacement of trees, shrubs and ground cover, is the sole responsibility of the property owner(s). Upon finding a violation, the code enforcement officer of the city shall notify the property owner(s), in writing, and the owner shall be given 30 calendar days from the date of notification to bring the site into compliance. If the property is in violation after that time, the code enforcement officer shall issue a citation against the property owner(s) of a site in violation with a maximum fine of $1,000.00. Each day the violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-15, § 2, 11-24-98) 
CHAPTER 9. - WETLAND PROTECTION 

Sec. 8-9-1. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings of fact. The wetlands within the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the State of Georgia. 
Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
It is therefore necessary for the city to ensure maximum protection for wetlands by discouraging development activities that may adversely affect wetlands. 
(b)  Title and purpose. This chapter shall be known as the Wetland Protection Ordinance of the City of Morrow, Georgia. The purpose of this chapter is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. The objective of this chapter is to protect wetlands from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, flood plain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic nature and wildlife habitat. 
(Ord. No. 2000-09, § 1, 5-9-00) 
Sec. 8-9-2. - Definitions. 
[As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
Functions means the beneficial roles that wetlands serve, including: storage, conveyance and attenuation of floodwater and stormwater; protection of water quantity and quality and reduction of erosion; habitat for wildlife, including rare, threatened and endangered species; food chain support for a wide variety of wildlife and fisheries; educational, historical and archaeological value protection; and scenic, aesthetic and recreational amenities. 
Generalized Wetland Protection District Map means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of Morrow, Georgia, as indicated on the National Wetlands Inventory Map. This map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within Morrow and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this chapter does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plants tolerant of or dependent on saturated soil conditions. 
Jurisdictional wetland means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Temporary emergency permit means a temporary permit that may be issued in certain circumstances specified in section 8-9-3(b)(7). 
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2000-09, § 1, 5-9-00) 
Sec. 8-9-3. - Development permits. 
(a)  Development permit requirements. No regulated activity will be allowed within 25 feet of a wetland area without written permission from the public works director in the form of a development permit. Issuance of a development permit is contingent upon full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. If the public works director determines a project appears to contain wetlands or be located within 25 feet of a wetland area, as identified on the Generalized Wetland Protection District Map, the developer must consult with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for a determination. Additionally, all activities that are not identified by existing development ordinances shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a development permit. If the corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site and that a section 404 permit or letter of permission is required, a development permit will be issued only following issuance of the section 404 permit or letter of permission. 
(b)  Permissible uses (uses as of right). The following uses shall be allowed as of right within a wetland to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except as provided herein. 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. However, section 404 does list some required performance standards and 15 specific road construction best management practices (BMPs) that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption. 
(4)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(5)  Temporary emergency permit. A temporary emergency permit can be issued by the public works director or his/her designee for the following reasons: 
•Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged and written notice before the commencement of work has been given to the public works director and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
•Temporary water-level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations. 
•Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses or other similar water-related structures, provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
(c)  Site plans. Applications for a development permit within 25 feet of a wetland area shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of 1:400 feet, with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 25 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(d)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. The site plan may be amended only with the approval of the public works director. The public works director may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of the purposes of this chapter. 
(e)  Subdivision design in a wetland area. Any subdivision that includes jurisdictional wetlands is required to be developed in accordance with the development ordinances and subject to the provisions of the City of Morrow Zoning Ordinance in effect at the time of permitting, in addition to state and federal laws that apply to the development. 
(f)  Filing fee. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the mayor and council. Filing fees up to a maximum of $1,000.00 may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation and wetland boundary determinations as deemed necessary by the public works director. 
(g)  Enforcement authority. The city manager is hereby established as the administrator of this chapter. 
(h)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the city manager and will be reviewed within 60 days. The review period shall begin upon determination by the city manager that the application is complete. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval or disapproval) by the city manager. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the public works director. If the review process is not completed within 60 days, the application is considered to be approved. 
(i)  Appeals. Decisions on permit applications made by the city manager may be appealed to the mayor and council. The appeal must be made within 30 days of the decision rendered by the city manager. A public hearing shall be held for appeals. 
(j)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2000-09, § 1, 5-9-00) 
Sec. 8-9-4. - Monitoring and enforcement. 
(a)  The mayor and council, their agent, officers and employees of the city shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this chapter and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the mayor and council deem necessary. 
(1)  All enforcement and monitoring activities conducted by the city manager or other city representative that involve entrance to privately owned land by the city manager or other city representative shall be preceded by written notification to the landowner. Said notification shall be issued at least three days before the activities specified in the notification. 
(2)  The city manager or his/her designee shall have authority to enforce this chapter; issue permits hereunder; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(3)  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist the city manager in enforcement. 
(b)  The city manager may require a bond in the amount of $10,000 and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit. The particular amount and the conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this chapter. In the event of a breach of any condition of any such bond, the city manager may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution. 
(Ord. No. 2000-09, § 1, 5-9-00) 
Sec. 8-9-5. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this chapter may be fined not more than $1,000 for each offense. Each violation shall be a separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this chapter, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the city manager. 
(c)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this chapter, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(d)  If the city manager or his/her designee discovers a violation of this chapter that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the city manager shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(e)  Suspension, revocation. The city manager or his/her designee may suspend or revoke a permit if he/she finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The city manager shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(Ord. No. 2000-09, § 1, 5-9-00) 
Sec. 8-9-6. - Amendments. 
These regulations may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information concerning wetland locations, soils, hydrology, flooding or plant species peculiar to wetlands becomes available. 
(Ord. No. 2000-09, § 1, 5-9-00) 
Sec. 8-9-7. - Assessment relief. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation program with the government or a nonprofit organization restricting activities in a wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains. 
(Ord. No. 2000-09, § 1, 5-9-00) 
Title 9 - LICENSING AND REGULATION 
CHAPTER 1. - MASSAGE THERAPISTS AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly, Ch. 1, §§ 9-1-1—9-1-17, contained general provisions, derived from the 1977 Code, §§ 8-1001, 8-1002, 8-1005—8-1016; Ord. No. 92-09, § 1, adopted Aug. 11, 1992; and several sections which bore no history note. Such provisions were deleted by Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, adopted Dec. 13, 1994, which further provided that provisions of Tit. 3, Ch. 2, Art. E, Massage therapists and massage establishments, being §§ 3-2-104—3-2-117, be deleted therefrom and transferred to Tit. 9, Ch. 1, herein set out as §§ 9-1-1—9-1-14. 

Sec. 9-1-1. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
Employee. The term "employee" shall mean any person at least 18 years of age who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage establishment and receives compensation from the operator of such establishment. 
Licensee. The term "licensee" shall mean any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or other entity to which a license has been issued to practice massage, or operate a massage establishment as defined herein. 
Massage or massage services. The term "massage" or "massage services" means the manipulation of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes and includes but is not limited to effleurage (stroking skin without going deep), petrissage (kneading movement by lifting and grasping), tapotement (brisk blows in rapid alternating fashion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve strokes and other movements, whether by hand or with mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of muscular massage. This may include the use of oil, salt glows, hot and cold pack and other recognized forms of massage therapy. 
Massage establishment. The term "massage establishment" means any establishment where one or more massage therapists provide massage services for money or similar consideration, and which constitutes a fixed place of business for any person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity to engage in any of the activities defined as "massage." A "massage establishment" includes but is not limited to a massage parlor, health garden, oriental clinic, spas, or any other establishment wherein massage or related services are rendered. 
Massage therapist. The term "massage therapist" means any person engaged in the practice of "massage" as defined in this section, provided that the massage or massage services are offered in businesses that provide other personal care services, such as a fitness center, beauty salon, or other personal care services. 
Physical therapist. The term "physical therapist" means a person licensed by the State of Georgia to practice physical therapy as defined by the O.C.G.A., section 43-33-3. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 2003-08, § 1A., 7-22-03) 
Sec. 9-1-2. - License required. 
Any person desiring to engage in the practice as a massage therapist, or any person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity desiring to operate the business of a massage establishment shall apply for and obtain a license from the city department of permits and licenses (the department) prior to commencing operations. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-1-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following individuals while engaged in the personal performance of the duties required of their respective professions: 
(1)  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, and other licensed practitioners of the healing arts; 
(2)  Nurses who are registered under the laws of this state; 
(3)  Barbers and beauticians who are duly licensed under the laws of this state, except that this exemption shall apply solely to the massaging of the neck, face, scalp, and hair of the customer or client for cosmetic or beautification purposes; and 
(4)  Physical therapists licensed under the laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-1-4. - Requirement for license; qualifications. 
(a)  A license to provide massage services shall be issued to any person who is at least 18 years of age and: 
(1)  Is a graduate of an educational program or course of study of not less than 500 hours in duration and which is accredited by a professional massage accrediting organization. The curriculum of such program or course of study shall include but not be limited to the following subjects: physical culture, anatomy, physiology, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, hygiene, and health service management. Other similarly related subjects may be substituted for those herein provided. In the case of an applicant who has graduated from a program conducted in a foreign country, such applicant must submit credentials approved by the department and have satisfactorily completed a three-month traineeship under the supervision of an individual meeting the eligibility requirements for licensing under this chapter; or 
(2)  Is not a graduate of an educational program or course of study meeting the criteria set forth in subsection (1) above, but has had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than two years under the direct supervision of a massage or physical therapist who would otherwise qualify for a license under this chapter. Additionally, such applicant must have received training and experience in areas which include but are not limited to the following: physical culture, anatomy, physiology, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, hygiene, and health service management. Other similarly related areas may be substituted for those herein provided. The applicant in this instance must furnish with the application an affidavit of previous employment, together with an affidavit of the person(s) under whom his or her apprenticeship or practical experience was obtained, providing the necessary requirements for qualification under this section. Further, the applicant must have successfully passed, within the last year, the National Certification Examination for Professional Massage and Bodywork developed by The Psychological Corporation working in conjunction with the National Certification Board for Bodywork and Massage Therapies; and 
(b)  A license to operate a massage establishment shall be issued to any person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity if the person(s) having a beneficial interest in the establishment is (are) at least 18 years of age, and: 
(1)  Employs one or more massage therapists meeting the requirements set forth in subsection (a) above; 
(2)  If a corporation, is an officer of the corporation which is organized pursuant to the laws of this state or authorized to do business in this state; and 
(3)  Meets all provisions of this chapter except those related to paragraphs (1) and (2) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-1-5. - License application. 
Every applicant for a license to engage in the practice as a massage therapist or operator of a massage establishment shall file an application under oath with the department upon a form provided by the department. An annual license fee in such amount as provided in this chapter shall be tendered with the application. Copies of the application shall be forwarded to the building inspection department, the fire department and police department. These departments shall within 30 days inspect any premises proposed to be operated as a massage establishment and shall make written verification to the department concerning compliance with applicable codes. 
(a)  Each application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The names and addresses for the past five years of the applicant and each person who would have a beneficial interest in the license. However, if the applicant is a corporation, only the names and addresses of the registered agents and those stockholders owning at least five percent of the stock must be disclosed; 
(2)  The name of the business operation, including a description of all services to be provided; 
(3)  The location, mailing address and telephone number where the business is to be conducted; 
(4)  The name, address, social security number and date of birth of each employee working at the massage establishment. Changes in the list of employees with the names of new employees, together with all information relating thereto, and all exhibits must be filed with the department within three days from the date of change; 
(5)  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(6)  The massage or similarly related business license history of the applicant; whether such person or entity has had a business license revoked or suspended in this or another county or state, and if so, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation of the applicant subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(7)  All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the date(s) and place(s) of conviction(s), and nature of the offense(s); 
(8)  The name, address and description of any massage business or other establishment owned or operated by a person whose name is required to be given by this chapter; and 
(9)  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant; and 
(b)  Applicant shall submit with the application certain documentation as required by the department, including but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  A blueprint or a scale drawing of the establishment; 
(2)  Proof that the applicant and all employees providing massage services are at least 18 years of age; 
(3)  A copy of the applicant's diploma or certificate of graduation from an accredited school or other institution of learning as provided in section 9-1-4(a)(1), or if applicable, a copy of the examination results as provided in section 9-1-4(a)(2). However, if the applicant will not engage in the practice of massage as heretofore defined, such applicant need not provide a diploma or certificate of graduation, or results of the examination; 
(4)  A signed and notarized consent form authorizing the department and the police department, their respective agents and employees to seek information and conduct a background check on the applicant and all employees (in the case of a massage establishment), and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for a license; 
(5)  A signed and notarized consent form authorizing the fire department, their respective agents and employees to inspect the premises to ensure compliance with the Fire Safety Code, all other codes and laws under their jurisdiction, and applicable provisions of this chapter; 
(6)  A current health certificate from a physician on the applicant and all employee trainees providing massage services, if applicable, indicating that they do not have a communicable disease or otherwise would not present a threat to the health, safety and welfare of their respective clientele; and 
(7)  A copy of this chapter signed by the applicant and all employee trainees providing massage services, if applicable, acknowledging that he or she has read and understands the provisions contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-1-6. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  Every portion of a massage establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  Price rates for all services rendered shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective clientele. 
(c)  All employees shall practice pursuant hygiene and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises. 
(d)  All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity as required in the business' normal operation and shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of any statute or ordinance governing the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof, whenever such inspection is deemed necessary by appropriate department officials. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-1-7. - License fees. 
The license fee for an applicant to be engaged in the practice as a massage therapist shall be $200.00 per year. If the applicant is the operator of a massage establishment and is not a massage therapist, the license fee shall be as provided in Title 3, Chapter 2, Article D of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 93-2, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-1-8. - Training permits; permit fees. 
(a)  The department may issue a training permit to an unlicensed trainee who is at least 18 years of age and is currently, or will be in the immediate future, enrolled in an educational program or course of study as required under section 9-1-4(a)(1), or preparing to sit for the examination as required under section 9-1-4(a)(2) of this chapter. 
(b)  A training permit shall allow the holder thereof to work only under the direct supervision of a person licensed under this chapter who has worked as a massage therapist for a period of not less than one continuous year prior to assuming the supervisory role. 
(c)  The training permit issued pursuant to this section shall be valid up to six months or expire immediately upon the securing of a license granted under the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  A training permit may be subject to renewal, at the discretion of the department, when good and sufficient cause is shown. However, in any event, the training permit may not be renewed more than one time and a failure to timely satisfy the educational or experience requirements is not deemed to be good and sufficient cause. 
(e)  The permit fee for an apprentice or trainee shall be $50.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-1-9. - Persons under 18 years of age. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to provide massage services to any person under the age of 18 years unless such person has with him or her at the time of such patronage a written order from an appropriate practitioner of the healing arts directing that the treatment is to be given. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to determine the age of the person patronizing such establishment, and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such licensee. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-1-10. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage establishment. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-1-11. - Inspection required. 
The department and the police department, their respective authorized agents or employees shall be authorized from time to time to make inspections during regular business hours of each massage establishment for the purpose of determining that Georgia law and the provisions of this chapter are fully complied with. It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to fail to allow the city's department officers and officials access to the premises or to hinder the officer or official in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-1-12. - Refusal to grant or restore license; discipline of licensees; suspension, revocation, or restriction of license. 
(a)  The department shall have authority to refuse to grant a license to an applicant or to discipline a licensee under this chapter upon a finding by the department that the licensee or applicant has: 
(1)  Displayed an inability or has become unable to work as a massage therapist or as an operator of a massage establishment, as the case may be, with reasonable skill and safety to clientele by reason of illness, use of alcohol, drugs, narcotics, chemicals, or any other type of substance, or as a result of any mental or physical condition. In enforcing this paragraph, the department may, upon reasonable grounds, require the licensee or applicant to submit to a mental or physical examination by an appropriate practitioner of the healing arts. The expense of such examination shall be borne by such licensee or applicant. The results of such examination shall be admissible in any hearing before the department, the mayor and council or court of competent jurisdiction, in the event of an appeal. If a licensee or applicant fails to submit to such an examination when properly directed to do so by the department, unless such failure was due to circumstances beyond the licensee's or applicant's control, the department may enter a final order upon proper notice, hearing, and proof of such refusal; or 
(2)  Been convicted in the last five years of the following offenses: sodomy, aggravated sodomy, or solicitation of sodomy; public indecency; prostitution; pimping; pandering or pandering by compulsion; distribution of materials that are obscene or depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law; any offense involving the use of or threat of force or violence upon the person(s) of another; any offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons; or any felony involving moral turpitude. For the purpose of this section, a conviction shall include a finding or verdict of guilty, plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere in a criminal proceeding regardless of whether the adjudication of guilt or sentence is withheld or not entered thereon pursuant to provisions of the O.C.G.A. sections 42-8-60 through 42-8-64, relating to first offenders, or any comparable rule or statute; or 
(3)  Knowingly made misleading, deceptive, untrue, or fraudulent representations to a client, customer, or other person or entity in connection with the provisions of massage services or any document connected therewith; or practiced fraud or deceit or intentionally made any false statement in obtaining or attempting to obtain a license provided for in this chapter; or 
(4)  Performed massage services contrary to this chapter; or knowingly aided, assisted, procured, or advised any person to perform massage services contrary to this chapter; or knowingly performed any act which in any way aids, assists, procures, advises, or encourages any unlicensed person to perform massage services; or 
(5)  Engaged in any unprofessional, unethical, deceptive, deleterious practice harmful to the public, which conduct or practice need not have resulted in actual injury to any person; unprofessional conduct shall also include any departure from or failure to conform to the acceptable and prevailing minimal standards applicable to massage therapists or operators of massage establishments; or 
(6)  Failed to report to the department any act or omission of a licensee or applicant or any other person who violates the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  When the department finds that any person is unqualified to be granted a license or finds that any person should be disciplined pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the department may take such action as more fully set forth in Title 1, Sec. 1-1-8. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a licensee or applicant, whether the same is a person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity, who may or may not perform massage services, and all persons having a beneficial interest in the operation of a massage establishment (except stockholders owning less than five percent of the stock in a corporation) shall be subject to the provisions of this section and be treated as if they were the licensee or applicant. 
(d)  Where the department refused to grant a license to an applicant or has revoked a license under this chapter, the affected licensee or applicant shall be disqualified from reapplying for such license for 12 months immediately following such action taken by the department. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-1-13. - Unlicensed practice constitutes public nuisance; injunctions. 
The provision of massage services and the operation of a massage establishment is declared to be an activity affecting the public interest and involving the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Such provision of services and operation by a person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity who is not licensed, or otherwise authorized, is declared to be a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The department, or any person or organization having an interest therein may bring a petition to restrain or enjoin such unlicensed practice in a court of competent jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary in order to obtain an injunction under this chapter to allege or prove that there is no adequate remedy at all, or to allege or prove any special injury. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-1-14. - Penalty. 
A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided generally for violations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.C, 12-13-94) 
CHAPTER 2. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The substance of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated is derived from Ord. No. 86-05, 6-10-86. Substantial reorganization of the ordinance was done during codification. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverage offenses involving minors, § 11-1-21. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverage code, O.C.G.A., Title 3; driving under the influence of alcohol, O.C.G.A., § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-2-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter has been enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages; to protect and preserve schools; to give effect to existing land use; to protect those of minor age in the community; and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhood and property values; and to protect against the evils of concentration of outlets for alcoholic beverages in one family or to prevent undesirable persons from controlling the alcoholic beverage industry. 
Sec. 9-2-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, in addition to the general definitions provided in section 1-1-2, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Alcohol. Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
(2)  Alcoholic beverage. All alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
(3)  Church. A permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship. 
(4)  College. Such state, county, city, church or other colleges that teach subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of the State of Georgia, not including private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
(5)  Distilled spirits. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
(6)  Family. Includes any person related to the holder of the license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as computed according to the civil law. 
(7)  Food caterer. Any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
(8)  Fortified wine. Any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
(9)  Hotel. Every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and transient guests, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of guests, and where the sleeping accommodations are in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Guest rooms must have interior accessibility only, with no exterior doorways and no exterior room entry. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. 
Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of restaurants in their premises and the holder of any franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel hereunder, provided such restaurant meets the standards and requirements of this chapter. 
(10)  Interest in license. An "interest in a license" shall be deemed to exist if the person involved is the outright owner of the license; a co-owner of the license; a partner in a partnership which owns all or any part of a license; a stockholder in any corporation organized for the pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of a license; an owner, lessor, sublessor or stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain owning or leasing any real estate which is occupied by a licensed alcoholic beverage establishment or shares in any of the income or corpus of any trust fund or estate having any interest in a licensed alcoholic beverage establishment. Provided, however, that a stockholder shall not be deemed to have an interest in a licensed alcoholic beverage establishment where he owns stock in a motel or hotel having 200 or more rooms with a retail spirituous liquor store located on the premises of such motel or hotel and owned by such motel or hotel. 
(11)  Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer. Any retail dealer who has been licensed pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 4, Article 2 of Chapter 5, or Article 2 of Chapter 6 of Title 3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(12)  Lounge or banquet room A separate room or area enclosed within a hotel with all booths, stools and tables being open and unobstructed to the view of any other customers in the lounge or the manager thereof. 
(13)  Malt beverage. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
(14)  Motel. See hotel. 
(15)  Package. A bottle, can, keg, barrel or other consumer container sufficient to hold 32 or more ounces. 
(16)  Private residence. A house or dwelling wherein not less than one nor more than two families reside and shall not include an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, nor a boarding or rooming house where there are five or more boarders or roomers. Any building occupied as a residence located within an area zoned for business shall not be construed as a private residence. 
(17)  Restaurant. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, the place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity of at least 60 people, having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating; and the serving of these meals shall be the principal business conducted. Closure of an establishment for more than four weeks in any calendar year for vacation, redecorating or other purposes shall void any alcoholic beverage license held by such establishment as a restaurant. For restaurants designating breakfast as their meal for purposes of this definition, the establishment must be open for business a minimum of three consecutive hours and the period of 6:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. must be included within such three-hour block. For restaurants designating lunch as their meal for purposes of this definition, the establishment must be open for business a minimum of three consecutive hours and the period of 11:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. must be included within such three-hour block. For restaurants designating dinner as their meal for purposes of this definition, the establishment must be open for business a minimum of three consecutive hours and the period of 7:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. must be included within such three-hour block. 
(18)  Retail consumption dealer. Any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
(19)  Retail dealer. Any person who sells alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale or for consumption on the premises. 
(20)  School. Such state, county, city, church or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of the State of Georgia, not including private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
(21)  Wholesale dealer. Any person who sells alcoholic beverages to retail consumption dealers, retail dealers or other wholesale dealers for resale. 
(22)  Wine. Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this Code section. 
(23)  Olde Town Morrow District. All that land or portion of land located in Land Lot 144 of the 13 th District, Clayton County, Georgia, consisting of 16.210 acres and more specifically described as follows: 
To arrive at the Point of Beginning, begin at a point at the intersection of the Northern right-of-way of Mt. Zion Road (formerly known as Morrow Industrial Boulevard (100′ r/w) and the Western right-of-way of Lake Drive (80′ r/w), thence North 84 degrees 06 minutes 30 seconds West for a distance of 681.60 feet along the northern right-of-way of Mt. Zion Road to a point, thence North 09 degrees 46 minutes East for a distance of 642.70 feet to a point, thence South 37 degrees 29 minutes 30 seconds East for a distance of 178.20 feet to a point, thence North 16 degrees 50 minutes 30 seconds East for a distance of 126.50 feet to a point, thence North 78 degrees 49 minutes East for a distance of 46.70 feet to a point, thence North 14 degrees 13 minutes East for a distance of 352.10 feet to a ½″ rebar (set), at the Southeast corner of Lot 15, Block "E" of Imperial Estates, Unit 1 as recorded in Plat Book 7, Page 44 of the Clayton County records and the Point of Beginning; 
THENCE North 00 degrees 29 minutes 57 seconds East for a distance of 1174.87 feet along the Eastern lot lines of Lots 15, 16, 17, and 18 of Imperial Estates, Unit 1 and Lots 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 and 28 of Forest Manor South, Unit IV as recorded in Plat Book 9, Page 239 of the Clayton County records to a ½″ rebar (found); 
THENCE North 01 degrees 30 minutes 19 seconds West for a distance of 460.33 feet along the Eastern line of Lot 12, Block "J", the Eastern right-of-way limits of Boca Raton Drive (50′ r/w) and the Eastern line of Lot 37, Block "M" of Yorktown, Unit 5 as recorded in Plat Book 9, Page 63 of the Clayton County records to a ½″ rebar (found) on the Southern right-of-way of Interstate 75 (r/w varies); 
THENCE South 77 degrees 30 minutes 00 seconds East for a distance of 994.41 feet along the southern right-of-way of Interstate 75 to a ½″ rebar (found), said point also being the Northwest corner of the Property now or formerly owned by Southlake Mall, L.L.C.; 
THENCE South 26 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds West for a distance of 428.70 feet along the Western line of the property now or formerly owned by Southlake Mall, L.L.C. as recorded in Deed Book 3803, Page 24 of the Clayton County records to a ½″ rebar (set); 
THENCE along a curve to the left having a radius of 1636.23 feet and an arc length of 258.41 feet, being subtended by a chord of South 55 degrees 51 minutes 50 seconds West for a distance of 258.14 feet along the Northern line of the Southlake Mall, L.L.C. property to a ½″ rebar (set); 
THENCE North 41 degrees 15 minutes 00 seconds West for a distance of 146.44 feet to a ½″ rebar (set); 
THENCE South 48 degrees 45 minutes 00 seconds West for a distance of 100.00 feet to a ½″ (set); 
THENCE South 41 degrees 15 minutes 00 seconds East for a distance of 144.98 feet to a ½″ (set); 
THENCE along a curve to the left having a radius of 1636.23 feet and an arc length of 974.30 feet, being subtended by a chord of south 30 degrees 46 minutes 43 seconds West for a distance of 959.97 feet along the Northern line of the property now or formerly owned by Southlake Mall, L.L.C. to a ½″ rebar (set), said point also being the southeast corner of Lot 15, Block "E" of Imperial Estates, Unit 1 as recorded in Plat Book 7, Page 44 of the Clayton County records. 
(Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 2005-11, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 2009-12, § 8, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 2011-34, § 1, 10-25-11; Ord. No. 2012-42, § 1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 9-2-3. - Construction of undefined terms. 
Words and terms not explicitly defined in this chapter or section 1-1-2 of this Code shall have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. 
Sec. 9-2-4. - Delivery of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No delivery of alcoholic beverages shall be made except onto the premises from which such beverages are to be sold. 
(b)  A licensee for on-premises consumption may purchase from wholesalers, licensed by the city, alcoholic beverages, designated by their licenses, in one-fifth of a gallon, liter or larger containers unless a particular brand is not packaged in these sizes, in which event the licensee may purchase the brand in the nearest size to those container sizes. 
Secs. 9-2-5—9-2-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - LICENSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Suspension and revocation procedures, § 9-2-84. 

Sec. 9-2-11. - License required. 
Any person desiring to operate in the city as a retail consumption dealer or retail dealer shall apply for and obtain a license from the city prior to commencing operations. 
Sec. 9-2-12. - Application required. 
(a)  Every person desiring to operate within the city as a retail consumption dealer or retail dealer shall make an application therefor. Such forms necessary for the application shall be furnished by the city. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable investigation fee as provided in section 9-2-30(c). 
Sec. 9-2-13. - Applicant. 
The applicant shall be the owner of the proposed business if the business is solely owned or the co-owner if a partnership or firm. If a proposed licensee is a corporation, the applicant may be the president, a vice-president, secretary or treasurer of the corporation or the corporation's general manager at the particular business location. Otherwise, no other individual may qualify as an applicant. 
Sec. 9-2-14. - Off-premises licenses for catered events. 
Any licensed alcoholic beverage retail dealer, whether for package sales or on-premises consumption, may apply to the city for an off-premises license to serve alcoholic beverages for catered functions. The license shall restrict the holder to sale of beverages authorized by its primary license issued by the city and the State of Georgia. The alcoholic beverage caterer's license is secondary to and dependent upon the primary license held for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city. Should the primary alcoholic beverage license of the caterer be suspended or revoked, its off-premises license to serve catered functions shall be automatically suspended or revoked for the same duration. 
(Ord. No. 2011-34, § 2, 10-25-11) 
Editor's note— Prior to the reenactment of § 9-2-14, said section was repealed by Ord. No. 2002-08, adopted Oct. 8, 2002. The former § 9-2-14 pertained to personal restrictions on interest in retail business, specifically the alcoholic beverage business. 
Sec. 9-2-15. - Retail licensee prohibited from having direct financial interest in wholesale liquor business. 
No person shall hold a retail or retail consumption license who also has any direct financial interest in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business. 
Sec. 9-2-16. - Hotels, motels. 
Hotel and motel corporations and their franchise restaurant corporations operating as contemplated in these regulations are authorized to apply for and to hold a retail consumption license in their corporate names. They shall name on such application an agent and/or manager actively employed in the operation of said hotel, motel or franchise restaurant who shall be responsible for operation under said license and who shall qualify in all respects under these regulations. Should said manager and/or agent leave the employment of the hotel or motel corporation or its franchise restaurant corporation in the city, a new agent and/or manager shall be named by the licensee within ten days thereafter. 
Sec. 9-2-17. - Qualification of applicants. 
All applicants for licenses must make application on forms furnished by the city and in connection therewith shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits, bonds and other supporting data or documents as required hereby. No license, whether original or renewal, shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation, organized for monetary gain, where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, general or limited, stockholder, directly or indirectly, beneficial or absolute, who by reason of such person's personal associations, records of arrests, or reputation in the community where he has resided, is not likely to maintain the operation in conformity with federal, state or local laws. Convictions or pleas of guilty, in this or any state, or by the United States or any other country, of any offenses involving sexual misconduct, drug possession (felony), or distribution, keeping a disorderly place, gambling, or offenses related to the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages, or other felony offenses related to the illegal possession or use of alcoholic beverages, within ten years immediately prior to the date of application would render such applicant ineligible for registration. 
(Ord. No. 2001-18, § 1.A., 9-11-01) 
Sec. 9-2-18. - Application contents. 
The application shall contain, under oath, the following information and documents: 
(1)  Name and address of each applicant and each person who would have an interest in the license, however including only those stockholders owning 20 percent or more of the corporation's stock. A list of all officers and stockholders, along with their addresses and social security numbers, must be attached to the application. 
(2)  Name and address for the past ten years of each individual licensee, including registered agent where necessary. 
(3)  The name, address and date of birth of each employee working at the business location. 
(4)  Description of the business operation, its location and facilities. 
(5)  Blueprint or scale drawing of the business facility. 
(6)  Survey indicating the location of the business and the distance to the nearest school, church, library, private residence and alcoholic treatment center, as described in section 9-2-26. 
(7)  Such other information and documents as may be required by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 99-04, § 1(A), 2-9-99) 
Sec. 9-2-19. - Untrue or misleading information; omissions. 
Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material omission left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for a license shall be cause for the denial thereof and, if any license has been granted under these circumstances, these shall be cause for revocation. 
Sec. 9-2-20. - Interests specified in application. 
(a)  All applications for licenses, both originals or renewals, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interest (as defined before in section 9-2-2(9)) in establishments which sell alcoholic beverages at wholesale or retail. This shall include: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business applying for a license to sell alcoholic beverages, together with an interest each person or any member of his or her immediately family has in any other business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  The ownership of the land and building where the business is to be operated. 
(3)  The amount of rental paid for the land and building and the manner in which the rent is determined and to whom and at what intervals it is paid. 
(4)  The names and addresses (by affidavit from the owner, lessor, or sublessor of the land and building) of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the store is located. 
(5)  A set of fingerprints of each applicant and each person who would have an interest in the license. 
(6)  A photograph of each applicant and each person who would have an interest in the license. 
(7)  Any other information called for by the city. 
(b)  Any change in any relationship herein declared must be filed with the city manager when the change is made, and failure to so file within a period of 30 days after the change is made shall be grounds for cancellation or revocation by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 99-04, § 1(B), 2-9-99) 
Sec. 9-2-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-04, § 1, adopted May 8, 1990, repealed § 9-2-21 pertaining to wholesaler's applications. Such section bore no history note, see the editor's footnote to chapter 2. 
Sec. 9-2-22. - Investigation of application. 
(a)  Applicants, by filing for a license to sell alcoholic beverages, agree to furnish the data, information and records as called for herein and also agree to submit under oath to interrogation by the city manager, as to any facts considered pertinent to the application. Applicants, by filing the application, also agree to produce for oral interrogation by the city manager, any person or persons requested by the city manager, as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the granting of the license. Failure to furnish this data, information and records or failure to produce such persons within 30 days from the date of the request by the city shall automatically serve to dismiss with prejudice the application of the applicant failing to furnish the data, information and records or failing to produce such persons. 
(b)  All applications for new licenses for sale of alcoholic beverages and applications for renewals thereof, shall be investigated by the chief of police, and no new or renewal license shall be issued by the city manager until the chief of police has indicated in writing that in his opinion no violation exists upon the facts as stated and ascertained by the aforesaid investigation as to any ordinance or law in effect as of the date of the rendering of the opinion. 
(c)  All applicants for new licenses or for transfers of locations shall be passed upon by the city manager and such action shall be taken within 60 days from the date of the filing of the application or notice of location transfer unless written notice of extension by the city manager is given two weeks prior to the 60-day deadline. 
(d)  Any change in any relationship declared in section 9-2-20, application contents, which requires investigation by the city manager prior to the issuance of a renewal license shall be passed upon by the city manager within 60 days from the date of the filing of the changes. 
(e)  Any information which changes or otherwise becomes obsolete shall be immediately reported by the applicant. 
Sec. 9-2-23. - Licensing considerations. 
In determining whether or not any application shall be granted and a license issued, the city manager shall consider the following information in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  If the applicant and/or licensee has ever violated any federal, state, county or municipal law or regulation regarding narcotics or alcoholic beverages, their sale, distribution or manufacture; 
(2)  The manner in which the applicant and/or licensee has conducted any business within the city as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance or as to the necessity for city action to compel the applicant's and/or licensee's adherence to any city law, regulation or ordinance; 
(3)  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, public safety, and general character of the neighborhood; and 
(4)  Whether the applicant and/or licensee has ever had an alcoholic beverage or business license suspended or revoked by the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
Sec. 9-2-24. - Grant of application. 
(a)  All applications for alcoholic beverage licenses meeting these regulations shall be granted by the city manager, unless some specific cause regarding location, traffic conditions or environmental conditions justifies a refusal. In such event, the applicant shall be entitled to file a new application of like kind for a different location without the loss of any part of the application fee. 
(b)  In the event the city manager denies an application for a license, the applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial to the mayor and council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within five business days of the date of denial. A hearing shall be held and decision rendered in accordance with the procedure established by section 9-2-84 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-42, § 2, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 9-2-25. - Procedure when license denied by state. 
In the event the applicant is denied a license by the state, upon the proof of that refusal, he shall be entitled to a refund of the license fee or business tax less the investigative fee as required plus an additional charge of $25.00 to cover the clerical costs of granting the license. This refund may be made by the city clerk without the necessity of any action by the city manager. 
Sec. 9-2-26. - Distance requirements from churches and schools. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to sell alcoholic beverages where the proposed premises are within: 
(1)  100 yards of any church (for the sale of distilled spirits); 
(2)  100 yards from the property line of any school or college ground (for the sale of malt beverages and wine); 
(3)  200 yards from the property line of any school or college ground (for the sale of distilled spirits); 
(4)  Reserved; 
(5)  Reserved; 
(6)  100 yards from any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the State of Georgia, Clayton County, or a municipality; or 
(7)  100 yards of any private residence, such distance to be measured as shown in paragraph (b) below; provided, however, this distance requirement shall not apply to any licensee located in the Olde Town Morrow District. 
(b)  Distances, unless otherwise specified in this chapter, shall be measured by the most direct line from the nearest point of the structure in which the licensee's business is conducted to the nearest point along the property line on which is located the school building, education building, school ground, college campus, church, alcoholic treatment center or residence. 
(c)  All applications shall include a survey prepared and certified by a registered surveyor of the proposed premises and the straight line distance from the proposed premises to the property line of the nearest school, residence, and church showing compliance with the appropriate provisions and sections of this chapter. 
(d)  No license will be considered for a retail dealer when there is a previously filed application or license for a retail dealer's place of business within 500 feet of the applicant's proposed site, measured along the most direct line. 
(Ord. No. 2004-04, § 1(A), 2-10-04; Ord. No. 2009-12, § 1, 10-13-09) 
Cross reference— School and private residence defined, § 9-2-2. 
State Law reference— Distance requirements, O.C.G.A., § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 9-2-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-04, § 1(B), adopted Feb. 10, 2004, repealed § 9-2-27, which pertained to annexed areas; continuance of business and derived from Ord. No. 86-05, adopted June 10, 1986. 
Sec. 9-2-28. - Physical requirements for licensed premises. 
No license shall be granted to a retailer, under the provisions of this chapter, unless the front entrance to the premises is clearly visible from a public street or private drive normally frequented by the public; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply where the license is issued to a location in a shopping center or hotel or Olde Town Morrow District. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, § 2, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 9-2-29. - Types of businesses to be licensed. 
Alcoholic beverage licenses shall be issued only for the following classes of businesses: 
(1)  Restaurant licenses for distilled spirits and/or malt beverages and wine, 40 percent alcoholic beverage to 60 percent food; provided that no food or beverage ratio is required to be maintained for restaurant licensees in the Olde Town Morrow District (other than on Sunday) so long as those restaurants have a kitchen which is staffed, equipped and supplied in order to provide to the public a menu of food which is cooked on the premises during those hours when the restaurant is open for business, nor does the 60/40 percent food/beverage ratio apply to the Morrow Conference Center. 
(2)  A hotel which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging may operate a lounge and obtain a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, only if the hotel meets the requirements of section 9-2-2(8). 
(3)  Movie theater (cinema, motion picture theater): Any indoor facility or auditorium, open to the public, which is used primarily for and designed for the purpose of exhibiting films, live broadcasts or other similar performances by use of film projectors or digital cinema projection. This definition shall not include adult entertainment establishments of any kind. The ability of a movie theater to sell alcoholic beverages is subject to the requirements of section 9-2-34 of the Code of Ordinances. For the purposes of this chapter, a movie theater shall be required to have the following: 
a.  At least 15 auditoriums for audience viewing of films or live broadcasts with a minimum of 75 permanently-affixed seats per auditorium and one permanently-affixed commercial screen, with dimensions of at least 17 feet tall by 27 feet wide, per auditorium; and 
b.  Films or live broadcasts must be shown at regularly scheduled and advertised times and shown during all times that the movie theater is open to the public. 
(4)  Package sales of malt beverages and wine only are permitted in licensed businesses which meet the following requirements: 
a.  No retail dealer license shall be issued to any applicant whose business does not have at least $15,000.00 inventory of food, household supplies and periodicals. Tobacco products may not be included for purposes of computing total inventory. 
1.  The value of such items shall be the same as those indicated in the applicants' annual returns to the Clayton County Tax Commissioner for ad valorem tax purposes. 
2.  The value so indicated shall be the cost of such item to the applicant and not the price which the applicant charges in retail sales. 
3.  Automotive supplies and services shall not be considered or included in determining the inventory. 
4.  Provisions for inspection of inventories contained elsewhere in this chapter shall apply hereto and all other procedures shall be in accordance as hereinafter set forth. 
b.  No retail dealer license shall be issued to an applicant who cannot provide satisfactory proof that the sale of packaged alcoholic beverages shall not constitute more than 49 percent of total sales. 
c.  No retail dealer license shall be issued for other than package sales of malt beverages or wine and the package sale of alcoholic beverages other than malt beverages and wine is expressly prohibited by this chapter. 
d.  No retail dealer license shall be issued to a business engaged solely in the sale of automotive supplies and/or services. 
e.  No retail dealer license shall issue for the sale of any packaged malt beverages or wine in a container holding less than 32 ounces. 
(5)  [Combined licenses.] No combined licenses i.e. on premises consumption/package sales, shall be permitted or issued. 
(Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 2004-04, § 1(C), (D), 2-10-04; Ord. No. 2009-12, § 3, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 2014-06 , § 1, 6-24-14) 
Sec. 9-2-30. - License fees. 
(a)  An annual license fee for the privilege of engaging in the business of selling alcoholic beverages in addition to any other business taxes levied in title 3, chapter 2, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Restaurant, serving malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits, whether an independent facility or whether part of a motel or hotel, the sum of $5,000.00. 
(2)  Restaurant, serving malt beverages and wine, whether an independent facility or whether part of a motel or hotel, the sum of $3,000.00. 
(3)  Lounge or banquet facility, located in a hotel serving malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits, the sum of $5,000.00. 
(4)  Lounge or banquet facility, located in a hotel serving malt beverages and wine, the sum of $3,000.00. 
(5)  Hotels, giving complementary drink tickets, not for sale to the public, the sum of $1,000.00. 
(6)  Package sales, malt beverage only, the sum of $1,000.00. 
(7)  Package sales, wine only, the sum of $500.00. 
(8)  Package sales of malt beverages and wine, the sum of $1,500.00. 
(9)  Sales off-premises for catered functions, the sum of $200.00. 
(b)  The fee for any licensee obtaining an initial license for less than a full license year shall be prorated on a quarterly basis. Annual licenses in excess of $3,000.00 may be paid in quarterly installments provided each installment is received prior to the commencement of the quarter for which said license fee is due. Failure to make a scheduled quarterly payment by its due date shall result in the remainder of the license fee for that calendar year being due and payable in its entirety. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, neither proration nor refund shall be made of license fees for licenses issued by the city. 
(c)  The sum of $500.00 shall be paid at the time an original application is filed to cover investigating costs which shall be credited against the first annual license fee and business tax upon the grant of a license. A transfer fee of $250.00 shall be paid at the time application is made of intent to take in new partners or stockholders. These fees are not refundable. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  All license fees shall be paid by January 1 of each year or within ten days of the granting of an application for a license, except for those fees in excess of $3,000.00 for which installment payments are permitted as provided in subsection (b). Any person failing to pay the license fee for an alcoholic beverage license on or before January 1 or before the first of each calendar quarter in the event of installment payments shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of $25.00. General business taxes for each business regulated by this chapter shall also be due and payable in addition to any license fees in accordance with the city business tax ordinance. 
(f)  Records and reports from licensee; form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city manager may require. On or before the 10th day of the month, a return for the preceding calendar month shall be filed with the zoning administrator in such form as he or she may prescribe by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of the excise taxes levied in sections 9-2-91 and 9-2-92 and for reporting the sale of food during the same period of the return. 
Those businesses and/or persons that are licensed to sell malt beverages and/or wine by the package shall file an annual report no later than the 20th day of January to verify their compliance with section 9-2-29(3). 
Additionally, those businesses and/or persons licensed to sell malt beverages and/or wine only by the drink and not required to remit excise taxes shall file an annual report no later than the 20th day of January. 
(g)  All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of all alcoholic beverages, amount of alcoholic beverages sold and tax collected or authorized due from the sale of alcoholic beverages only, for the related period; and, the amount of revenue received from the sale of food during the same period of the return. 
(h)  Every retail consumption licensee shall, at the time of collecting for food and drinks served, give to the purchaser a receipt on which the price of alcoholic beverages served shall be itemized separately. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefor at the time to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(Ord. No. 90-04, § 2, 5-8-90; Ord. No. 94-01, § 1, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 2000-02, § 1(A), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2005-11, 1-10-06; Ord. No. 2009-12, §§ 4, 5, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 2011-34, § 3, 10-25-11) 
Sec. 9-2-31. - Standards to determine sleeping or seating capacity. 
Where a minimum sleeping or seating capacity is prescribed herein, the requirement shall be judged by existing ordinances of the county or state regulations. 
Sec. 9-2-32. - Term of license. 
No license under this chapter shall be issued for less than a calendar year period except for initial licenses as provided in section 9-2-30(b) and, in case of the revocation or surrender of the license before expiration of the calendar year period, the holder shall not be entitled to receive any refund of any fees or taxes whatsoever. 
Sec. 9-2-33. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  Licenses shall not be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. In the case of the death of any person holding a license, or any interest therein, the same may, in the discretion of the city manager, be transferred to the administrator, executor, or the lawful heir of the decedent. The executor, administrator, or lawful heir shall have a 30-day grace period to apply for a license transfer. 
(b)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. 
(c)  Should a transfer of location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee or business tax and the new location shall be considered as a new license hereunder. 
(d)  All applications for transfer of locations shall comply with the provisions herein set forth governing new licenses. 
(e)  This chapter is in no way to be construed to conflict with any federal or state bankruptcy or receivership laws. 
Sec. 9-2-34. - Protection of minors in movie theaters. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect minors and to protect against underage drinking in movie theaters licensed for on-premises consumption. 
(2)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
a.  Adequate security measures means security measures that are adequate for the policing and enforcement of this section. Movie theaters licensed to serve alcoholic beverages shall: 
1.  Ensure that the bar areas are adequately lit so as to ensure compliance under this subsection; 
2.  Segregate bar areas, which areas are limited to persons 21 years of age and above. Bar areas must be physically separated from non-bar areas by a partition or wall sufficient to control access, and access points to licensed areas must be controlled by management in a manner sufficient to exclude persons under the legal drinking age from admittance; 
3.  Require every person who requests to purchase an alcoholic beverage to present identification; 
4.  Utilize a distinctive set of translucent cups in which alcoholic beverages are sold; 
5.  Require servers of alcoholic beverages to be at least 21 years of age; 
6.  Provide a course of instruction for its servers of alcohol that must include subjects dealing with alcoholic beverages as follows: 
a.  The importance of not selling or serving alcoholic beverages to underage customers or visibly intoxicated persons. 
b.  Classification of alcohol as a depressant and its effect on the human body, particularly on the ability to drive a motor vehicle. 
c.  Effects of alcohol when taken with commonly used prescription and non-prescription drugs. 
d.  Guidelines for recognizing underage customers or visibly intoxicated persons. 
e.  Guidelines for checking and verifying age identification, and for recognizing false or altered identification. 
f.  Guidelines for refusing sales of alcoholic beverages to underage customers and visibly intoxicated persons. 
g.  State of Georgia laws and regulations regarding the sale and service of alcoholic beverages. 
h.  City of Morrow ordinances and regulations regarding the sale and service of alcoholic beverages. 
7.  Provide an alcohol server management course for managers. The course must include subjects on alcoholic beverages as follows: 
a.  State of Georgia laws and regulations and City of Morrow ordinances and regulations governing the service of alcoholic beverages and the operation of establishments serving alcoholic beverages. 
b.  Development of standard operating procedures for dealing with under-aged customers and visibly intoxicated persons. 
c.  Development of standard operating procedures for reporting to law enforcement customers and employees who use or distribute illegal drugs at the licensed premises. 
d.  Methods of assisting employees in dealing with underaged customers and visibly intoxicated persons, and in maintaining records that relate to such incidents. 
e.  Development of standard operating procedures for recognizing underage customers and visibly intoxicated persons. 
f.  Development of guidelines for checking and verifying age identification, and for recognizing false or altered identification. 
8.  Require each nonmanagerial employee who is employed to serve alcoholic beverages to complete the employee training course specified in subsection (6) within 30 days after commencing employment. The licensee must provide for the supervision of such an employee in the service of alcoholic beverages until the employee has received such training. 
9.  Require each managerial employee to complete the managerial training course specified in subsection (7) within 15 days after commencing employment. 
10.  Require all employees who handle or serve alcoholic beverages to attend at least one meeting every four months that must include the dissemination of information covering the applicable subjects specified in this section and an explanation of the licensee's policies and procedures relating to those subjects. 
11.  Maintain employment records of applications, acknowledgements, and training of its employees required by this section. 
12.  Post signs on the licensed premises informing customers of the licensee's policy against serving alcoholic beverages to under-aged persons and informing customers that the purchase of alcoholic beverages by an under-aged person will result in ejection from the premises and prosecution. 
b.  Adequately lit means ambient lighting that is adequate for the purposes of observing the operation of or patrons within the bar area. A bar area is to be adequately lit at all times that alcoholic beverages are being sold, served and consumed. 
c.  Bar area means a discrete area, that is within the same building as and that is under common ownership or, possession, and control of a movie theater, from which alcoholic beverages are dispensed and sold to customers of a movie theater for on-premises consumption. 
(3)  Movie theaters to take adequate security measures. All movie theater licensees shall ensure that adequate security measures are employed to prevent the unlawful sale to or possession of alcoholic beverages by a person under the legal drinking age throughout the movie theater, including the bar areas. 
(4)  Pre-approval of premises. 
a.  The chief of police, or his designee, is authorized to require any movie theater to submit for approval plans evidencing compliance with the provisions of this section which includes plans regarding adequate security measures. In such event, failure to follow or operate in accordance with the approved plans shall constitute a violation of this section. 
b.  A movie theater may request of the chief of police, or his designee, a pre-approval of plans evidencing compliance with the provisions of this section which includes regarding adequate security measures. In such event, failure to follow or operate in accordance with the approved plans shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(5)  Preservation of alcoholic beverage laws. Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow activity which is contrary to state or local alcoholic beverage control laws. 
(Ord. No. 2014-06 , § 2, 6-24-14) 
Secs. 9-2-35—9-2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - REGULATION OF CONSUMPTION ON PREMISES 

Sec. 9-2-41. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  No retail consumption dealer located outside the Olde Town Morrow District and/or the Morrow Conference Center shall sell, give away or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink between the hours of 1:55 a.m. Sunday and 12:30 p.m. Sunday, and between 11:30 p.m. Sunday and 9:00 a.m. Monday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on other days, nor permit their places of business to be open for the sale of alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day or any other day prohibited by federal or state law. 
(b)  No retail consumption dealer in the Olde Town Morrow District and/or the Morrow Conference Center shall sell, give away or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink between the hours of 1:55 a.m. Sunday and 12:30 p.m. Sunday, and between the hours of 11:30 p.m. Sunday and 9:00 a.m. Monday, and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on other days, nor permit their places of business to be open for the sale of alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day and any other day prohibited by federal or state law. 
(c)  In all restaurants meeting the standards of section 9-2-2, the sale of alcohol is permitted on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight where such establishment derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
(d)  The sale of alcoholic beverages on election days is specifically permitted in the city. 
(Ord. No. 92-14, § 1, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 2009-12, § 6, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 9-2-42. - License number to be displayed. 
Each retail consumption dealer shall have printed on the front window adjacent to the main entrance of the licensed premises the inscription "City License No. _______" in uniform letters not less than three inches and not more than four inches in height. 
Sec. 9-2-43. - Signs. 
No sign of any kind, painted or electric, advertising the fact that alcoholic beverages may be purchased on the premises shall be permitted on the exterior, or in the window, of any licensed premises. No placard or sign of any kind which is visible from the exterior of the licensed premises shall make reference to the price of any alcoholic beverages sold therein. 
Sec. 9-2-44. - Condition of premises. 
All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the conditions or premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
Sec. 9-2-45. - Nude dancing and obscene expressions prohibited. 
(a)  Findings; public purpose. Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; Dekalb County, Georgia; College Park, Georgia; Smyrna, Georgia; Richmond County, Georgia; Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida; which experiences we believe are relevant to the problems faced by the City of Morrow, Georgia, we take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the finding of the city council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "adult entertainment," begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequent of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
(b)  Enactment. The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or disperse alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (b)(1) or where such person(s) perform(s) acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsection (b)(1) and (2) above. 
(Ord. No. 91-01, § 1, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 93-08, §§ 1, 2, 9-14-93) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-01, § 1, adopted Feb. 12, 1991, repealed former §§ 9-2-45 and 9-2-46, and enacted in lieu thereof new provisions designated as § 9-2-45, herein set out. Prior to repeal, § 9-2-45 prohibited disturbances and obscenities, and § 9-2-46 prohibited nudity. Such sections bore no history notes. 
Sec. 9-2-46. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note following § 9-2-45. 
Sec. 9-2-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.D, adopted Dec. 13, 1994, provided for the deletion of § 9-2-47, which prohibited amusement devices, slot machines, pinball machines, etc., on premises of retail consumption dealers. Such section bore no history note. 
Sec. 9-2-48. - Machines used for the purpose of musical entertainment and cigarette dispensing permitted. 
Machines or central systems used for musical entertainment are permitted, provided that the machines or systems may be controlled by the individual user or maintained by the licensee in such a manner so as to assure proper decorum at all times. Loud or otherwise abusive sounds are specifically prohibited. 
Sec. 9-2-49. - Sales outside of licensed premises. 
It shall be made unlawful for any sale to be made outside of the building, premises or place of business licensed for sale or for any patron of such businesses to carry alcoholic beverages outside the licensed premises except as specifically permitted herein. Consumption-on-premises licensees located within the Olde Town Morrow District shall be permitted to make sales of alcoholic beverages which may be carried within the boundaries of the district, but which may not be carried outside the boundaries of that district or carried into any motor vehicle. Such licensees within the Olde Town Morrow District are further permitted to make sales of alcoholic beverages on the porches or patio areas of their respective premises at any time in which alcohol sales may be lawfully made. 
(Ord. No. 2009-12, § 7, 10-13-09) 
Sec. 9-2-50. - Employee registration for on-site consumption.[4] 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be sold, served, distributed and dispensed only by employees of the licensee, who are 18 years of age or older. No licensee shall employ for the purposes of selling, serving, distributing or dispensing alcoholic beverages within the premises any person who, by reason of such person's personal associations, records of arrests, or reputation in the community where he has resided, is not likely to maintain the operation in conformity with federal, state or local laws. Convictions or pleas of guilty, in this or any state, or by the United States or any other country, of any offenses involving sexual misconduct, drug possession (felony) or distribution, keeping a disorderly place, gambling, or offenses related to the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages, or other felony offenses related to the illegal possession or use of alcoholic beverages, within ten years immediately prior to the date of employment would render such applicant ineligible for registration. Employment of such person subjects the licensee to suspension or revocation of the license. 
(b)  Employees who are involved in the sale and/or dispensing of alcoholic beverages are required to register with the city on a form provided by the city for that purpose. A dispensing permit with a photo affixed will be issued and a fee will be charged to all applicants for the same. Such fee may be changed from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. Reregistration shall be accomplished annually on the anniversary of initial registration in the same manner as previously stated. Such permits allow an employee who dispenses or sells alcoholic beverages to work in any retail consumption establishment in the city. Such permits must be worn, clearly visible to the public, at all times when the holder of the permit is engaged in the dispensing and/or sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Persons under the age of 18 years may be employed in or about places of business where alcoholic beverages are sold, provided such persons shall be prohibited from selling, taking orders for, dispensing or serving alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be served only by employees of the establishment. 
(e)  Employee permits allowing the sale of alcoholic beverages may be revoked or suspended by the city manager following ten calendar days' notice, hearing and a determination that such employee has violated any provision of this Code regulating alcoholic beverages or upon a finding that the employee no longer possesses the qualification for holding of such permit. The decision of the city manager with respect to suspension or revocation shall be a final decision of the city and may be appealed by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Clayton County as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2001-18, § 1.B., 9-11-01; Ord. No. 2012-42, § 3, 11-13-12) 
Cross reference— Other offenses involving minors and alcoholic beverages, § 11-1-21. 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-18, adopted Sept. 11, 2001, repealed former section 9-2-50, employee registration, and enacted a new section 9-2-50 as set out herein. Former section 9-2-50 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 86-05, adopted June 10, 1986, Ord. No. 88-05, adopted June 30, 1988, and Ord. No. 97-01, adopted January 14, 1997. 

Sec. 9-2-51. - Price information. 
(a)  All retail consumption dealers, except private clubs, shall maintain a schedule of prices for alcoholic beverages and shall display in prominent places their current prices of alcoholic beverages, and admission and cover charges. Such schedule shall be effective for not less than one calendar week. 
(b)  Licensees shall file a copy of their price list with the investigating officer of the police department and shall furnish to any customer who desires it, an itemized bill of charges which shall not exceed the price list furnished to the police department. Upon any increase or decrease of prices, a new list must be filed with the police department. 
(c)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons, except in accordance with section 9-2-29(2)c; 
(2)  Deliver more than two alcoholic beverages to one person at one time; 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not opened to the public; 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages to any person or group of persons on any one day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not opened to the public; 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages including malt beverages, by the pitcher, except to two or more persons at any one time; 
(6)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week; 
(7)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(d)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (c). 
(e)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, provided all patrons are allowed equal access to such free food, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests. Otherwise no food and alcoholic beverage package may be offered by any licensee. 
Sec. 9-2-52. - Service in back rooms prohibited. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not normally open to the general public use is prohibited, except that private parties or conventions, which have been scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms, and, provided further, that this prohibition shall not apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption hereunder to the registered guests of any hotel or motel in their designated rooms. 
Sec. 9-2-53. - Copy of provisions to be maintained on licensed premises; effect of violation by employee or agent of licensee. 
It shall be the duty of the licensee hereunder to maintain a copy of this chapter on the premises and to instruct each and every employee of the terms thereof. A violation of the chapter by an employee or agent of the licensee shall be deemed a violation of the licensee. 
Sec. 9-2-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D-1. - REGULATION OF SALES OFF-PREMISES FOR CATERED FUNCTIONS 

Sec. 9-2-55. - Event permits. 
(a)  In order to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine at an off-premises catered function, the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall apply to the city manager for an event permit. The application for the event permit shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address, and time of the event, and the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's license number. For alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by the city, no further event permit fee is required, and all alcoholic beverage excise and sales taxes attributed to the sale or use of alcohol at the catered event shall be reported through the alcoholic beverage caterer's primary alcoholic beverage license. 
(b)  For alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by political subdivisions in the state other than the City of Morrow, in addition to the information required of city event caterers, the applicant for the event permit shall provide proof of its state and local primary alcoholic beverage license and of a valid licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's license from its home jurisdiction. The non-local alcoholic beverage caterer shall pay an event permit fee of $50.00 per event to cater events within the city, and in addition, shall collect and remit local excise and sales taxes on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the city by the caterer. 
(Ord. No. 2011-34, § 4, 10-25-11; Ord. No. 2012-42, § 4, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 9-2-56. - Records and reports. 
All licensed alcoholic beverage caterers shall maintain all records and reports required by state law and the city, and shall make those records and reports available for inspection by the city upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 2011-34, § 4, 10-25-11) 
Sec. 9-2-57. - Familiarity with alcoholic beverage regulations. 
All licensed alcoholic beverage caterers shall be familiar with the alcoholic beverage regulations of the city and all state laws governing the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages. It shall be the responsibility of the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to ensure that all agents and employees serving alcoholic beverages under its event permit are familiar with those ordinance requirements and state regulations and shall comply with same. 
(Ord. No. 2011-34, § 4, 10-25-11) 
Sec. 9-2-58. - Days and times of alcoholic beverage catering. 
No sales or distribution of alcoholic beverages pursuant to an event permit obtained by a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall be made on any day or at any time during which alcoholic beverages may not lawfully be sold within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-34, § 4, 10-25-11) 
Sec. 9-2-59. - Employees of licensed alcoholic beverage caterers. 
No licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall employ any person or allow any person under the age of 21 years of age to handle, sell, or distribute alcoholic beverages under its event permit. All employees of licensed alcoholic beverage caterers, whether licensed by the city or by other jurisdictions, shall obtain a city registration, as required by section 9-2-69 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2011-34, § 4, 10-25-11) 
Sec. 9-2-60. - Penalties. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties provided in Article E of this chapter, in the event that a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer licensed by a jurisdiction other than the city violates any of the alcoholic beverage regulations of the city or state law, such licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall not be permitted another event license within the city for a period of 12 months. 
(b)  In the event that a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer licensed by the city commits a violation of any regulation of this chapter or of state law governing the sale, furnishing, or distribution of alcoholic beverages, such violation shall count as a violation on its underlying license issued by the city, and shall be handled in accordance with the provisions of Article E of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2011-34, § 4, 10-25-11) 
ARTICLE D. - REGULATION OF PACKAGE SALES OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE 

Sec. 9-2-61. - Hours and days of sale. 
No retail dealer shall sell or give away any malt beverages and/or wine except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Christmas Day, or any other day prohibited by state law. The package sales by retailers of malt beverages and wine on Sundays is authorized betweens the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2013-43, § 1, 2-12-13) 
Note— The above provisions were approved at a referendum held on November 4, 2013. 
Sec. 9-2-62. - Sales outside of licensed premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any sale to be made outside of the building, premises or place of business licensed for sales except as permitted herein. 
Sec. 9-2-63. - Signs advertising products. 
No sign of any kind, painted or electric, advertising any brand or price of malt beverages or wine shall be permitted on the exterior, or in the window, of any licensed premises. No placard or sign of any kind which is visible from the exterior of the licensed premises shall make reference to the price of any malt beverages or wine sold therein. 
Sec. 9-2-64. - License number to be displayed. 
Each person licensed to sell malt beverages and wine by the package shall have printed on the front window adjacent to the main entrance of the licensed premises the inscription "City License No. _______" in uniform letters not less than three inches and not more than four inches in height. 
Sec. 9-2-65. - Signs concerning prohibited acts. 
(a)  The retail licensee shall post in a conspicuous place where the actual transaction takes place within the licensed premises a sign stating that no malt beverages or wine shall be sold to or purchased by any person under 21 years of age and that it shall be unlawful for any minor to falsely misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever to a licensee. Such sign shall be printed in uniform letters not less than one inch in height. 
(b)  The retail dealer licensee shall display at any entrances or exits to the licensed premises a sign which shall state that it is unlawful to consume any malt beverages or wine or to open any container of such beverages on the licensed premises or in any parking area adjacent thereto. Further, such signs shall also be placed in such a manner as to be visible from any parking area adjacent to the licensed premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any retail dealer to permit, allow or acquiesce in the consumption of any malt beverages or wine or the opening of any container of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises or in any parking area adjacent thereto. 
(d)  All signs required by this section shall be clearly visible and lettering shall be dark and unfaded. 
Sec. 9-2-66. - Prices. 
(a)  Each retail dealer shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the malt beverages and wine offered for sale and one printed copy of these regulations; provided, that a licensee, in lieu of having four copies of a printed price list, may have the price placed on the bottles or on the bottom of the shelf where the alcoholic beverages are exhibited for sale. 
(b)  Licensees shall file a copy of their price lists with the investigating officer of the police department and shall furnish to any customer that so desires an itemized bill of charges which shall not exceed the prices list furnished to the police department. Upon any increase or decrease of prices, a new list must be filed with the police department. 
Sec. 9-2-67. - Broken seals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a licensee, his manager or agent in charge of licensed premises, to carry into or have in his possession on any premises any malt beverages or wine in the original package, the seal of which has been broken or the original package opened. 
Sec. 9-2-68. - Reuse of bottles. 
It shall be illegal for the licensee hereunder to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any malt beverage or wine. 
Sec. 9-2-69. - Employee registration for off-site consumption.[5] 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages by the package shall be sold or distributed only by employees of the licensee, who are 18 years of age or older. No licensee shall employ for the purposes of selling or distributing alcoholic beverages within the premises any person who, by reason of such person's personal associations, records of arrests, or reputation in the community where he has resided, is not likely to maintain the operation in conformity with federal, state or local laws. Convictions or pleas of guilty, in this or any state, or by the United States or any other country, of any offenses involving sexual misconduct, drug possession (felony) or distribution, keeping a disorderly place, gambling, or offenses related to the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages, or other felony offenses related to the illegal possession or use of alcoholic beverages, within ten years immediately prior to the date of employment would render such applicant ineligible for registration. Employment of such person subjects the licensee to suspension or revocation of the license. 
(b)  Employees who are involved in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages are required to register with the city on a form provided by the city for that purpose. A permit with a photo affixed will be issued and a fee will be charged to all applicants for the same. Such fee may be changed from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. Reregistration shall be accomplished annually on the anniversary of initial registration in the same manner as previously stated. Such permits allow an employee who sells or distributes alcoholic beverages to work in any retail package establishment in the city. Such permits must be worn, clearly visible to the public, at all times when the holder of the permit is engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Persons under the age of 18 years may be employed in or about places of business where alcoholic beverages are sold, provided such persons shall be prohibited from selling or handling alcoholic beverages; provided, however, in supermarkets, convenience stores and drugstores, persons under 18 years of age may handle or sell alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2001-18, § 1.C., 9-11-01) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-18, adopted Sept. 11, 2001, repealed former section 9-2-69, employees registration and replaced said section with a new section 9-2-69 as set out herein. The former section 9-2-69 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 86-05, adopted June 10, 1986, Ord. No. 88-05, adopted June 30, 1988, and Ord. No 97-01, adopted Jan. 14, 1997. 

Sec. 9-2-70. - Interior visibility. 
No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any retail dealer's store, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
Sec. 9-2-71. - Copy of provisions to be maintained on licensed premises; effect of violation by employee or agent of licensee. 
It shall be the duty of the licensee hereunder to maintain a copy of this chapter on the premises and to instruct each and every employee of the terms thereof. A violation of the chapter by an employee or agent of the licensee shall be deemed a violation of the licensee. 
Sec. 9-2-72. - Security cameras required for certain establishments selling alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Any licensee which sells any alcoholic beverage packages to go, is hereby required to install a continuous video recording system dedicated to each register area with cameras and lens of a type, number and location approved by the chief of the police department. Such cameras must be capable of producing a retrievable and identifiable image on film or tape that can be made a permanent record and that can be enlarged through projection or other means. Provided, however, that any establishment governed by this section and having three or more employees on duty at all times during business hours is hereby exempted from the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Cameras meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be in operation at all hours in which such establishment is open for business. The camera shall be subject to periodic inspection by the chief of police or his designee along with the person on duty at the time of the inspection and in the event the primary system becomes inoperable, the licensee must have the camera repaired or have availability of a backup camera system within a ten-day period of time. In addition, in the event the camera becomes inoperable, the licensee must immediately notify the police chief or his designee. If a crime occurs or an employee believes a crime has occurred, the police department shall be contacted immediately and the film retrieved by a designated police officer. 
(c)  Violation of any provisions under this section shall constitute an offense hereunder and shall be punishable as follows: 
(1)  On a first offense there shall be a minimum fine of $250.00. 
(2)  On the second offense, if within 12 months of the first, there shall be a minimum fine of $350.00. 
(3)  Any conviction or acceptance of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere as well as any alternative sentencing imposed on a defendant appearing in municipal court for a violation of this chapter shall be reported by the judge to the city manager at the close of the court session. 
(Ord. No. 91-11, § 1, 9-24-91; Ord. No. 2012-42, § 5, 11-13-12) 
Secs. 9-2-73—9-2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 9-2-81. - Inspection authority of city. 
Sworn officers of the police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed hereunder during the hours in which the premises are open for business. The inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of these regulations. 
Before any alcoholic beverage license is issued, the code enforcement officer or other representative of the city designated by the city manager shall conduct an on-site inspection of each licensed establishment to ensure compliance with all city codes. The fee for an inspection shall be as set by the mayor and council from time to time. Any violations of the City Code of Ordinances must be corrected within a reasonable amount of time as determined by the city manager, or such establishment's alcoholic beverage license will not be issued until the establishment comes into compliance. 
The applicant for an alcoholic beverage license whose license is not issued based on this Code section may file a written appeal with the city manager not later than five business days after receiving written notice from the city that the license will not be issued because of noncompliance with the City Code of Ordinances. The city manager shall render his decision in writing within five business days of the receipt of the appeal. In the event the appeal to the city manager is denied, the applicant for an alcoholic beverage license may appeal the city manager's decision to the mayor and council by filing written notice with the city clerk within five business days of the city manager's decision. Such appeal shall be heard and decided in accordance with the procedures established by section 9-2-84. 
(Ord. No. 2000-02, § 1(B), 2-8-00; Ord. No. 2012-42, § 6, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 9-2-82. - Automatic revocation in response to state revocation. 
Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the city license to deal in that product, issued pursuant to these regulations, shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the city. 
Sec. 9-2-83. - Failure to begin or continue operation. 
Whenever a holder of a license granted in the chapter shall fail to open for business the establishment referred to in the license and begin the sale of products or product authorized by the license within nine months from the date of issuance of the license, or whenever a holder of a license shall begin the operation of a business and sale of the product or products as authorized in the license but shall fail to operate the business for a period of nine consecutive months, the holder shall automatically forfeit his license, which shall be cancelled or revoked without the necessity of any further action of the city. 
Sec. 9-2-84. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Except as provided for herein, no license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any person under this chapter shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing and upon the prior ten-day written notice to the holder of the license of the time, place and purpose of the hearing and a statement of the charge upon which the hearing shall be held. 
(b)  "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating the businesses, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating the businesses, or for the violation of any state, federal, or local law or ordinance relating to the use and sale of drugs and/or alcoholic beverages or any crime of moral turpitude. 
(c)  The hearing may be conducted by the mayor and council or, alternatively, the mayor and council may appoint a hearing officer to conduct the hearing on its behalf. Any such hearing officer shall be either licensed to practice law in the State of Georgia and possess a minimum five years' experience involving local governments or have a minimum of five years' experience as a city manager within the State of Georgia. The hearing shall be held within 30 days of the date notice of appeal is received; provided, such hearing may be rescheduled for one additional 30-day period upon good cause. In the event the mayor and council appoints a hearing officer to conduct the hearing, the hearing officer shall conduct the hearing and make a recommendation to the mayor and council. Such recommendation shall include a statement of findings, and a recommended action to be taken. At any hearing conducted pursuant to this section, the licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and to cross examine witnesses. The city shall make a tape recording of proceedings. Should a licensee desire the availability of a court reporter, the licensee shall be responsible for making those arrangements and paying the costs thereof. The licensee shall present a list of city officers and employees it wishes to have present for hearing no later than five business days in advance of hearing. Provided such notice is timely received, the city shall produce such witnesses for hearing. Prior scheduled leave time for vacation, school or other legitimate purposes of a necessary witness is due grounds for continuance of a hearing at either party's request. If a hearing officer is used, such hearing officer shall reduce his recommendation to writing and provide it to the mayor and council within 14 days of conclusion of the hearing. Final determination of all appeals shall be made by the mayor and council by vote in regular session no later than the next regularly scheduled meeting at which a quorum is present after receipt of the hearing officer's recommendation or at the next meeting after close of the hearing if conducted by the mayor and council. 
(d)  In the event of revocation, no refund or any portion of the license fee or business tax shall be returned. 
(e)  Revocation of a license for violation of this chapter shall be for a minimum of six months and a maximum of 24 months, the period to be determined at the discretion of the mayor and council. A total of three separate and unrelated violations shall constitute grounds for permanent revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-42, §§ 7, 8, 11-13-12) 
State Law reference— Due process standards for denial, suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage licenses, O.C.G.A., § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 9-2-85. - Prevention of evasion; records; inspections; confidentiality of information. 
(a)  Upon demand by the city manager and/or the mayor and council it shall be the duty of any licensee to throw open to these city officials or their designee, during regular business hours, all portions of the place of business for the purpose of enabling these city officials to ascertain and gain any information as may be necessary for determination of the percentage of gross receipts from the sale of food and the percentage of gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. Upon demand by these city officials, it shall also be the duty of any licensee to furnish the city officials during regular business hours at the licensee's place of business all books of account, invoices, papers, reports and memoranda containing entries showing amount of purchases, sales receipts, inventory and other information, from which the correct percentages of gross receipts from the sale of food as opposed to alcoholic beverages, including exhibition of bank deposit books, bank statements, copies of sales tax receipts to the State of Georgia, copies of Georgia income tax reports and federal income tax reports. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any licensee of the city to secure, preserve, maintain and keep for a period of three years the records and documents enumerated and referred to in the previous subsection. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee or for any servant, employee, or agent of the licensee to fail or refuse to perform any duty herein imposed upon the licensee or to obstruct or interfere with any city officials in obtaining information necessary for determination of the aforesaid percentages of sales. 
(d)  Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the license fee or business tax provided in this code, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city or any person to divulge or make known in any manner the information required to be submitted in the registration and application for license, or otherwise submitted under the terms of this chapter and the rules and regulations promulgated in connection therewith. All information so submitted shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using the information for the purpose of the administration of this chapter. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the administrator shall be classed as employees. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the disclosure of the license fee or business tax levied and assessed upon any person subject thereto, the name, address, and type of business of the license holder. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to prohibit publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns on the items thereof, or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia or of the United States. 
Sec. 9-2-86. - Penalties for violation of chapter; application irregularities. 
Any person who acquires a license or a renewal thereof, in violation of this chapter by any misrepresentation or fraudulent statement, or who, after acquiring a license, is found to have violated any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code in addition to any suspension or revocation of the license. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
Secs. 9-2-87—9-2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE F. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 9-2-91. - Malt beverages and wine. 
(a)  Licensed wholesale dealers in malt beverages and wine shall pay to the city an excise tax in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  $0.05 per 12-ounce container of malt beverages sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers as specified in subsection (2). Fractional parts of 12-ounce containers shall be computed proportionately. 
(2)  $6.00 for each container of malt beverages containing not more than 15½ gallons and at a like rate for fractional parts, where the beverage is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, that beverage commonly known as tap or draft beer. 
(3)  $0.22 per liter of vinous beverages, and a proportionate amount in like rates on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  The excise tax imposed by this section shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the city by the 10th of the month, based upon the units of beer and wine sold during the previous month. 
(c)  When any person required to file a report as provided by this article fails to file the report within the time prescribed, the person shall be assessed a penalty of $50.00 for each failure to file. 
(d)  When any person fails to pay the tax due as provided in this article, the person shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the tax due and not paid on or before the time prescribed, together with interest on the principal amount at the rate of one percent per month from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid. Any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(Ord. No. 93-12, 10-26-93) 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A., § 3-5-80, 3-5-81; tax on wine, O.C.G.A., § 3-5-60. 
Sec. 9-2-92. - Distilled spirits. 
There is hereby imposed an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink, which tax shall be three percent of the charge to the public for the beverages. Such taxes are to be collected at the time of sale by licensee, and such licensee shall be permitted a three percent deduction of the amount collected as compensation for his effort, providing that the account is not delinquent at the time of payment. This tax does not apply to the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented beverage. Such taxes are due and payable to the city on or before the 10th day of every month next succeeding each respective calendar month. This tax is in lieu of that portion of gross revenue reportable as gross receipts and may be itemized as a deduction on application for the annual business license, whereupon the gross receipts are reported in accordance with section 3-2-52. Such exclusion from other business tax is authorized in section 3-2-52(b)(2)b.2. 
(Ord. No. 92-02, § 1, 2-11-92; Ord. No. 2000-02, § 1(C), 2-8-00) 
Sec. 9-2-93. - Enforcement. 
Each wholesaler or retail licensee required to report and remit the excise tax to the city shall accompany such report with a sworn statement that the report is a true and correct report of all sales and shipments made within the city. Upon demand by the mayor and council, or their designee, it shall be the duty of any wholesaler/licensee to throw open to the city officials or their designee all portions of the place of business for the purpose of enabling the city officials to ascertain and gain any information as may be necessary for the determination of quantities of alcoholic beverages sold in order to determine the amount of excise tax due and/or payable to the city. 
Cross reference— Reporting procedure combined with food/beverage ratio reporting, § 9-2-30(f), (g); administrative powers of the city, § 9-2-85. 
CHAPTER 3. - CABLE TELEVISION 

Sec. 9-3-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the same meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include singular number; and words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(1)  CATV means community antenna television. 
(2)  Community antenna television system (hereinafter called CATV system) means any facility which: 
a.  In whole or in part receives directly or indirectly over the air and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television and AM and FM radio stations and distributes these signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for the services; 
b.  Distributes by cable or wire news, weather and other information including civil defense type information as required as an incidental part of CATV service to all subscribers without additional charge; 
c.  Distributes any and all other lawful communications of a specialized nature provided that it shall not mean or include any facility to which is transmitted any special television program or event for which a separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in a manner commonly known and referred to as pay television, except as may be permitted by the federal, state, and/or local regulatory agencies. 
(3)  Applicant means any person submitting an application to the city for a franchise to operate a CATV system under the terms and conditions set forth by the mayor and council. 
(4)  Grantee means the person to whom or to which a franchise is granted by the mayor and council under this chapter or anyone who succeeds the person in accordance with the provisions of the franchise. 
(5)  Gross subscriber revenue means all revenue derived from the monthly charges from all subscribers. 
(6)  Street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the city which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the city and its grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting CATV system transmissions over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a CATV system. 
(7)  Residential subscriber means a purchaser of any service delivered over the system to an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession. 
(8)  Commercial subscriber means a purchaser of any service delivered over the system who or which is not a residential subscriber. 
(9)  Basic service means the simultaneous delivery by the grantee to television receivers (or any other suitable types of audio-video communication receivers) of all subscribers in the city of all signals of over-the-air television broadcasts required by the FCC to be carried by a CATV system as defined hereinabove. Basic service shall also include grantee channels, city channels, except as may be designated for special purposes by the mayor, public channels and additional channels at the option of the grantee, or as directed by the mayor and council. 
(10)  Additional service means any communications service other than basic service provided over its CATV system by a grantee directly or as a carrier for its subsidiaries, affiliates, or any other person engaged in communications services including, but not limited to, burglar alarm, data, or other electronic intelligence transmission, facsimile reproduction, meter reading, and home shopping. 
(11)  Channel means a band of frequencies, six megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum which is capable of carrying either one audio-video television signal and a number of non-video signals or several thousand non-video signals. 
(12)  City channels means channels on the CATV system which are reserved by this chapter for use by the city. 
(13)  Public channels means channels on the CATV system which are reserved for carriage of program material provided by persons who lease channel time and, if necessary, studio facilities from a grantee for the presentation of programs. 
(14)  Grantee channels means the channels on the system which are reserved by this chapter for the carriage of program material originated by a grantee and the retransmission of broadcast signals in accordance with the FCC's cable casting rules and regulations. 
(15)  Federal Communications Commission or FCC means that agency as presently constituted by the United States Congress or any successor agency. 
(16)  Certificate of compliance means that approval required by the FCC in order for a grantee of a CATV franchise to begin operation within the city. 
(17)  Pay television means the delivery over the CATV system of video signals in intelligible form to residential subscribers for a fee or charge (over and above the charge for basic service) on a per program, per channel or other subscription basis. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3001) 
Sec. 9-3-2. - Grant of authority. 
The mayor and council is hereby authorized to grant the right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the streets of the city for a period of 15 years from and after the passage, acceptance and effective date of this chapter, subject to the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided; and this right, privilege and franchise may be granted to any qualified applicant who, upon the proper showing, shall fulfill all the requirements and conditions of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3002) 
Sec. 9-3-3. - Franchise term. 
The franchise, authority or permit granted shall terminate 15 years from date of grant and may be renewed for successive 15 year terms on the same terms or conditions as contained herein, or such different or additional terms and conditions as may be lawfully specified by the mayor and council, and consistent with the requirements of Rule 76.31 (a) (6) of the FCC. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3003) 
Sec. 9-3-4. - Application for CATV franchise. 
(a)  No CATV franchise or renewal thereof shall be issued except on a written application and upon a form approved by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The form shall set forth any facts in detail as the mayor and council may deem appropriate including: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, partnership or unincorporated association, its statement shall contain the names and addresses of all persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in and to the prospective franchisee's business operation, and in and to the prospective franchise if awarded to the proposer. The term "equitable interest" shall include all assignment for value, as well as all contingent assignments of any right or privilege under the prospective franchise, and shall also include any benefit, payment or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a franchise under this chapter. 
(2)  If the applicant is a non-public corporation, the statement shall furnish, additionally, the names and addresses of the officers, directors and shareholders of the corporation, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(3)  If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, as defined by the rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall contain the states in which incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
(4)  A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in rendering the service. 
(5)  The source of funds for operation of the system respecting the installation and maintenance of all CATV facilities and shall demonstrate the financial ability to provide and extend service to proposed subscribers at a reasonable cost. 
(6)  A detailed schedule of the rates to be charged for the services offered, the facilities to be employed and the general routes of the cables used in redistributing signals, the service area or areas, the commencement and completion dates of construction of the CATV system and the proposed dates the service will be available to the area or areas named. 
(7)  A detailed schedule of rates to be applied to residential, apartment, commercial and other users of service. 
(c)  The council may request any other information as it may deem appropriate. 
(d)  All applications shall be open to public inspection, shall be kept on file a reasonable length of time at the discretion of the council, and any intentional misrepresentation in an application shall be grounds for its rejection or for termination of the franchise. 
(e)  All applications shall be considered firm offers to the city, shall be signed and verified by the applicants whose relationship to the applicant shall be set forth and shall bind the applicant to the provisions thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3004) 
Sec. 9-3-5. - Franchise payments. 
(a)  The grantee shall pay to the city, on or before March 31 of each year, a franchise fee not to exceed five percent of the gross subscriber revenues received for cable television operations in the city for the preceding calendar year. No other fee, charge or consideration shall be imposed. A grantee shall file with the city within 30 days after the expiration of each calendar year during the period the franchise shall be in force a financial statement showing in detail the gross annual subscriber revenues as defined herein of grantee during the preceding year. It shall be the duty of a grantee to pay to the city at the time for filing the statement the sum hereinabove prescribed. A grantee shall also file within 90 days following the conclusion of each fiscal year of a grantee an annual report prepared and audited by an independent certified public accountant acceptable to the city showing the yearly total gross subscriber revenues and payments to the city and any further relevant financial information in regard to the grantee as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(b)  In the event the franchise should be terminated or forfeited prior to the end of the basic 15 year term, a grantee shall immediately submit to the city a financial statement prepared as before required showing the gross subscriber revenues of a grantee for the time elapsed since the last period for which a grantee has paid to the city the required percentage of gross annual subscriber revenues, and a grantee shall pay to the city not later than 30 days following the termination of the franchise a like percentage of such revenues and any other sums legally due and owing to the city. 
(c)  In the event that any payment is not made on or before the applicable date fixed in subsections (a) and (b) hereof, interest on the payments shall apply from such date at the yearly rate of eight percent (8%). 
(d)  The city shall have the right to inspect a grantee's records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and shall have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under the franchise. No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release of or an accord or satisfaction of any claim the city might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this chapter or for any other performance or obligation of grantee hereunder. 
(e)  Payments of compensation made by a grantee to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be considered in the nature of a tax but shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or hereafter required to be paid by any law of the United States, the State of Georgia or the city. 
Sec. 9-3-6. - Insurance. 
(a)  At all times during the term of the franchise, grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the city executed duplicate copies and receipts evidencing the payment of premiums for the following: 
(1)  A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees, from any and all claims by any person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or persons occasioned by the operations of a grantee under franchise or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $500,000 per personal injury or death of any one person and $1,000,000 for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(2)  Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for property damage occasioned by the operation of grantee under the franchise herein granted or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $250,000 for property damage to any one person and $500,000 for property damage to two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(3)  $1,000,000 for all other types of liability. The insurance shall be kept in full force and effect by a grantee during the existence of and until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the CATV system as defined in the franchise. 
(b)  All of the foregoing insurance contracts shall be in form satisfactory to the city and shall be issued and maintained by companies authorized to do business in the State of Georgia and acceptable to the city, and they shall require 30 days' written notice of any cancellation to both the city and a grantee herein, and a copy of the policy shall be filed with the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3006) 
Sec. 9-3-7. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Grantee shall at its sole cost and expense fully indemnify, defend and save harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions and employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damage. 
(b)  These damages or penalties shall include but shall not be limited to damages arising out of copyright infringement and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV system authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise. 
(c)  A grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned above. These expenses shall include but not be limited to all out of pocket expenses such as attorney fees and all other costs of litigation. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3008) 
Sec. 9-3-8. - Books and records of grantee. 
(a)  A grantee shall file with the city manager a copy, true and accurate, of maps and/or plats of all existing and proposed installations upon the streets. These maps and plats shall conform to the requirements of the city manager and shall be kept continuously up to date. 
(b)  A grantee shall continually keep on file with the city a current list of its shareholders holding over three percent of the outstanding stock and officers with their current addresses. 
(c)  All books and records of a grantee concerning its operations within the city shall be made available for inspection and audit by the mayor or his designate within 30 days after any request for an inspection or audit shall be made. 
(d)  Copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions established by a grantee for the operation of CATV under the franchise shall be filed with the city and at the local office of a grantee. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3009) 
Sec. 9-3-9. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)  All transmissions and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the streets. The CATV system shall be constructed and operated in compliance with all adopted city and national construction and electrical codes and shall be kept current with new codes. 
(b)  Except when absolutely necessary to service a subscriber and not simply because it shall be more convenient, economical or profitable for a grantee to so operate, and then only when expressly permitted in writing by the city manager, under any conditions as he or she shall prescribe for the public welfare, a grantee shall not erect or authorize or permit others to erect any poles or facilities within the streets of the city for the conduct of its CATV system, but shall use the existing poles and other equipment of the appropriate electrical power and telephone and other utility companies under any terms and agreements as a grantee negotiates with these companies. The city shall cooperate with a grantee in negotiating and obtaining permission to use the facilities. 
(c)  No poles, cables, equipment or wires for the construction, maintenance and operation of the CATV system shall be installed or the installation thereof commenced on an existing pole within the city until the proposed location, specifications and manner of installation of the cables, equipment and wires shall have been set forth upon a plat or map showing the existing poles, streets, alleys or highways within the city where the installations are proposed and submitted in writing by a grantee to the city manager and approved in writing. 
(d)  Should a grantee be required in the conduct of its business to locate property within the streets of the city other than property which may be attached to utility poles, then in that event, before a grantee shall install or shall permit any other person to install for grantee any of the property in the street, the nature of the property shall be disclosed to the city manager for his approval as to the need thereof and as to the location within the street and only installed under any conditions as he shall prescribe concerning the location or installation. 
(e)  Whenever the city or state shall require the relocation or reinstallation of any property of a grantee in any of the streets of the city, it shall be the obligation of a grantee, upon notice of the requirement, to immediately remove and relocate or reinstall the property as may be reasonably necessary to meet the requirements of the city or state. The relocation, removal or reinstallation by a grantee shall be at the sole cost of a grantee. 
(f)  Whenever, in any place within the city, all the electric and telephone utilities shall be located underground, it shall be the obligation of a grantee to locate or to cause its property to be located underground within those places. If the electric utilities or telephone utilities shall be located underground in any place within the city after a grantee shall have previously installed its property, nevertheless, a grantee shall at the same time or immediately thereafter remove and relocate its property also underground in those places. Facilities of a grantee placed underground at the property owner's request in an area where electric utilities or telephone utilities are aerial shall be installed with the additional expense paid by the property owner. 
(g)  Grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging the streets of the city so as to prevent the branches of the trees from coming in contact with a grantee's wires and cables. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of a grantee. 
(h)  In case of disturbance of any street caused by a grantee, a grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city manager, replace and restore the street in as good a condition as before the work involving the disturbance was done. Provided, that where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut a grantee shall replace the full width of the existing walk and length of the section or sections cut, a section being determined as that area marked by expansion joints or scoring. 
(i)  A grantee shall maintain, repair and keep in good condition for a period of one year following the disturbance all portions of a sidewalk or street disturbed by it or its agents, provided the maintenance and repairs shall be made necessary because of defective workmanship or materials supplied by grantee. 
(j)  A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of the building. The expense of the temporary removal or raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and a grantee shall have the authority to require the payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for the temporary wire changes. In the event of a disagreement between a grantee and a holder of a permit, the disagreement will be resolved by the city manager. 
(k)  If at any time in case of fire or disaster in the city it shall become necessary, in the judgment of the mayor or the chief of the fire department, to cut or move any of the wire cables, amplifiers, appliances or other fixtures of a grantee, this may be done, and the repairs thereby rendered necessary shall be made by a grantee, at its own cost and expense and without charge against the city. 
(l)  Grantee's work, while in progress, shall be properly executed at all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices as are reasonably required to protect all members of the public having occasion to use the portion of the streets involved, or adjacent property. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3011) 
Sec. 9-3-10. - Initial system installation schedule. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the acceptance of the franchise, a grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
(b)  The grantee, within one year from the date the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) certifies grantee's compliance with its rules and regulations governing cable television operations in and for the city, shall extend energized trunk cable to 20 percent of the city and shall extend energized trunk cable to the remaining portions of the city within four years thereafter unless additional time is granted by the council upon request by grantee for good cause shown. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3012) 
Sec. 9-3-11. - System extension to new subscribers. 
(a)  A grantee, whenever it shall receive a request for service from at least five subscribers within 660 feet of its system, shall extend the system to the subscriber at no cost to the subscriber for system extension other than the usual connect fees for all subscribers. The 660 feet shall be measured in extension length of grantee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall not include length of necessary service drop to the subscriber's home or premises. 
(b)  In addition, the city manager may, upon complaint from any potential subscriber residing in the city, order the extension of the system to the subscriber after opportunity for hearing and notice to a grantee. In those cases, the city manager, in his discretion, may order the extension to any subscriber only upon reasonable contribution from the subscriber to the cost of the extension. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3013) 
Sec. 9-3-12. - Type and capacity of equipment to be installed. 
The applicant shall specify in its proposal the type and capacity of the equipment to be installed, and a grantee shall be required by the city manager to update this section of its proposal in keeping with the advances in the state of the art of CATV Systems design. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3014) 
Sec. 9-3-13. - Operational standards. 
(a)  The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest accepted standards of the industry to the end that the subscriber may receive the highest and most desirable form of service. 
(b)  In determining satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this chapter, the following, among other things, shall be considered: 
(1)  That the CATV system is installed and remains capable of using all band equipment and of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum and that it shall have the further capability of converting UHF for the distribution to subscribers on the VHF band. 
(2)  That the CATV system as installed is capable of transmitting and passing the entire color television signals without the introduction of material degradation of color fidelity and intelligence. 
(3)  That the CATV system is designed and capable of 24 hours a day continuous operation. 
(4)  That the CATV system is capable of and will produce a picture upon any subscriber's television screen in black and white or color (provided the subscriber's television set is capable of producing a color picture) that is undistorted and free from ghost images and accompanied by proper sound assuming the technical, standard production television set is in good repair and that the television broadcast signal transmission is satisfactory. In any event, the picture produced shall be as good as the state of the art allows. 
(5)  The CATV system shall transmit or distribute signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures with good sound in all television receivers of all subscribers without causing cross modulation in the cables or interference with other electrical or electronic systems. 
(6)  That the CATV system as installed has a minimum capacity of 20 channels. 
(7)  That a grantee shall provide, upon request and without charge, one outlet to each public office building, fire station, police station and public and private school that is passed by its cable. If more than one outlet is required at any of these locations, a grantee shall install at the cost of time and material only, and in no event will there be a monthly service charge at these locations except for additional outlets. 
(8)  That a grantee shall make its studio facilities, including color cameras and other equipment, available for use by public and private schools for local origination programs and for closed circuit educational films subject to reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to the use by the grantee and in the manner as to not duly interfere with the cable television operations of a grantee. Services rendered to all users by a grantee under the terms of the franchise shall at all times be as good as the state of the art allows. 
(9)  That a grantee shall provide at least one free dedicated noncommercial public access channel to be available on a nondiscriminatory basis. 
(10)  That a grantee shall reserve at least one channel solely for educational use on a developmental basis, and that upon completion of the basic trunk line, for the first five years thereafter at least one channel will be made available free. 
(11)  That a grantee shall reserve at least one channel solely for use by state and local governments on a developmental basis and that, upon completion of the basic trunk line, for the first five years thereafter at least one channel will remain free. 
(12)  That the cable television system shall be installed with the capacity for two-way communication in accordance with the regulations of the FCC now in effect or which may be promulgated. 
(c)  A grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. The interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
(d)  A grantee shall maintain an office in the county which shall be open during all usual business hours, have necessary listed telephones, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3015) 
Sec. 9-3-14. - Supervision by the city. 
(a)  A grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the CATV system subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the city who have jurisdiction in such matters and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances and departmental rules and regulations. 
(b)  The CATV system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the city. 
(c)  The city manager may, from time to time, issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the CATV system as are consistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  If at any time the powers of the council or any agency or official of the city are transferred by law to any other board, authority, agency or official, the transferee shall have the powers, rights and duties previously vested under this chapter or by law in the council or any agency or official of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3016) 
Sec. 9-3-15. - Grantee's duty to remove its properties from the public streets. 
(a)  Following a grantee's commencement of service through and over its CATV system, a grantee shall promptly remove from the public streets where its properties are located all or any part of the facilities so located when one or more of the following enumerated conditions occur: 
(1)  A grantee ceases to operate the CATV system for a continuous period of six months from the date of the occurrence. 
(2)  A grantee fails to construct the system as hereinabove and hereafter provided. 
(3)  The franchise is terminated or revoked pursuant to notice as provided herein. 
(b)  A grantee shall be entitled to receive notice in writing from the city setting forth one or more of the occurrences hereinabove enumerated or any other occurrence hereinbefore or hereinafter provided and shall have 90 days from the date upon which the notice is received to remove the properties as hereinabove required. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3017) 
Sec. 9-3-16. - Operational reports. 
(a)  Within six months from the acceptance date of the franchise, a grantee shall submit to the city manager and the mayor an installation plan for the entire city, indicating the date on which a grantee expects the installation of the CATV system to be completed and available for service to subscribers in the various areas of the city. 
(b)  A grantee shall furnish the city manager with progress reports indicating in detail the area of construction of the CATV system. The periodic reports shall be furnished at three-month intervals, the first report to be made three months after the construction commencement date. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3018) 
Sec. 9-3-17. - Cable casting of city and public channels. 
For the presentation of programming on public channels, a grantee shall make available free time and, if necessary, adequate studio facilities to members of the public at rates filed with the council and subject to the council's review. Appropriate technical assistance shall also be furnished by a grantee. Time shall be provided on a first-come, first-served basis, except that a grantee shall endeavor to grant the channel time to as many different persons as is practical, it being the intention of the council that the public channels serve as a significant source of diversified expression. In order that there is a maximum opportunity for freedom of expression by members of the public, the programming shall be free from any control by a grantee as to program content, except as is required to protect a grantee from liability under applicable law. The council may direct that a grantee discontinue, or not deliver, a program on the public channels which it finds to be essentially promotional or otherwise related primarily to the conduct of a business, trade or profession; provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed as a prohibition of advertiser-supported programming on public channels. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3020) 
Sec. 9-3-18. - Removal of facilities upon request. 
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of the subscriber upon his or her written request. This removal shall be at no cost to the subscriber. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3022) 
Sec. 9-3-19. - Emergency use of the facilities. 
(a)  In the event of an emergency or disaster, a grantee shall, upon request of the mayor, make available its facilities to the city at no cost for emergency use during the period of the emergency or disaster and shall provide the personnel as necessary to properly operate under the circumstances. 
(b)  A grantee shall incorporate into its facilities the capability for an emergency override alert whereby the city, in times of crisis, may be able to introduce a bulletin on all channels simultaneously. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3023) 
Sec. 9-3-20. - Compliance with state and federal laws. 
(a)  A grantee shall, at all times, comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal governments or any administrative agency thereof, and if any state or federal law or regulation shall require a grantee to perform any service or shall prohibit a grantee from performing any service or shall permit a grantee to perform any service in conflict with the terms of the franchise or of any law or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, a grantee shall notify the mayor of the point of conflict believed to exist between the regulation or law and the laws or regulations of the city or the franchise, and a grantee shall be governed by the advice of the mayor. 
(b)  Grantee shall be subject to all city ordinances as set forth herein, and grantee shall also be subject to all applicable rules and regulations which, from time to time, may be promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission for CATV systems. 
(c)  If the council determines that a material provision of this chapter is affected by the subsequent action, the council shall have the right to modify any of the provisions herein to the reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3024) 
Sec. 9-3-21. - Filing communications with regulatory agencies. 
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by a grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matter affecting CATV operation shall also be submitted simultaneously to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3025) 
Sec. 9-3-22. - Restrictions against assignment. 
(a)  The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, leased or sublet in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person either by the act of a grantee or by operation of law without the consent of the council. The granting, giving or waiving of any one or more of the consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent or consents. 
(b)  The consent or approval of the council to any assignment, lease, transfer or sublease of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets. 
(c)  Prior approval of the council shall be required where ownership or control of more than 10 percent of the right of control of grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already owns or controls 10 percent or more of the right of control, singularly or collectively, at the date the franchise is granted. By its acceptance of the franchise, a grantee specifically agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the council shall constitute a violation of this chapter by a grantee. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or pledge of the CATV system equipment or any part thereof or a leasing by a grantee from another person of the CATV system equipment or part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3026) 
Sec. 9-3-23. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
A grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or any other respect, make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person or subject any person to any undue prejudice or disadvantage; provided, however, connection and service charges may be waived or modified during promotional campaigns of a grantee. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3027) 
Sec. 9-3-24. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to all of the rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the city, the city reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct power the right to terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee hereunder in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A grantee shall by act or omission violate any term or condition of this chapter and within 30 days following written demand by the city shall fail to effect compliance. 
(2)  Any provision of this chapter shall be finally adjudged by a court of law invalid or unenforceable and council further finds that the provision constitutes at that time a consideration material to the continuance of the franchise herein granted. 
(3)  A grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged a bankrupt or all or part of grantee's facilities should be sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemable by grantee within 30 days from the sale. 
(4)  A grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under the franchise with the city or subscribers or potential subscribers. 
(b)  A grantee shall not be declared in fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this chapter in any case in which performance of any provision is prevented for reasons beyond its control. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3028) 
Sec. 9-3-25. - Procedures. 
(a)  Any inquiry, proceeding, investigation or other action to be taken or proposed to be taken by the mayor and council in regard to the operations of grantee's cable television system other than as provided in subsection (c) of this section, but including action in regard to a change in subscription rates, shall be taken only after 30 days' public notice of the action or proposed action is published in a local daily or weekly newspaper having general circulation in the city; a copy of the action or proposed action is served directly on grantee; and the grantee has been given an opportunity to respond in writing and/or at hearing as may be specified by the mayor and council, and general members of the public have been given an opportunity to respond or comment in writing on the action or proposed action. 
(b)  The public notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response and the person or persons in authority to whom the responses should be addressed, and the other procedures as may be specified by the mayor and council. If a hearing is to be held, the public notice shall give the date and time of the hearing, whether public participation will be allowed and the procedures by which any participation may be obtained. The grantee is a necessary party to any hearing conducted in regard to its operations. 
(c)  An informal complaint shall be submitted to the mayor and council in writing and shall contain the name and address of the complainant, the name of the cable system against which the complaint is made and a complete statement of facts upon which the complaint is based. 
(1)  Upon receipt of any informal complaint, the mayor and council will forward a copy to the system complained of or may take the question up by correspondence with the system. Within the time prescribed by the mayor and council, the system will be called upon to satisfy the complaint or advise the mayor and council of its refusal or inability to do so. If the system satisfies the complaint, it shall so notify the mayor and council in accordance with the provisions of section (2) hereof. The mayor and council will forward a copy of the system's notice of satisfaction to the complainant. If the system refuses or is unable to satisfy the complaint, it shall so notify the mayor and council, and the mayor and council will forward a copy of the notice to the complainant, with a statement of the procedure to be followed to further prosecute the complaint. 
(2)  If a system satisfies any complaint brought to its attention by the mayor and council, a statement must be filed with the mayor and council setting forth when and how the complainant has been satisfied. 
(3)  When a complaint has not been satisfied pursuant to subsection (2) hereof, the complainant may file a formal complaint with the mayor and council in the form and manner to be specified thereby. The complaint to the mayor and council must be filed within six months from the date of the mayor and council's statement accompanying a copy of the system's notice of refusal or inability to satisfy the complaint, and the complaint to the mayor and council must make reference to the date of the complaint filed with the mayor and council and that it is based on the same facts as the complaint filed with the mayor and council. If no complaint is filed with the mayor and council within the six-month period, the complainant will be deemed to have abandoned his or her complaint, and the complaint will be deemed dismissed. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3029) 
Sec. 9-3-26. - Grantee to have no recourse. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided in the franchise, a grantee herein shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost or expenses or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the city nor for the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all or any part of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting a franchise, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city to grant the franchise. 
(c)  A grantee by acceptance of the franchise acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the city or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed herein. 
(d)  A grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of the terms and conditions and agrees that in the event of any ambiguity therein or in the event of any other dispute over the meaning thereof, they shall be construed strictly against a grantee and in favor of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3030) 
Sec. 9-3-27. - Failure of city to enforce the franchise; no waiver of the terms thereof. 
A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise by any failure of the city upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any of the terms or conditions. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3031) 
Sec. 9-3-28. - Time essence of the agreement. 
Whenever the franchise shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of a grantee, that time shall be deemed of the essence, and any failure of a grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to revoke the franchise. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3032) 
Sec. 9-3-29. - Grantee will not contest validity of franchise. 
A grantee agrees by the acceptance of the franchise that it will not at any time set up against the city in any claim or proceeding any condition or term of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void or that the city had not power or authority to make the term or condition but shall be required to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their entirety. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3033) 
Sec. 9-3-30. - Rights reserved to the city. 
Without limitation upon the rights which the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers and authorities: 
(1)  to exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to the city; and 
(2)  to determine through the council any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other factors of the franchise. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3034) 
Sec. 9-3-31. - Acceptance. 
This chapter and its terms and provisions shall be accepted by a grantee by a written franchise agreement executed and acknowledged by grantee and filed with the city clerk. The agreement shall incorporate grantee's written application to the city for the CATV franchise and shall bind grantee to the provisions of the application. The council may require a grantee to clarify any portion of its written application prior to final acceptance. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3035) 
Sec. 9-3-32. - Extension of city limit. 
Upon the annexation of any territory to the city (other than through a governmental consolidation process, as to which the city makes no agreement), the right and franchise hereby granted shall extend to the territory so annexed to the extent the city has authority, and all facilities owned, maintained or operated by grantee, located within, under or over streets of the territory so annexed, shall thereafter be subject to all terms hereof. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3036) 
Sec. 9-3-33. - Local office. 
During the term of the franchise, and any renewal thereof, the grantee shall maintain within the city a local business office or agent. The provisions of this section shall be complied with if the grantee maintains a local business headquarters office within ten air miles of the center of the city; provides the mayor and council with the name, address and phone number of a resident of the county who will act as grantee's agent to receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters; and at least once a week informs all subscribers by appropriate announcement (e.g., by a slide card) over the system's originations cablecasting channel of the name, address and phone number of the grantee's registered agent for the city. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3037) 
Sec. 9-3-34. - Employment regulations. 
A grantee shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges or employment because of sex, race, creed, color or national origin. A grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated equally during employment without regard to their sex, race, creed, color or national origin. This requirement shall apply to but not be limited to the following: Employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer; recruitment advertising; layoff or termination; rates of pay or other forms of compensation; and selection for training. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3039) 
Sec. 9-3-35. - Modification of FCC rules. 
Consistent with the requirements of rule 76.31(a)(6) of the FCC, any modification of rule 76.31 resulting from amendment thereto by the FCC shall, to the extent applicable, be considered as a part of the franchise as of the effective date of the amendment made by the FCC and shall be incorporated in the franchise by specific amendments thereto by the lawful action of the council within one year from the effective date of the FCC's amendment or at the time of renewal of the franchise, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1977, § 8-3040) 
CHAPTER 4. - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE A. - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 9-4-1. - Penalty. 
Failure to comply with any requirement of this chapter or violation of any provision contained herein shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. In addition to any fine or imprisonment prescribed in section 1-1-8, if any license or permit holder is convicted of a violation of this chapter, or of a requirement of state or federal law affecting any license or permit issued under this chapter, such permit or license shall be subject to revocation or suspension in accordance with the provisions of section 9-1-12. 
Sec. 9-4-2. - Garage sales and rummage sales. 
Sales commonly known as garage sales or rummage sales, conducted on residential property, shall be subject to the following rules and regulations: 
(1)  These sales shall be conducted only by the owner or tenant of the residential property used. 
(2)  Such sales shall be allowed a maximum of three times during a calendar year on one residential lot. No such sales shall be conducted for a longer period than 72 hours consecutively. 
(3)  No wares, goods, or merchandise shall be advertised or offered for sale, or swap, or given away, except goods, wares, and merchandise owned by the property owner or the tenant conducting the sale. 
(4)  No goods, wares, or merchandise shall be purchased by the owner or tenant for the purpose of selling, swapping, or giving away same at such a sale. 
(5)  Any person desiring to conduct such a sale shall notify the city clerk no later than 12:00 noon of the day preceding the sale. The city clerk or his authorized representative shall issue a license to the person to conduct a sale upon the payment of a license fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council if the applicant otherwise meets the requirements of this section. This fee shall be in lieu of any other fees or business taxes in this Code. 
(6)  Sales for religious and charitable purposes shall be exempt from the payment of a permit fee, but shall register with the city at least 48 hours prior to the sale and shall comply with all other provisions of this section; provided that goods owned by a member of such organization and donated to such sale shall satisfy the requirements of subsection (3) above. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale or rummage sale without first obtaining a license as described herein, or in such a manner as to violate any of the provisions of this section, and the city manager is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 93-10, § 1, 10-12-93) 
Cross reference— Sign restrictions for garage sales, § 8-5-21(10). 
Sec. 9-4-3. - Business certificate; special regulations for business of. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a business certificate to write or post bail bonds, the applicant shall be required to post a surety bond with a value of $25,000.00. The bond shall be payable to the mayor, in his official capacity, and shall be contingent upon the payment of sums due the city on forfeited bonds written by the applicant. The bond shall be approved by the city manager. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to write or post bail bonds in the city and engage in the bail bonds business unless and until that person, firm, or corporation has obtained a business certificate as provided in this Code and has posted an approved bond as provided in this section. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4006) 
Sec. 9-4-4. - Liability insurance required for operators of certain amusement devices and carnival rides. 
All persons, firms, or corporations shall, prior to operating an amusement device where human beings are conveyed, obtain from the city a permit. Upon receiving a permit the applicant must show evidence of personal liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for each person and $2,000,000.00 for each accident plus $100,000.00 [for] property damages. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4007; Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 9-4-5. - Mixed use retail establishments; approval required, when. 
(a)  Restrictions. 
(1)  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, corporation or company or any combination thereof to establish a mixed use retail establishment without specific approval of mayor and council where the nature of the merchandise to be sold presents imminently hazardous conditions which could develop into a danger to occupants, customers, adjacent property owners or tenants and/or the general public. 
(2)  Such uses and/or combination thereof shall include but not be limited to: Service stations, used or new car sales or leasing, convenience stores; gasoline sales only in combination with vehicular sales or leasing or gasoline sales in combination with storage of vehicles for any purpose whatsoever except as may be permitted by mayor and council such as wrecker or service or delivery truck parked on the premises which is used as an integral part of the business. 
(b)  Parking spaces. 
(1)  Parking spaces for vehicles at all businesses shall be as stated in the zoning ordinance of the city and shall additionally provide ample turnaround areas, fire apparatus ingress and egress capability to include fire lanes where appropriate and as directed and general overall reduction of congestion of the area for convenience of the public, the owner/operator and the city. 
(2)  Under no circumstances shall there ever be stored at any retail establishment which sells petroleum products or automobile or internal combustion engine vehicle parts or supplies any vehicles for sale, lease, rent or for hire at any time. 
(Ord. No. 89-11, § 2, 7-25-89) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-11, §§ 1, 2, adopted July 25, 1989, pertaining to approval of mixed use retail establishments, did not specify manner of codification; hence, such provisions have been designated by the editor as § 9-4-5. 
Cross reference— Branch, multiple or joint business, § 9-1-15. 
Sec. 9-4-6. - Consumer fireworks retail sales stands. 
(a)  The city fire marshal shall issue licenses for the operation of consumer fireworks retail sales stands, as that term is defined in section 402 of appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  A maximum of two active city-issued licenses for the operation of a consumer fireworks retail sales stand shall exist at one time. Such licenses are available on a first-come, first-served basis. 
(Ord. No. 2017-03 , § 2, 2-28-17) 
Secs. 9-4-7—9-4-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - PAWNBROKERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; municipal supervision, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 

Sec. 9-4-20. - Purposes of article; authority. 
This article is enacted in accordance with the plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, of establishing reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of pawnshops or similar places where money is advanced on goods or other effects or where merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, and also similar places, better known as swap shops, that engage solely in buying, selling and trading used merchandise from and with an individual. 
(Ord. No. 2003-08, § 1B.(1), 7-22-03) 
Sec. 9-4-21. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms shall have the following meanings for purposes of this section. 
(1)  Pawnbrokers or pawn or swap shops means any establishments which (a) engage in the business of providing money to customers on a temporary basis, wherein such loans are secured by post-dated check, paycheck or car title, or (b) are registered as lenders under state or federal law. This classification does not include a state or federally chartered bank, savings association, credit union, or industrial land company. Further, this classification does not include establishments selling consumer goods, including consumables, where the cashing of checks or money orders is incidental to the main purpose of the business. 
(2)  Pledged goods means tangible personal property other than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in the course of his business. 
(3)  Pledgor means the person who promises performance by a pledge. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(a); Ord. No. 2003-08, § 1B.(2), 7-22-03) 
Sec. 9-4-22. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, attempt to sell, buy, barter, or otherwise deal in the lending of money on the security of purchased goods, without first registering with the business license administrator and obtaining a business license for such transactions. These transactions will be limited to businesses that are eligible for licensing in the city as dominant business activities, and that have been granted a conditional use permit. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(b)) 
Sec. 9-4-23. - Licensee required to have at least a one year lease on business site. 
A prospective licensee must have at least a one-year lease on the business site for which the application applies or own the business site. The express purpose of this provision is to prohibit lending from temporary locations. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(c)) 
Sec. 9-4-24. - Review of application. 
A background investigation of the applicant will be conducted by the police department, and such findings shall be furnished to the city manager, who shall make his recommendations to the planning and zoning board and the mayor and council. No license shall be issued except upon the recommendation of the planning and zoning board and approval of the mayor and council under the conditional use provision of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(k)) 
Sec. 9-4-25. - Limitation on issuance. 
(a)  Only one pawnbrokers license shall be issued per 6,000 population. 
(b)  No pawnbrokers license shall be issued to any person or to any pawnbroker who employs anyone who has been convicted of any crime involving as an element thereof, the theft of property. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(l); Ord. No. 88-11, § 4, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 2001-16, § 1, 9-11-01) 
Sec. 9-4-26. - Regulatory fee. 
The annual regulatory fee for each new pawnbroker doing business within the city, or for each individual establishment maintained for the purpose of doing business as pawnbrokers within the city, shall be $4,500.00. For subsequent calendar years, the actual number of pawn tickets processed by the police department shall be tallied at the end of each calendar year and a refund will be issued or an additional amount will be charged to existing establishments based on the processing fee of $0.75 per pawn ticket. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(m(1); Ord. No. 89-01, § 1, 2-28-89; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.E, 12-13-94; Ord. No. 98-13, § 2, 11-24-98) 
Sec. 9-4-27. - Hours of operation. 
The hours within which pawnbrokers may keep open their places of business shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. except Saturdays and the week before Christmas, when the hours of closing shall be 12:00 midnight. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(m(2)) 
Sec. 9-4-28. - Pawn tickets. 
Pawn tickets will be regulated by the following and reflected on a form approved by the license administrator: 
(1)  Positive identification will be made of any prospective pledgor to include, but not be limited to, name, date of birth, address, right thumb print on form provided, driver's license number, social security number, race, sex, and signature of pledgor. 
(2)  Transactions will not be made with a minor under 18 years of age. 
(3)  Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, shall hold such goods so taken in pawn or purchased for at least 14 days before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(d)) 
Sec. 9-4-29. - False names. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a false or fictitious name or address as his own, or to give the name or address of any other person without that person's knowledge and approval, as a means of identification while selling or attempting to sell, or pawning, anything of value. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(e)) 
Sec. 9-4-30. - Records to be kept; information to be shown; inspection authorized. 
(a)  All pawnbrokers shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged or sold to them. Such description shall include: (i) the name of the manufacturer of the article; (ii) any identifying marks or numbers; (iii) a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. 
(b)  In such books there shall be entered also (i) the name of the person by whom same was deposited or sold; and (ii) the time when the transaction was accomplished. 
(c)  These entries shall be made as soon after the transaction as possible, but in no event later than one hour thereafter. 
(d)  Such books and the articles themselves so pledged or sold shall at all times be subject to inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer and the license administrator. 
(e)  Any person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker, who shall fail or refuse to keep books as provided in this section, or who shall make false entries concerning the transactions named, or who shall fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination by any duly authorized law enforcement officer of the books and of the property pledged with or sold to them shall be considered to be in violation of this section and shall be punished as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(f)) 
Sec. 9-4-31. - Daily report to police. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report in writing to the chief of police, in such form as may be prescribed by the chief, of all property pledged to or brought by him during the 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the date of the report. Such report shall be typewritten. In addition to any other information required by the chief of police, they shall show: 
(1)  The name and address of the pawnbroker; 
(2)  The time of each and every transaction; 
(3)  Serial number of pawn tickets; 
(4)  Amount paid or advanced for each transaction; and 
(5)  Full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry, together with all identifying names, marks, and numbers thereon. 
(b)  Insufficient reports shall be rejected and any pawnbroker making such shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(g)) 
Sec. 9-4-32. - Pledge of building glass and plumbing material. 
It shall be unlawful for pawnbrokers to purchase, advance money on, or take in pawn, glass taken from buildings, such as mantle mirrors, art glass, and the like, or copper wire, copper lining of bathtubs, lead pipes, or any kind of plumbing material sold as junk, where same is offered for sale or pawn by other than persons of known good character. In all cases where such goods are purchased or money advanced, the pawnbroker shall keep a record of such purchases or advances, showing the names of the persons from whom received, their residence, the goods so taken, and the amount of money paid or advanced, and this shall be at all times open for inspection by any duly authorized law enforcement officer. In addition, it shall be unlawful for pawnbrokers to purchase any such goods, or to advance money thereon, where their appearance indicates that they have been tampered with, or there is an effort to conceal identity, or the goods are mutilated or otherwise show an effort to destroy evidence of the former location of the property. While such goods are being kept for 14 days before being disposed of, they shall be so arranged that they can be inspected by all duly authorized law enforcement officers upon demand. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(h)) 
Sec. 9-4-33. - Minors. 
No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(i)) 
Sec. 9-4-34. - Stolen goods. 
It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him or which is sought to be pledged with him, if he shall have reason to believe the article was stolen, or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. No pawnbroker shall accept any item, good, or ware upon which a manufacturer's identity or serial number has been removed, obliterated, or in any way caused to become unreadable. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4011(j)) 
Secs. 9-4-35—9-4-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE C. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-46, adopted July 23, 2013, amended the Code by repealing Art. C, §§ 9-4-41—9-4-50, and adding a new Art. C. The former article derived from Code 1977, § 8-4010(a), and pertained to coin-operated amusement devices. 

Sec. 9-4-41. - Gambling devices and places prohibited. 
Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2), are prohibited in the city, and the ownership, use, or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a) through (k). Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(3), are also prohibited in the city, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-42. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Amusement game room means any location as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b), (c) or (d) where one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are operated that permit non-cash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(1)(B),(C), or a combination thereof. 
(2)  Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) and (B) and any applicable regulations of the state. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
a.  Pinball machines; 
b.  Console machines; 
c.  Video games; 
d.  Crane machines; 
e.  Claw machines; 
f.  Pusher machines; 
g.  Bowling machines; 
h.  Novelty arcade games; 
i.  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
j.  Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
k.  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
l.  Basketball machines; 
m.  Shuffleboard machines; 
n.  Kiddie ride games; 
o.  Skee-ball &reg; machines; 
p.  Air hockey machines; 
q.  Roll down machines; 
r.  Coin-operated pool table or coin-operated billiard table as defined in paragraph (3) of O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1; and 
s.  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in the state. 
(3)  The term bona fide coin-operated amusement machine does not include the following: 
a.  Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; 
b.  Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
c.  Gas and electric meters; 
d.  Pay telephones; 
e.  Pay toilets; 
f.  Cigarette vending machines; 
g.  Coin-operated vending machines; 
h.  Coin-operated scales; 
i.  Coin-operated gumball machines; 
j.  Coin-operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
k.  Coin-operated massage beds; and 
l.  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in the state. 
(4)  Location means a business within the city that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to occupation taxes and business licenses. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-43. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having obtained a license and without first having paid the applicable occupation tax required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-44. - Application for and issuance of license. 
Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city shall be filed in writing with the occupation tax administrator, on a form to be provided by the city, and shall include: 
(1)  Name, address, and age of the applicant and the date of the application and, if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses; 
(2)  Address or place where the licensed bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that place or places; 
(3)  The number of machines to be maintained on the premises and the type of machines to be maintained; 
(4)  Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; 
(5)  Whether or not the person or persons having management of or supervision over the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance relating to narcotics or any crime of moral turpitude, the nature of such offense, and the punishment assessed therefore; 
(6)  Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the city; 
(7)  List of any other licenses or permits from the city held by the applicant. 
Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the city official or employee shall provide the license with a copy of this section. A license issued in accordance with this section shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupation taxes in accordance with title 3, chapter 2 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-45. - Occupation tax required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having completed the occupation tax certificate form, paid the required occupational tax, and obtained the license required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-46. - Number of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines at a location. 
No amusement game room in the city shall offer to the public more than six bona fide coin-operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c), (d)(1), and (d)(2), at the same location. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-47. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin-operated amusement machines and from business. 
Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by city officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. Income from the amusement game or games shall not constitute more than 50 percent of the income from the location. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the 50 percent of income requirement. Every owner or operator of an amusement game room who is subject to O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84 must provide to the city a copy of each verified monthly report prepared in accordance with such code section. In addition, each owner or operator must allow the local government an annual audit of the reports from the owner or operator to the Lottery Corporation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-48. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or substantially similar language: 
"GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING FIVE DOLLARS($5.00) FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE." 
(b)  Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the city conspicuously and permanently. 
(c)  The owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this section, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this section. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-49. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the city only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-78. In addition, the business owner where the machines are available for play by the public must pay a location license fee in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71(a.1) and (b). The city official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the state commissioner of revenue of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 50-27-71 or § 50-27-78. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-50. - Penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
(a)  Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be sufficient grounds for revocation or suspension of a license issued hereunder, or for punishment under the provisions for penalties allowed under state law. 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, any violation of this article is a misdemeanor and the municipal court is authorized, after conviction, to assess any penalties allowed under the State Code, the City Charter, and the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-51. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
In the event that it comes to the attention of the mayor and council or the city manager, that the licensee has violated any provision of this article or that an amusement game room has created a nuisance to the surrounding community, the following procedure will be followed: 
(1)  The city manager shall issue a notice of objection which shall include the address of the location and the specific reasons why the machine or machines in question are alleged to violate any provision of this section. The city manager will then notify the proprietor, amusement center proprietor or arcade room proprietor that a notice of objection has been filed and will set a date for a hearing before the mayor and council on this matter. Extensions and necessary investigations will be granted and conducted at the discretion of the mayor and council. 
(2)  At the time of the hearing, any resident, the operator, the proprietor, and the city manager may be heard. After this hearing, the mayor and council shall issue a "notice of decision" which will call for the dismissal of the objection, removal of the machines or such other remedy as they deem appropriate under the circumstances that are consistent with the purpose of this section. 
(3)  The decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for their decision and shall be based upon the merits of the case. 
(4)  The decision of the mayor and council shall be final but may be appealed to the appropriate court within 30 days. 
(5)  The decision of the mayor and council shall be binding upon the proprietor, amusement center proprietor, arcade room proprietor and/or distributor of the machine under consideration. 
(6)  The city council and mayor may issue a decision revoking the license or suspending the license for a defined period of time. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-52. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin-operated machines in violation of law or ordinance. 
The municipal court of the city is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing such bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling or overseeing a bona fide coin-operated amusement machines: 
(1)  First citation. Fine not to exceed $250.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Second and subsequent citations. Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-53. - Operating regulations. 
All businesses operating as an amusement game room hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)  Inspection. The chief of police shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such machine(s) are operated or set up for operating, and shall inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(3)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(4)  Refunds and adjustments. Refunds and adjustments to all customers shall be the responsibility of the proprietor, arcade room proprietor or amusement center proprietor of the machine in question 
(5)  Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly, and shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licenses to operate an amusement game room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
a.  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
b.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. 
(6)  Attire. All proprietors shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their premises. 
(7)  Distance. Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for business licensed to sell alcohol set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21 and any city ordinance containing proximity provisions for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-54. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. 
(a)  Licenses required in this article are nontransferable. All businesses that have bona fide coin-operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current license issued by the city. 
(b)  The issued license shall not be transferred to another owner at the same site within the city. A new owner or proprietor must first obtain a new license if they are going to operate in the same or different location in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-55. - Enforcing officer. 
The chief of police or his designee is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and shall execute all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-46, § 1, 7-23-13) 
Sec. 9-4-56—9-4-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE D. - PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS DEALERS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate additional to state law, O.C.G.A., § 43-37-5; dealers in precious metals and gems generally, O.C.G.A., § 43-37-1 et seq. 

Sec. 9-4-61. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, attempt to sell, buy, barter, or otherwise deal in the transfer of precious stones, jewelry, gold, silver, and other valuable metal, without first registering with the business license administrator and obtaining a business license for such transactions. These transactions will be limited to dealers, wholesalers and retailers, who are eligible for licensing in the city as dominant business activities. 
(b)  Employees who are involved in the selling, purchasing or negotiating of precious metals are required to register with the city on a form provided by the city for that purpose. A permit with a photo affixed will be issued and a fee will be charged to all applicants for the same. Such fee may be changed from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. Registration shall be accomplished annually on the anniversary of initial registration in the same manner as previously stated. Such permits allow an employee who sells, purchases or negotiates precious metals to work in any appropriate retail establishment in the city. Such permits must be worn, clearly visible to the public, at all times when the holder of the permit is engaged in the selling, purchasing or negotiating of precious metals. 
(c)  Persons under the age of 18 years may be employed in or about places of business where precious metals are purchased, provided such persons shall be prohibited from the purchasing and negotiating of precious metals. 
(d)  Precious metals shall only be purchased or negotiated by employees of the establishment. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4009(a); Ord. No. 2010-20, 8-10-10) 
Sec. 9-4-62. - Business required to meet requirements of section. 
Other businesses conducting such transactions on the effective date of this section [January 13, 1981], shall be permitted to continue such operations providing all of the following requirements are met. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4009(b)) 
Sec. 9-4-63. - Licensee required to have at least a one year lease on business site. 
A prospective licensee must have at least a one year lease on the business site for which the application applies or own the business site. The express purpose of this provision is to prohibit the buying and selling from temporary locations. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4009(c)) 
Sec. 9-4-64. - Exclusions. 
Persons involved in personal transactions, involving their personal assets not related to a business entity as a buyer or seller, are excluded from this article. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4009(g)) 
Sec. 9-4-65. - Purchase form. 
Purchases will be regulated by the following and reflected on a form provided by the administrator: 
(1)  Positive identification will be made of any prospective seller to include, but not be limited to, name, date of birth, address, right thumb print on form provided, driver's license number, social security number, race, sex, and signature of seller. 
(2)  Purchases will not be made from a minor under 18 years of age. 
(3)  A full description of each item is to be recorded on the appropriate form, including any special identifying marks and serial numbers. 
(4)  Prior to disposal by any method, all items purchased, other than from authorized vendors, will be retained for 14 days from the date of purchase. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4009(d)) 
Sec. 9-4-66. - False names. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use a false or fictitious name or address as his own, or to give the name or address of any other person without that person's knowledge and approval, as a means of identification while selling, or attempting to sell precious stones, jewelry, gold, or silver and other precious metals within the city limits. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4009(e)) 
Sec. 9-4-67. - Records. 
Each licensee will throw open his books, records, and items, including those covered by other sections of this code, for review and inspection by any police officer or the city manager. Failure to administer the provisions of this section, either by failing to obtain positive identification or by failing to maintain accurate records, shall be grounds for the citation for such offenses under this title and chapter of the code of ordinances. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4009(f)) 
Secs. 9-4-68—9-4-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE E. - RELIGIOUS AND CHARITABLE SOLICITING 

Sec. 9-4-81. - Permit required. 
Any nonprofit person, firm, association, corporation or organization desiring to solicit or canvass upon public areas or to call from house to house in the city for the purpose of raising funds or seeking donations for any religious, charitable or eleemosynary organization shall register with, and obtain a written permit from the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 92-05, § 1(a), 3-10-92) 
Sec. 9-4-82. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any nonprofit person, firm, association, corporation or organization desiring a permit to solicit or canvass upon public areas or to call from house to house in the city shall file, on a form to be supplied by the chief of police, an application stating the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent residence address; 
(3)  Name, address and telephone number of employer, firm, corporation or organization represented; 
(4)  Names and address of all persons assisting in the solicitation, canvassing or calling from house to house in the city; and 
(5)  Nature of any merchandise, wares, goods or any similar items to be sold or offered for sale or given away in conjunction with the solicitation, canvassing or calling from house to house in the city. 
(b)  Proof of tax-exempt status shall be required when registering with the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 92-05, § 1(b), 3-10-92) 
Sec. 9-4-83. - Nonprofit organization, defined. 
No organization shall be considered a nonprofit organization within the meaning of this article except a tax-exempt organization within the meaning of the Internal Revenue Code or the Georgia Income Tax Law as such code and such law are now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 9-4-84. - Use of streets. 
(a)  Solicitation, canvassing and collecting is expressly prohibited in public streets, or from occupants of vehicles on public rights-of-way. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person issued a permit under the provisions of this article to conduct any business transaction in any area which is within 35 feet of any street, alley, road or highway. 
(Ord. No. 92-05, § 1(c), 3-10-92) 
Sec. 9-4-85. - Issuance of permit; identity card. 
Upon proper registration with and payment of such administrative fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council to the chief of police, a written permit shall be issued to be valid for a period of seven days from the date of issuance. A permit shall not be issued more frequently than every six months. In addition, an identifying letter shall be issued by the city and a photograph made which must be carried by all persons while engaged in solicitation, or canvassing upon public areas or calling from house to house in the city. 
(Code 1987, § 9-4-85; Ord. No. 88-09, 11-8-88; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1(d), 3-10-92) 
Sec. 9-4-86. - Regulations governing activities. 
Solicitation or canvassing upon public areas or calling from house to house in the city shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  All solicitation, calling or canvassing from house to house in the city shall only occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time. 
(2)  The number of solicitors or canvassers or callers from house to house in the city for any single firm, corporation or organization shall not exceed five in number at any one time. 
(3)  Immediately prior to any solicitation of funds within the city, each solicitor, canvasser or caller shall present his or her identity card, issued by the chief of police, to each person solicited and request each person solicited to read such identity card. Each solicitor or canvasser must inform each person solicited, in clear language, of the nature and purpose of the solicitation, and name and home or national office headquarters of the firm, corporation or organization represented. Each solicitor, canvasser or caller must inform each person solicited as to any minimum donation required for the acceptance of any merchandise, wares, good or any similar items given by each solicitor, canvasser or called prior to such acceptance by each person solicited. 
(Code 1987, § 9-4-86; Ord. No. 88-09, 11-8-88; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1(e), 3-10-92) 
Sec. 9-4-87. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for a solicitor, canvasser or caller to do any of the following: 
(1)  To falsely represent, directly or by implication, that funds being solicited are on behalf of any person, firm, corporation, association or organization other than such registered with the chief of police; 
(2)  To solicit, canvass or call without the express prior permission of any occupant or property owner at any residence, apartment complex, or shopping mall where there is posted a sign forbidding such activity; 
(3)  To remain on private premises after being asked to leave the premises; or 
(4)  To continue solicitation after being refused upon public areas; such action shall constitute harassment. 
(Ord. No. 92-05, § 1(f), 3-10-92) 
Sec. 9-4-88. - Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
Secs. 9-4-89—9-4-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE F. - COMMERCIAL SOLICITING[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A., § 43-32-1 et seq.; transient merchants, O.C.G.A., § 43-46-1 et seq. 

Sec. 9-4-111. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for a peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor as defined below to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 9-4-112. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor is defined as any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of the city or not, who engaged in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within said city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad box car, or boat, public room in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or other place within the city, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction provided that such definition shall not be construed to include any person, firm or corporation who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples only for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The person, firm, or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this article merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(b)  The word peddler as used herein shall include any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance, and further provided that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this article. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
(c)  A canvasser or solicitor is defined as any individual, whether resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, provided that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
Sec. 9-4-113. - Application. 
Applicants for permits under this article must file with the chief of police a sworn application in writing on a form to be furnished by the city, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  address; 
(3)  a brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4)  if employed, the name and address of the employer; 
(5)  the length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6)  if a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number or other means of identification; and 
(7)  a statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
Sec. 9-4-114. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon receipt of such application, the chief of police shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good. 
(b)  If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse on such application his disapproval and his reasons for the same, and notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the chief of police may appeal such decision to the city manager. 
(c)  If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall, upon receipt of payment of the prescribed permit fee, deliver to the applicant his permit. The chief shall keep a permanent record of all permits issued. 
(d)  Upon proper registration with the city, a written permit shall be issued which will be valid for a period of seven days from the date of issuance. Additionally, a permit shall not be issued more frequently than every six months. 
(Ord. No. 92-05, § 1(g), 3-10-92) 
Sec. 9-4-115. - Fees. 
The permit fee which shall be charged by the city for such permit shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council, provided that no fee shall be charged to farmers engaged in direct sales of produce or other farm products produced on their own farms. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, § 1, 12-28-93) 
Sec. 9-4-116. - Exhibition of permits. 
(a)  Itinerant merchants. The permit issued hereunder for itinerant merchants and dealers and transient merchants shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event that such person or persons applying for said permit shall desire to do business in more than one place within the city, separate permits may be issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. 
(b)  Peddlers. Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers are required to exhibit their permit at the request of any citizen. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, § 1, 12-28-93) 
Sec. 9-4-117. - Transfer. 
No permit or badge issued under the provisions of this article shall be used or worn at any time by any person other than the one to whom it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, § 1, 12-28-93) 
Sec. 9-4-118. - Use of streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person issued a permit under the provisions of this article to conduct any business transaction in any area which is within 35 feet of any street, alley, road or highway. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, § 1, 12-28-93) 
Sec. 9-4-119. - Revocation of permits. 
Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit; 
(2)  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on any business contemplated hereunder; 
(3)  Any violation of this article; 
(4)  Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
(5)  Conducting any business contemplated hereunder, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, § 1, 12-28-93) 
Sec. 9-4-120. - Regulation of hours. 
All activity regulated hereunder shall occur only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, § 1, 12-28-93) 
Sec. 9-4-121. - Door-to-door activities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person holding a valid permit under this article to make a call at any residence, where the owner or any person residing therein has posted a sign reading as follows: NO SOLICITORS, without the express prior permission of the occupant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person holding a valid permit under this article to fail to immediately leave the premises of any person when requested to do so. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, § 1, 12-28-93) 
Sec. 9-4-122. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 93-13, § 1, 12-28-93) 
ARTICLE G. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-11, adopted Nov. 28, 2006, repealed the former Art. G, §§ 9-4-123—9-4-154, and enacted a new Art. G, §§ 9-4-123—9-4-152, as set out herein. The former Art. G pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 93-13, § 1, adopted Dec. 28, 1993; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.H, adopted Dec. 13, 1994; Ord. No. 2003-08, § 1C, adopted July 22, 2003. 

Sec. 9-4-123. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The City of Morrow engaged in considerable fact-finding with respect to the secondary effects of adult entertainment in 1991 prior to adoption of restrictions on adult entertainment and the serving of alcoholic beverages. At that time, the city relied on the experiences of other urban counties and cities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta, Fulton County, DeKalb County and Richmond County, Georgia, College Park and Smyrna, Georgia, and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida. The city took note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality which does not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within this country. 
(b)  In preparing the revision of this article, the city has reengaged in that study and has examined studies from numerous other jurisdictions, including Austin, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Pinellas County, Florida; and a Minnesota Attorney General's Report of 1989 concerning regulation of sexually oriented businesses. It also, in public hearing, heard testimony from Major Thomas Kuzniacke of the College Park Police Department of an undercover operation conducted by that department, and from Morrow's Chief of Police Jeff Baker concerning research he had done involving adult entertainment in New Jersey, Austin, Texas, Beaumont, Texas, Minnesota and Indianapolis, Indiana. Chief Baker additionally provided information on Roswell's zoning ordinance, information about the number of schools located throughout Morrow, and the incompatibility of adult entertainment with residential neighborhoods, particularly the tendency of nearby neighborhoods to transition to less stable renter based areas following establishment of nearby adult uses. 
(c)  With respect to live entertainment, the potential of adult entertainment establishments to serve as the source of connection between parties for various criminal offenses of a sexual nature has long been recognized. Because both parties to such activity frequently are consenting, crime statistics do not fully bear out the extent of criminal activity existing within such establishments and occurring off-site but originating through contact within such establishments. Studies bear out a correlation between the amount of clothing removed and aggression. Similarly, non-live adult venues pose health risks and can serve as a contact point for patrons making themselves available to one another, resulting in fluids deposited on the floors and walls. In some such establishments condoms are provided or may be purchased at the door. 
(d)  The purpose of this article is to regulate adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and their resultant health risks will be curtailed. The preservation of stable residential areas and attractive vibrant commercial activity is a further goal of this ordinance. However, it is recognized that regulation of adult entertainment venues cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-124. - Definitions. 
(a)  Adult entertainment means the offering on commercial premises of any of the following: 
(1)  Permitting, performing or engaging in, in person, on the premises, acts of or acts which simulate: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexual oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquierism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling, either of one's self or of another, of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
(2)  The opportunity to view any model, dancer or other person who appears live and unclothed or live and in such attire, lingerie, costume or clothing so as to expose to view whether continually, intermittently or occasionally any portion of the female areola, any portion of the anus, vulva or genitals, cleft of the buttocks, or attached male or female pubic hair. 
(3)  Showing or permitting the showing or viewing of films, still pictures, electronic reproductions, video graphic or other visual images depicting masturbation, or acts of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law and in which the unclothed contact of the genitalia of two or more persons are clearly visible. 
(4)  Sales or rentals of films, still pictures, electronic reproductions, video graphic or other visual images depicting masturbation, or acts of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law and in which the unclothed contact of the genitals of two or more persons is clearly visible so long as such sales or rentals account for more than ten percent of gross income for the establishment. 
(5)  Sales or rental of any device or paraphernalia that is designed principally for sexual activities but not including contraceptive devices, so long as such sales or rentals account for more than ten percent of gross income for the establishment. 
(6)  Sales or rentals of books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, bestiality, or any sexual acts that are prohibited by law and in which such materials comprises ten percent or more of the collection available for sale or rent or ten percent or more of the gross sales of such establishment. Displays of such materials in a segregated room or section shall be counted toward the overall sales and inventory of the establishment. 
(7)  Sales or rental of any "drug related object" as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. Section 16-13-32, so long as such sales or rentals account for more than ten percent of gross income for the establishment. 
a.  Where sales of ten percent or more are referenced by type of adult entertainment, an establishment showing any combination of such merchandise, such as films and paraphernalia, shall have its sales receipts combined for all sales meeting the criteria outlined in this definition and the total receipts from adult oriented merchandise resulting in ten percent or more of the establishment's sales shall result in classification of the business as an adult entertainment business. 
Random acts of patrons whose actions do not constitute actions taken pursuant to encouragement or acquiescence of the management of the establishment and are not for the purpose of entertainment, promotion, publicity or notoriety of the establishment shall not constitute adult entertainment as defined in this section, provided that nothing in this paragraph or article shall be deemed to make legal any conduct that is otherwise illegal under Georgia law. 
(b)  Adult entertainment establishment means any commercial establishment in the city where adult entertainment is sponsored, allowed, encouraged, condoned, presented, sold or offered to the public, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to such activity. An establishment meets this definition even if such activity is allowed on only one occasion. Examples of adult entertainment establishments include, but are not limited to, lingerie modeling studios, adult book stores, adult video stores, adult theaters, and adult dancing establishments. 
(c)  Good moral character . A person is of good moral character under this article if that person has not been convicted of any crime involving lottery, gambling, illegal possession or sale of any narcotics, drugs or chemicals for which the sale thereof is controlled or prohibited by law, the control of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, or masturbation for hire, within the past 15 years for an establishment license holder, or within five years for an employee. "Conviction", for the purpose of this article, shall include pleas of guilty and nolo contendere as well as bond forfeitures when charged with such a crime. 
(d)  Minor means, for the purpose of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
(e)  Dressing room means an area within an adult entertainment establishment that is used by employees for the purpose of changing clothes or using the restroom. 
(f)  Employee means any person who works or performs in an adult entertainment establishment, regardless of whether said person is paid a salary or wage, contract rate or has the opportunity to obtain tips or prize money. Employee shall also include any person who performs at an adult entertainment facility and who pays any form of consideration to an owner or manager of the establishment for the privilege to work or perform within the establishment. 
(g)  Private performance means adult entertainment being offered or performed in a private room. 
(h)  Private room means any area within an adult entertainment establishment not open to the public and/or not fully visible from an area within the facility open to the public. For purposes of this definition, "fully visible" means that no less than 25 percent of the perimeter or circumference of the area can be viewed, without obstruction, from the common area of the facility which is open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-125. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  Adult entertainment establishments are permitted only within the following geographical area: That area bounded on the west and south by Barton Road, on the east by Southlake Parkway, and on the north by a railroad spur running primarily east-west more or less parallel to Barton Road and approximately equidistant between Barton Road and Mt. Zion Road. 
(b)  No adult business or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or occupied for residential use; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
(4)  Within 500 feet of any other property housing an adult entertainment use; 
(5)  Within 500 feet of the property boundaries of any hotel or motel. 
(c)  Distance shall be by airline measurement from property lines, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-126. - Regulation of live conduct on premises. 
All adult entertainment establishments offering live entertainment shall comply with the following conduct standards pertaining to the operation of such establishments. 
(1)  No later than February 15th of each year, each live venue for adult entertainment shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to performers (whether engaged as employees or independent contractors) for the preceding calendar year. 
(2)  All adult entertainment establishments offering live entertainment shall maintain and retain for a period of three years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed or contracted for as performers. 
(3)  No such establishment shall employ or contract with, as a performer, a person under the age of 18 years or a person not holding a permit pursuant to this article. 
(4)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment offering live entertainment. 
(5)  An establishment offering live entertainment may be open only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 11:00 a.m. through 12:00 a.m. on Sunday. No license [licensee] shall permit his place of business to be open on Christmas Day. 
(6)  No adult entertainment establishment offering live entertainment shall serve, sell, distribute, suffer or allow the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee or upon any parking area dedicated to use of the premises. 
(7)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(8)  All dancing and other performances shall occur on a fixed stage intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. "Fixed stage" shall be defined as a raised floor area at least four feet high and designed exclusively for, and used only by, performers. Tables used for seating and service to customers do not meet these standards and shall not be used for performance purposes. 
(9)  No performance shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(10)  No performer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any performer. 
(11)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any performer. 
(12)  No performer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(13)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths footcandles per square foot. 
(14)  All dancing and any other interaction to which patrons are exposed shall occur only in the main room of the establishment. No private rooms or dressing rooms shall be used for entertainment of patrons. No patrons are allowed in any area of the establishment other than the main room or restrooms. No dancers, employees or contractors are allowed in the restrooms designated for use by patrons. 
No private performances shall occur within an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-127. - Regulation of conduct on premises where no live entertainment occurs. 
All persons operating an adult entertainment establishment at which no live entertainment is offered, and all patrons on the premises, shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  No licensee shall offer adult entertainment between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon Monday through Saturday or at any time on Sunday or on Christmas Day. 
(2)  No person under the age of eighteen shall be permitted on the premises. 
(3)  The license shall be displayed in a prominent place on the premises at all times. 
(4)  No licensee shall permit any alcoholic beverage to be served, offered or consumed on the licensed premises or in any parking area dedicated to use of the premises. 
(5)  No adult entertainment establishment shall permit any touching, caressing or fondling, either of one's self or of another, of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals on the premises of the licensed premises or in any parking area dedicated to the licensed premises. 
(6)  All areas where adult entertainment is offered shall be physically arranged in such a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls wherein adult entertainment is provided shall be visible from the common area of the premises, so that no private room is created. Visibility shall not be blocked or obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes, or any other obstruction whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-128. - Obscene conduct prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity operating an adult entertainment establishment shall permit any employee or patron to publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, or any portion of a person's genitals, public area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. No employee or patron of an adult entertainment establishment shall engage in such lewd or obscene behavior. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-129. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter to give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-130. - Employees. 
(a)  Qualifications . Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Should any employee, during his or her term of employment in an adult entertainment establishment, be convicted of a crime that would disqualify him or her as a new employee of such an establishment, that employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilty on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval of employment . Before any person may work on an adult entertainment licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the licensing officer of his intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and shall receive approval of such employment in the form of a letter of eligibility from the licensing officer. The employee shall provide to the city his name, date of birth, and any other names by which he has been known, including stage names and aliases, and current address and addresses for the preceding three years. In addition to completion of an application, the prospective employee shall supply a set of fingerprints, on regular City of Morrow or United States Department of Justice forms. The city shall run a criminal history check on the prospective employee and shall make a determination of eligibility for employment within five working days of the date of application. Denial of eligibility shall be limited to those employees who do not meet the good character qualification of this article. Final decision on eligibility shall be communicated by first class mail to the applicant no later than the sixth working day following submission of the application and shall be deemed given upon mailing. Upon approval of eligibility, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, appeal to the city council by filing a request for hearing. Hearing before the council shall be handled through the same processes and time frames as appeal of license denials for establishments, including a subsequent right of appeal to superior court. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license . Violation of any provision of this article or any law of the State of Georgia that would disqualify an applicant for a letter of eligibility shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of his eligibility. 
(d)  Independent contractors . For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-131. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, upon any premises within the City of Morrow any adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article without a license so to do. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-132. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city manager or his designated representative. An application fee in the amount of $500.00 shall be tendered with the application to cover the cost of the investigation. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. 
(b)  The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-133. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of 15 years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each location; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the 15 years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and place of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each to its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. An applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age, date and place of birth of each of the following: the applicant, any partners, any and all officers, and any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, and all directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any offense constituting a disqualification of good moral character within the past 15 years, such person shall include a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed, and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving gambling, controlled substances, alcoholic beverage violations, and sex offenses in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, the premises' proximity to any residence, church, school, public park, governmental building or site, hotel or motel, alcoholic beverage licensed establishment or other business regulated hereunder; 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and corrected by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, by the individual; 
b.  If a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-134. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the City of Morrow and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-135. - Application; investigation. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation and no later than 30 days from receipt of a completed application the city shall grant the license if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of any attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have rendered the applicant disqualified to hold a license under the definition of good moral character; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(10)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any residence, church, school, library, governmental building or site, hotel or motel, alcoholic beverage licensed establishment, or any other business restricted hereunder. (See section 9-4-125); and 
(11)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the City of Morrow, State of Georgia or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-136. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares or capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; or 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. 
(b)  There shall be a limit on the number of adult entertainment licenses issued by the city, based on a maximum of one license for every 1,000 residents of the city. Once such limit is reached, no additional adult entertainment licenses shall be issued unless an existing license holder looses, forfeits or fails to renew its license. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-137. - Permit—Refusal; appeal. 
If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, then the city shall notify the applicant in writing of its license denial and the reasons therefore. The notice shall be sent by certified and first class mail or be hand-delivered. Failure of the city to act within 30 days of receipt of a completed application shall be deemed a denial and shall trigger the deadline for filing an appeal. An applicant whose license has been denial [denied] may file an appeal pursuant to section 9-4-142. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-138. - Same—Renewal. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the licensee continues to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be $200.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-139. - Same—Nontransferable. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-140. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city manager and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this article have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with all provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-141. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The following shall constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of adult entertainment establishment licenses: 
(1)  Any violation of this article regulating adult entertainment establishments or other ordinances of the city relating to conduct of the business; 
(2)  Violation of federal or state law applicable to the licensed premises; 
(3)  Maintaining the premises or permitting conduct on the premises in such manner as to constitute a nuisance; or 
(4)  Loss of qualifications of the license holder. 
(b)  Any violation by an agent or employee of a license holder that would subject the licensee to suspension or revocation shall be considered as a violation by the licensee for the purpose of the suspension and revocation provisions of this section. 
(c)  In the event the city determines grounds for suspension or revocation exist, the city clerk shall send a notice to the licensee stating the grounds for suspension or revocation and the proposed action to be taken. Such notice shall be sent by certified and first class mail or may be hand-delivered to the licensee. Should the licensee contest the action taken by the city, the licensee, upon receipt of such notice, may file an appeal within ten days as provided by section 9-4-142. Hearing on such appeal shall be as provided by section 9-4-144. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-142. - Appeal—Procedure. 
(a)  The applicant of a denied license or any licensee to whom adverse notice has been given shall, within ten days after he has been notified of such determination, submit a notice of appeal in writing to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application, license or request, the date of the adverse decision, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-143. - Same—Council determines procedure. 
When an appeal is placed on the agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; or 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-144. - Conduct of hearing. 
At the time and date set for hearing, the council or hearing officer shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties and from city staff. The appellant shall have the right to present evidence through testimony and documents, question other witnesses, and make a statement before the council or hearing officer. All testimony shall be under oath. Should the appellant desire to subpoena witnesses for the hearing, he shall be required to submit his request to the city clerk for subpoenas no later than ten days prior to the date fixed for hearing. Neither the city council nor the hearing officer shall be bound by formal rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article, but all procedures shall be explained at the beginning of the hearing and shall be adhered to. All proceedings of the hearing shall be tape recorded and a copy retained in city records. Should the appellant wish an official transcription, it shall be his duty to supply a court reporter at his expense. The city council or hearing officer shall render a final decision no later than ten days following close of the hearing. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the appellant by first class mail. The action of the city council or hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-145. - Appeal from final city action. 
Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the city council may appeal to superior court by writ of certiorari or petition for mandamus, in accordance with the standards and procedures provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-146. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1000.00 per violation or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-147. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. The city shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-148. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-149. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The operator of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-150. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-151. - Exemptions. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as applying to State of Georgia licensed barbers, cosmetologists, manicurists, pedicurists, physical therapists, physical therapists' assistants, midwives, practical nurses, agents, servants or employees and licensed hospitals or nursing homes or other licensed medical institutions, licensed physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors, podiatrists, naturopathic physicians or other licensed medical practitioners, licensed psychologists or other agents, servants or employees of such persons acting in the course of such profession, agency, service or employment. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 9-4-152. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is severable from each and every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article. In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence or paragraph of this article shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the mayor and council that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or other unenforceable provision shall not affect the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences or paragraphs of this article and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences and paragraphs shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable and of full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2006-11, 11-28-06) 
CHAPTER 5. - HOME OCCUPATIONS 

Sec. 9-5-1. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the orderly conduct of a limited commercial activity on property otherwise zoned residential. Such activity must be of a nature not to impose any disruption to the quality of life, safety, character, health, welfare, or appearance of a residential neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90) 
Sec. 9-5-2. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
Accessory use or building. A use, building, or structure on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily subordinate to the principal use or building. 
Home occupation. Any occupation or activity conducted by a member of the family residing on the premises, in connection with which there is: 
(1)  No group instruction, assembly or activity and no signage is used to indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in any part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; 
(2)  There is no commodity sold upon the premises; 
(3)  No person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; 
(4)  No mechanical equipment is used except that which is normally used for purely domestic purposes; and the same activity complies with all regulatory provisions contained in this chapter. 
Interior floor space. That area of a residential building that is designed, used and heated and/or cooled in a manner so as to comply with all applicable codes concerning living quarters. Attached garages for vehicles which share a common roof with the living quarters of the residential structures shall not be included and/or defined as interior floor space. For purposes of this chapter, attached garages shall be treated in the same manner as an accessory use or building. 
Residential building or dwelling. A building designed or used for permanent living quarters for one or more families. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90) 
Sec. 9-5-3. - Home occupation permits. 
Application for a home occupation permit shall be made in the office of permits and licensing on forms specially provided therefor. Such a permit does not operate as a business certificate. When granted, the home occupation permit would entitle the holder to obtain a business certificate for a fee in accordance with Title 3, Chapter 2. 
Renewal of the business certificate will be required annually, no later than April 1st. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90; Ord. No. 94-15, § 1.I, 12-13-94) 
Sec. 9-5-4. - Permitted uses. 
Those uses permitted as home occupations would include, but not be limited to, those types of occupations such as: 
(1)  Typing services; 
(2)  Manufacturer's representative; 
(3)  Bookkeeping; 
(4)  Accounting; 
(5)  Computer software; 
(6)  Development offices; 
(7)  Clergymen. 
(8)  Contractor's office (administrative only). 
Generally, such home occupations as may be permitted are those which are conducted solely indoors, do not generate significant levels of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and give no indication outwardly of the conduct of a commercial activity. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(A), 5-9-95) 
Sec. 9-5-5. - Prohibited uses. 
Specifically prohibited as a home occupation would be: 
(1)  Mechanical or body repair of vehicular equipment; 
(2)  Contractors, specifically where there is storage of material, equipment, inventory or vehicle(s) advertising or indicating such business is located on the premises; 
(3)  Activity requiring persons travelling to and from the permitted location; 
(4)  Any activity where a commodity and/or product is sold on the premises. (Reference: Section 9-5-12.) 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(B), 5-9-95) 
Cross reference— Group instruction prohibited, § 9-5-12. 
Sec. 9-5-6. - Accessory buildings. 
No home occupation permit will be issued to any premises where any accessory building or outside storage unit is involved in the storage of materials and/or equipment for use in connection with the home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90) 
Sec. 9-5-7. - External alterations prohibited. 
No home occupation will be permitted involving the external alteration of the residential building in order to accommodate the home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90) 
Sec. 9-5-8. - Floor space devoted to home occupation. 
No more than 25 percent of the total interior floor space of the dwelling shall be available for use as a home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90) 
Sec. 9-5-9. - Certain vehicles prohibited. 
Those persons involved in the home occupation shall be limited to the use of passenger vehicles only being parked on the premises wherein the home occupation is being practiced. These vehicles shall not display any symbols, letters, numbers, words, phrases, codes or markings of any kind which would indicate in any manner that a home occupation was being practiced. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90) 
Sec. 9-5-10. - Limitation on equipment use. 
Only that equipment customarily used in the practice of any business or profession may be installed or used, and all such equipment must be located completely within the premises. In no event shall such equipment, or the use thereof, cause any intrusion in any form upon adjoining properties. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90) 
Sec. 9-5-11. - Occupation limited to dwellers therein; landlord permission for tenants. 
The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and shall be supervised by one or more persons living within the premises. 
The written consent of the owner of the property is required in all cases and is to be submitted along with the application for a home occupation permit. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(C), 5-9-95) 
Sec. 9-5-12. - Group instruction prohibited. 
No home occupation shall be permitted wherein group instructions or group assembly or activity is involved. To that end, dance instructions, exercise classes, group sales presentations, and similar activities would not be permitted as a home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90) 
Sec. 9-5-13. - Creation of nuisance prohibited. 
No home occupation shall be permitted to generate or produce obnoxious odors, glare, noise, vibration, electrical or electronic disturbances, or generate radioactivity or other emanations detrimental to the health, welfare and/or environment of the adjoining premises or affecting the character of the area in which the home occupation is located. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90) 
Sec. 9-5-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(D), adopted May 9, 1995, repealed § 9-5-14, which required posting of permit application. Such section derived from Ord. No. 90-07, adopted Aug. 28, 1990. 
Sec. 9-5-15. - Application and permit conditions. 
(a)  A home occupation permit will be issued subject to inspection of the premises by the fire marshal or other city representative. The fire marshal or other city representative will be allowed to inspect the specific home occupation area and the HVAC system, water heater and electrical service areas for fire and safety hazards prior to the issuance of any home occupation permit. If the fire marshal or other city representative determines that such home occupation will be a fire or safety hazard to the home in which such occupation will be carried on and/or to adjoining homes and/or buildings, such home occupation will not be authorized. An inspection fee will be required for each application for a home occupation permit. 
After the issuance of a home occupation permit, an inspection by the fire marshal or other city representative will be conducted at least annually to verify compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  As a condition for the granting of a home occupation permit, the permittee agrees that the city shall be authorized to conduct an inspection during normal business hours for the purpose of determining whether or not the provisions of this Code are being complied with. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(E), 5-9-95; Ord. No. 2008-03, 7-8-08) 
Sec. 9-5-16. - Terms of expiration. 
A home occupation permit shall automatically expire and terminate upon the occurrence of any one or more of the following events: 
(1)  Upon the termination of the original applicant to occupy the premises for which the permit was issued. Any subsequent occupant must apply for any further home occupation permit; 
(2)  Upon the failure of the holder of the permit to operate the home occupation for a period of six consecutive months; 
(3)  Upon the failure of the permit holder or anyone living on the premises to conduct business in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90) 
Sec. 9-5-17. - Procedure for revocation. 
A home occupation permit may be revoked by use of the provisions set forth in section 3-2-83 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(F), 5-9-95) 
Sec. 9-5-18. - Penalty. 
Any person(s) found to be engaged in a home occupation of any description without having first obtained a home occupation permit shall be in violation of this chapter of the Code, and shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 90-07, 8-28-90; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1(G), 5-9-95) 
CHAPTER 6. - STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWERS 

Sec. 9-6-1. - Purposes. 
This chapter is designed and intended to balance the interests of the residents of the City, telecommunications providers, and telecommunications customers in the siting of telecommunication facilities within the city so as to protect the health, safety and integrity of residential neighborhoods and foster, through appropriate zoning and land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunications carriers that does not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services and shall not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, and so as to promote the City of Morrow as a proactive city in the availability of personal wireless telecommunications service. To that end, this chapter shall: 
(1)  Provide for the appropriate location and development of telecommunication facilities in the city; 
(2)  Protect the city's built and natural environment by promoting compatible design standards for telecommunication facilities; 
(3)  Minimize adverse visual impacts of telecommunication facilities through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
(4)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from a tower or antenna failure through engineering and careful siting of telecommunications antennas and tower structures; 
(5)  Maximize use of any new and existing telecommunications towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the city; 
(6)  Maximize and encourage use of alternative telecommunication tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; and 
(7)  Encourage and promote the location of new telecommunication facilities in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98) 
Sec. 9-6-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna excluded under section 9-6-3. 
Governing body means the mayor and council of the City of Morrow. 
Macro telecommunication facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures and which project more than three feet above the top of the structure but no more than ten feet above the roof line, parapet or top of the structure. Macro telecommunication facilities may exceed the height limitation specified for the zoning district. 
Micro telecommunication facilities are those which are located on existing buildings, poles or other existing support structures where antennas do not project more than three feet above the top of the structure and there are no more than four antennas per site. Micro telecommunication facilities shall not exceed the maximum height limitations of the zoning district by more than three feet. 
Monopole tower means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on the ground, including earthworks, ditches, canals, dams, reservoirs, pipelines, telephone, telegraph or electric power lines, walks, driveways, and roads. 
Telecommunication facilities refer to antennas and towers, either individually or together, as regulated by this chapter. 
Tower means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennas intended for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
Zoning administrator means the zoning administrator of the City of Morrow or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98; Ord. No. 2000-01, § 1(A), 2-8-00) 
Sec. 9-6-3. - Exclusions. 
The following shall be exempt from this chapter: 
(1)  Any tower and antenna less than 70 feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
(2)  Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service, of one meter or less in diameter; 
(3)  Any telecommunications facility located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city provided a license or lease authorizing the telecommunications facility has been approved by the governing body; 
(4)  Any cable television headend or hub towers and antennas used solely for cable television services; 
(5)  Any radio or television broadcast towers and antennas, whose placement is regulated by the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98) 
Sec. 9-6-4. - Placement of telecommunication facilities by zoning district. 
(a)  Micro and macro telecommunication facilities shall be allowed as a use by right in the light manufacturing (LM) and heavy manufacturing (HM) districts and in any other district that such telecommunications facility is deemed compatible with the design and location of such facility, as determined by the city manager or his designee. In all other zoning districts, micro and macro telecommunication facilities shall be considered through an application for a conditional use permit. No telecommunications facility shall be sited at any location where it causes interference with air traffic safety. 
(b)  Telecommunications towers, other than monopole towers, designed and intended to accommodate at least one user are permitted up to a height of 80 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the zoning administrator. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least two users are permitted up to a height of 100 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the zoning administrator. Telecommunications towers designed and intended to accommodate at least three users are permitted up to a height of 120 feet following design review by and receipt of a building permit from the zoning administrator. Variances may be approved for towers of greater height provided the applicant demonstrates a technological justification, as supported by the learned opinion of a telecommunications engineer. 
(c)  Monopole towers are permitted up to a height of 50 feet to accommodate single users. Monopole towers are permitted up to a height of 80 feet if designed and intended to accommodate at least two users. No variance shall be granted for a monopole tower of a height greater than 80 feet. 
(d)  Larger satellite dishes of greater than one meter in diameter, but less than two meters in diameter, shall not be located within the front yard setback or on the roof of a single-family residence, unless a building permit is issued by the zoning administrator following design review in which the applicant demonstrates he cannot receive acceptable signals in preferred locations. 
(e)  Telecommunication facilities, covered by this chapter, outside the guidelines listed above may only be built after approval of a variance in accordance with section 1403(2) of the zoning ordinance of the city, as well as receipt of a building permit. It is the intent of the city not to impose barriers that impair a telecommunication user's ability to avail himself of technological devices used to receive radio and television signals and/or personal wireless services. Where legitimate technological reasons dictate that such devices are placed outside preferred locations, variances shall be granted despite the strong and compelling aesthetic concerns of the community. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98) 
Sec. 9-6-5. - Preferred and disfavored location sites. 
(a)  Preferred location sites are categorized from highest to lowest, as follows: 
(1)  Co-location sites: Any existing telecommunications tower currently being used for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication shall be the highest preferred location site regardless of the underlying zoning designation of the site, provided, however, that locations which meet this criterion shall be subject to the design and siting components of this chapter and co-location sites shall not become an "antenna farm" or otherwise be deemed by the zoning administrator or the governing authority to be visually obtrusive. 
(2)  Publicly used structures: Publicly used structures are the next highest preferred locations throughout the city because they appear in virtually all neighborhoods, are dispersed throughout the city, and due to their institutional or infrastructure uses are generally similar in appearance to or readily adaptable for telecommunication facilities. Therefore, telecommunication facilities should be less noticeable when placed on publicly used structures than when placed on commercial or residential structures. Publicly used structures include, but are not limited to, facilities such as police or fire stations, libraries, community centers, civic centers, courthouses, utility structures, water towers, elevated roadways, bridges, flag poles, schools, hospitals, clock or bell towers, light poles and churches. 
(3)  Industrial and commercial structures: Wholly industrial and commercial structures such as warehouses, factories, retail outlets, supermarkets, banks, garages, or service stations shall be preferred locations particularly where existing visual obstructions or clutter on the roof or along a roofline can and will be removed as part of the installation of the telecommunications facility. 
(4)  Mixed use buildings in high density districts: Mixed use buildings (housing above commercial or other nonresidential space) are also preferred location sites. 
(b)  Disfavored location sites. Any single-family residential structure or site or multifamily duplex shall be a disfavored site for the location of telecommunication facilities; provided, however, larger satellite dishes may be sited in rear or side yard setbacks as a matter of right. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98) 
Sec. 9-6-6. - Requirements for telecommunication facilities. 
(a)  General requirements for all telecommunication facilities. The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunication facilities governed by this chapter. 
(1)  Building codes and safety standards: To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunication facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building codes and any applicable standards for such telecommunication facilities, as amended from time to time. Owners of telecommunication facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every year to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a qualified, independent engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the zoning administrator. 
(2)  Regulatory compliance. 
a.  All telecommunication facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunication facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the telecommunication facilities governed by this chapter shall bring such telecommunication facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 
b.  Owners of telecommunication facilities shall provide documentation to the zoning administrator, upon written request, showing that each telecommunications facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance may be requested every 12 months. 
(3)  Security. All telecommunication facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. 
(4)  Lighting: No illumination is permitted on telecommunication facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. If lighting is required or necessary, the zoning administrator may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
(5)  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on telecommunication facilities. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this chapter are met. 
(6)  Visual impact. 
a.  Telecommunication facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c.  Whenever reasonably possible, those telecommunication facilities located in zoning districts other than the light manufacturing (LM) and heavy manufacturing (HM) districts shall be disguised or camouflaged. For example, many monopole towers have been disguised as trees compatible with the area, placed within church steeples, or disguised through other inconspicuous placement. 
d.  Where feasible, telecommunication facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
e.  Telecommunication facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
f.  Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports telecommunication facilities must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(7)  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the telecommunications facility from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
b.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
c.  The zoning administrator may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes, for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms or where an antenna is placed on an existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the zoning administrator. 
(8)  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
(9)  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
b.  Telecommunication facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. 
(10)  Lot size and setbacks. 
a.  The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunication facilities, provided however, that the zoning administrator may reduce the standard setback requirements of this section if the goals of this chapter would be better served thereby. 
1.  Telecommunication facilities must be set back from any property line a distance equal to the height of the tower to protect adjoining property from the potential impact of telecommunications facility failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in section 9-6-7. 
2.  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
b.  For antennas attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ratio (example: ten-foot high antenna and supporting structure requires a ten-foot setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
(b)  Additional requirements for towers. 
(1)  Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zoning district as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
(2)  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
(3)  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(4)  Towers shall not be located any closer than 1,500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable. 
(5)  When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, it must be set back from the nearest residence a distance at least equal to its total height. 
(6)  In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard, back yard or side yard in a residential district. 
(7)  Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or any state or federal law or agency or where they will create visual clutter. 
(8)  Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access. 
(9)  Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98; Ord. No. 2000-01, § 1(B), (C), 2-8-00) 
Sec. 9-6-7. - Application procedures. 
(a)  General application requirements for all building and conditional use permits. Application for a building permit or a conditional use permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the zoning administrator by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. An application fee of $3,000.00 is required from all tower applicants and will be used to defray the costs of staff time and research devoted to processing of the application. Additionally, each applicant is required to reimburse the city for actual reasonable costs related to engineering studies or other professional fees incurred by the city as a result of communication towers and/or similar facilities. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit, conditional use permit or other permit or variance included in this chapter and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
(1)  Basic Information. 
a.  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunication facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. Applicants shall submit both a paper location map and a digitized location map in a format compatible with the GIS software currently utilized by the city. 
b.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in section 9-6-6(a)(7). 
c.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
d.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
e.  Report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting the following: 
1.  Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
2.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
3.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
4.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris. 
f.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity. 
g.  Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity. 
h.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
i.  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
j.  Designation of which location preference, identified in section 9-6-5, above, the proposed facility is meeting. If the proposed location is not a preferred location (1) through (4) or is a disfavored site, describe: (a) what publicly-used building(s), co-location site(s) or other preferred location sites are located within the geographic service area. Provide a list (by address with lot and block number noted) and a map at 1:200 scale of all such buildings within the service area; (b) what good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure each of these preferred location sites; (c) why each such site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible and why such efforts were unsuccessful; and (d) how and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area. 
(2)  Five-year plan and site inventory. Each application shall include a five-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
a.  A list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility sites within the city limits and within one mile of the city limits and a map showing these sites. The list must include the following information for each site: 
1.  Street address; 
2.  Tax Assessor's map, block and lot or other applicable ad valorem tax identification number; 
3.  Zoning district; 
4.  Type of building (commercial, residential, mixed use) and number of stories; 
5.  The number of antennas and base transceiver stations per site and the location and type of antenna installation (stand alone rooftop, building facade, etc.) and location of the base transceiver station installation(s); 
6.  The height from grade to the top of the antenna installation; and 
7.  The radio frequency range in megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and effective radiated power. 
b.  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of areas where telecommunication facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list, by tax map and block(s) the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunications facility site. 
(3)  Additional information requirements for towers: 
a.  If the proposed site is zoned for residential use, applicants must justify why any alternate sites in commercial or industrial zones have not been proposed. The zoning administrator will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The zoning administrator shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
b.  Applicants must identify all existing towers and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the zoning administrator. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If co-location on any such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicants must justify why such co-location is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. The zoning administrator will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The zoning administrator shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
c.  In all zones, applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a telecommunications tower. 
d.  The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennas. The applicant shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antenna locations. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The zoning administrator shall approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means. 
e.  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage, gas and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
(4)  The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the zoning administrator to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(b)  Expedited review for building permits only. When a telecommunications facility will be a use as of right pursuant to section 9-6-5 of this chapter and requires only a building permit and design review before it may be erected, the zoning administrator will expedite review of the application and render a decision on the application within three business days after receipt of a complete application. 
(c)  Conditional use permit. 
(1)  A request for a conditional use permit shall be initiated by application to the zoning administrator and handled in accordance with the conditional use procedures of section 1501 of the zoning ordinance. The governing body may issue a conditional use permit under this section provided it shall have determined that all of the requirements of section 9-6-6 have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
(2)  In granting a conditional use permit, the governing body may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined reasonably necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98; Ord. No. 2000-01, § 1(D), 2-8-00) 
Sec. 9-6-8. - Co-location. 
The owner(s) of all existing telecommunication facilities, including future towers permitted under this chapter, shall allow other future personal wireless service companies, including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to co-locate antennas, equipment and facilities on an existing telecommunications facility unless specific technical constraints prohibit said co-location. Personal wireless carriers shall provide a mechanism for the construction and maintenance of shared facilities and infrastructure and shall provide for equitable sharing of cost in accordance with industry standards. 
Competitive wireless telecommunications providers are required to cooperate and negotiate fairly with each other regarding co-location leases. All tower applicants must develop plans for future co-location. Additionally, tower applicants must send a certified mail announcement to all other tower owners in the city and to those located within one mile of any part of the city limits, stating their siting needs and/or sharing capabilities. An owner of a tower as permitted under this chapter shall notify the city in writing when another personal wireless service company has been approved to co-locate antennas, equipment or facilities on the owner's existing telecommunications facility. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98; Ord. No. 2000-01, § 1(E), 2-8-00) 
Sec. 9-6-9. - Appeals. 
Appeals from any decision of the zoning administrator may be taken by any person aggrieved by the decision. Such appeal shall be to the governing body pursuant to section 1404 of the zoning ordinance. Application for writ of certiorari to review any decision of the governing body shall be made to the superior court within 30 days of the decision. Any decision by the zoning administrator denying a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by a written record. Any decision by the governing body denying or approving a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by a written record. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98) 
Sec. 9-6-10. - Nuisances. 
Telecommunication facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times so as not to cause unreasonable noise or the generation of heat that adversely affects a building's occupants and shall be maintained or operated in such a manner as to not become a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98) 
Sec. 9-6-11. - Removal of antennas and towers. 
All telecommunication facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the zoning administrator any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such facility into compliance. In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within 30 days, the city may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within 30 days of receipt of such notice, the city may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that telecommunication facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98) 
Sec. 9-6-12. - Abandoned towers. 
(a)  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of six months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within 30 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the city may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunication facilities are removed. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(b)  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this chapter as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98) 
Sec. 9-6-13. - Pre-existing towers/nonconforming uses. 
(a)  All telecommunication facilities operative on December 22, 1998 shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use and shall be treated as a nonconforming use in accordance with article V of the zoning ordinance. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing telecommunication facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  A telecommunications facility that has received city approval as of December 22, 1998 in the form of either a building permit or a conditional use permit, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(c)  Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming structure. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98) 
Sec. 9-6-14. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person who attempts to erect or erects a telecommunications facility covered by this chapter without having first obtained the necessary building permit, conditional use permit, or variance in the manner provided in this chapter shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. Any responsible party or other persons convicted in the municipal court of Morrow of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)  If any structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this chapter or without obtaining the required permits, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this article, the zoning administrator, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98) 
Sec. 9-6-15. - Coordination with federal law. 
Whenever the governing authority finds that the application of this chapter would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a waiver of the offending provisions of this chapter shall be granted. 
(Ord. No. 98-19, § 2, 12-22-98) 
CHAPTER 7. - TATTOOING AND TATTOOING ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 9-7-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto: 
Employee. The term "employee" shall mean any person at least 18 years of age who renders any service in connection with the operation of a tattoo establishment. 
Licensee. The term "licensee" shall mean any person, partnership, firm, corporation, or other entity to which a license has been issued to practice tattooing, or operating a tattoo establishment as defined herein. 
Tattooing. The term "tattooing" means the art or profession of marking the skin of any person by pricking in, inserting, or implanting pigments, except when performed by a physician licensed as such. 
Tattoo artist. The term "tattoo artist" means any person who performs tattooing, except that the term tattoo artist shall not include in its meaning any physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. Chapter 34 of Title 43, nor shall it include any technician acting under the direct supervision of such licensed physician or osteopath, pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. section 16-5-71. 
Tattoo establishment. The term "tattoo establishment" means any establishment where one or more tattoo artists provide tattooing for money or similar consideration, and which constitutes a fixed place of business for any person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity to engage in any of the activities defined as "tattooing." 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-2. - License required. 
Any person desiring to engage in the practice as a tattoo artist, or any person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity desiring to operate the business of a tattoo establishment, shall apply for and obtain a license from the occupation tax administrator prior to commencing operations. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-3. - License application; application fee. 
Every applicant for a license to engage in the practice as a tattoo artist or operator of a tattoo establishment shall file an application under oath with the occupation tax administrator upon a form provided by the occupation tax administrator. An application fee in the amount of $200.00 shall be tendered with the application. Copies of the application shall be forwarded to the zoning administrator, the fire department and police department. These officials shall within 30 days inspect any premises proposed to be operated as a tattoo establishment and shall make written verification to the occupation tax administrator concerning compliance with applicable codes. 
(1)  Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  The names and addresses for the past five years of the applicant and each person who would have a beneficial interest in the license. However, if the applicant is a corporation, only the names and addresses of the registered agents and those stockholders owning at least five percent of the stock must be disclosed; 
b.  The name of the business operation, including a description of all services to be provided; 
c.  The location, mailing address and telephone number where the business is to be conducted; 
d.  The name, address, social security number and date of birth of each employee working at the tattoo establishment. Changes in the list of employees with the names of new employees, together with all information relating thereto, and all exhibits must be filed with the occupation tax administrator within three days from the date of the change; 
e.  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of application; 
f.  The tattoo or similarly related business license history of the applicant; whether such person or entity has had a business license revoked or suspended in this or another county or state, and if so, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation of the applicant subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
g.  All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations, including the date(s) and place(s) of conviction(s), and nature of the offense(s); 
h.  The name, address and description of any tattoo business or other establishment owned or operated by a person whose name is required to be given by this chapter; and 
i.  A description of any other business to be operated on the same premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant; and 
(2)  Applicant shall submit with the application certain documentation as required by the occupation tax administrator, including but not limited to, the following: 
a.  A blueprint or a scale drawing of the establishment; 
b.  Proof that the applicant and all employees providing tattoo services are at least 18 years of age; 
c.  A signed and notarized consent form authorizing the occupation tax administrator and the police department, their respective agents and employees to seek information and conduct a background check on the applicant and all employees (in the case of a tattoo establishment), and to conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for a license; 
d.  A signed and notarized consent form authorizing the fire department, their respective agents and employees to inspect the premises to ensure compliance with the Fire Safety Code, all other codes and laws under their jurisdiction, and applicable provisions of this chapter; 
e.  An annual health certificate from a physician on [for] the applicant and all employee trainees providing tattoo services, if applicable, indicating that they do not have a communicable disease or otherwise would not present a threat to the health, safety and welfare of their respective clientele; and 
f.  A copy of this chapter signed by the applicant and all employee trainees providing tattoo services, if applicable, acknowledging that he or she has read and understands the provisions contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-4. - Occupation tax. 
The occupation tax for an applicant to be engaged in the practice as a tattoo artist shall be as provided in Title 3, Chapter 2, Article D of this Code. The owner of the tattoo establishment, if other than the applicant, shall pay the occupation tax fee as provided in Title 3, Chapter 2, Article D of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-5. - Operating requirements. 
(a)  Every portion of a tattoo establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition. 
(b)  Price rates for all services rendered shall be prominently posted in the reception area in a location available to all prospective clientele. 
(c)  All employees shall practice pursuant [prudent] hygiene. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises. 
(d)  The room in which tattooing is done shall have an area of not less than 100 square feet. The walls, floors and ceiling shall have an impervious, smooth, and washable surface. 
(e)  A toilet shall be located in the establishment and shall be accessible at all times that the tattooing establishment is open for business. The lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water, soap and sanitary towels. 
(f)  All tables and other equipment shall be constructed of easily cleanable material, shall be painted or finished in a light color, with a smooth washable finish, and shall be separated from waiting customers or observers by a panel at least six feet or 1.83 meters high or by a door. 
(g)  The operator shall wash his hands thoroughly with soap and water before starting to tattoo; the hands shall be dried with individual, single-use towels, and the operator must wear surgical gloves during the tattooing. 
(h)  No tattooing shall be done on any skin surface that has rash, pimples, boils, infections, any communicable disease, or manifests any evidence of unhealthy conditions. 
(i)  No skin area shall be penetrated, abraded or treated with chemicals for the purpose of removing, camouflaging or altering any blemish, birthmark, scar or tattoo. 
(j)  Safety razors with a new, single-service blade for each customer or patron or a straight edge razor may be used and shall be thoroughly cleaned and sterilized before use on each customer or patron. 
(k)  The area to be tattooed shall first be thoroughly washed for a period of two minutes with warm water to which has been added an antiseptic liquid soap. A sterile single-use sponge shall be used to scrub the area. After shaving and before tattooing is begun, a solution of 70 percent alcohol shall be applied to the area with a single-use sponge used and applied with a sterile instrument. 
(l)  Only petroleum jelly in collapsible metal or plastic tubes, or its equivalent as approved by a licensed physician, shall be used on the area to be tattooed and it shall be applied with sterile gauze. The name, address and telephone number of the licensed physician shall be provided to the occupation tax administrator. 
(m)  The use of styptic pencils, alum blocks, or other solid styptic to check the flow of blood is prohibited. 
(n)  Inquiry shall be made, and anyone giving a history of recent jaundice or hepatitis may not be tattooed. 
(o)  Single-service or individual containers of dye or ink shall be used for each patron and the container therefor shall be discarded immediately after completing work on a patron and any dye in which the needles were dipped shall not be used on another person. Excess dye or ink shall be removed from the skin with an individual sterile sponge or a disposable paper tissue which shall be used only on one person and then immediately discarded. After completing work on any person, the tattooed area shall be washed with sterile gauze saturated with an antiseptic soap solution approved by a licensed physician whose name, address and telephone number have been provided to the occupation tax administrator, or a 70 percent alcohol solution. The tattooed area shall be allowed to dry and petroleum jelly from a collapsible or plastic tube shall be applied, using sterile gauze. A sterile gauze dressing shall then be fastened to the tattooed area with adhesive. 
(p)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of any statute or ordinance governing the maintenance of premises, nor to preclude authorized inspection thereof, whenever such inspection is deemed necessary by appropriate department officials. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-6. - Care of instruments. 
(a)  All clean and ready-to-use needles and instruments shall be kept in a closed glass or metal case or storage cabinet while not in use. Such cabinet shall be maintained in a sanitary manner at all times. 
(b)  A steam sterilizer (autoclave) shall be provided for sterilizing all needles and similar instruments before use on any customer, person or patron. (Alternate sterilizing procedures may only be used when specifically approved by a licensed physician whose name, address and telephone number have been provided to the occupation tax administrator.) Sterilization of equipment will be accomplished by exposure to live steam for at least 30 minutes at a minimum pressure of 15 pounds per square inch, temperature of 240 degrees Fahrenheit or 116 degrees Celsius. 
(c)  The needles and instruments required to be sterilized shall be so used, handled and temporarily placed during tattooing so that they will not be contaminated. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-7. - Records. 
Permanent records for each patron or customer shall be maintained by the licensee or operator of the establishment. Before the tattooing operation begins, the patron or customer shall be required personally to enter, on a record form provided for such establishments, the date, his or her name, address, age, serial number if a member of the armed forces, and his or her signature. Such records shall be maintained in the tattoo establishment and shall be available for examination by a licensed physician whose name, address and telephone number have been provided to the occupation tax administrator. Records shall be retained by the operator or licensee for a period of not less than two years. In the event of a change of ownership or closing of the business, all such records shall be made available to a licensed physician whose name, address and telephone number have been provided to the occupation tax administrator. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-8. - Infections. 
All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing which become known to the operator shall promptly be reported to a licensed physician whose name, address and telephone number have been provided to the occupation tax administrator and to the Morrow Fire Chief by the person owning or operating the tattooing establishment, and the infected client shall be referred to a physician. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-9. - Persons under 18 years of age. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to provide tattooing to any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the licensee to determine the age of the person patronizing such establishment, and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such licensee. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-10. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any tattoo establishment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to provide tattooing to any person who is under the influence to any extent of intoxicating liquors, malt beverages or drugs. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-11. - Tattooing of eye area. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tattoo the body of any person within any area within one inch of the nearest part of the eye socket of such person. Any person who violates this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-12. - Inspection required. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to obtain a permit issued by the county board of health or its duly authorized representative, subject to supervision and direction by the department of human resources. A permit shall be valid until suspended or revoked and shall not be transferable with respect to person or location. The county boards of health may suspend or revoke permits where the health and safety of the public require such action. When, in the judgment of such board or its duly authorized agents, it is necessary and proper that such application for a permit be denied or that a permit previously granted be suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder of the permit shall be so notified in writing and shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing. In the event that such application is finally denied or such permit finally suspended or revoked, the applicant for or holder of such permit shall be given notice in writing, which notice shall specifically state the reasons why the application or permit has been suspended, revoked, or denied. Any person, firm, or corporation operating a tattoo studio without a valid permit or performing tattooing outside of a licensed tattoo studio shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
The occupation tax administrator and the police department, their respective authorized agents or employees shall be authorized from time to time to make inspections during regular business hours of each tattoo establishment for the purpose of determining that Georgia law and the provisions of this chapter are fully complied with. It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to fail to allow the city's department officers and officials access to the premises or to hinder the officer or official in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-13. - Refusal to grant or restore license; discipline of licensees; suspension, revocation, or restriction of license. 
(a)  The city shall have authority to refuse to grant a license to an applicant or to discipline a licensee under this chapter upon a finding by the city that the licensee or applicant has: 
(1)  Displayed an inability or has become unable to work as a tattoo artist or as an operator of a tattoo establishment, as the case may be, with reasonable skill and safety to clientele by reason of illness, use of alcohol, drugs, narcotics, chemicals, or any other type of substance, or as a result of any mental or physical condition. In enforcing this paragraph, the city may, upon reasonable grounds, require the licensee or applicant to submit to a mental or physical examination by an appropriate practitioner of the healing arts. The expense of such examination shall be borne by such licensee or applicant. The results of such examinations shall be admissible in any hearing before the city manager, the mayor and council or court of competent jurisdiction, in the event of an appeal. If a licensee or applicant fails to submit to such an examination when properly directed to do so by the city, unless such failure was due to circumstances beyond the licensee's or applicant's control, the city may enter a final order upon proper notice, hearing, and proof of such refusal; or 
(2)  Been convicted in the last five years of the following offenses: any offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons; or any felony involving moral turpitude. For the purpose of this section, a conviction shall include a finding or verdict of guilty, a plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere in a criminal proceeding regardless of whether the adjudication of guilt or sentence is withheld or not entered thereon pursuant to provisions of the O.C.G.A. sections 42-8-60 through 42-8-64, relating to first offenders, or any comparable rule or statute; or 
(3)  Knowingly made misleading, deceptive, untrue, or fraudulent representations to a client, customer, or other person or entity in connection with the provision of tattoo services or any document connected therewith; or practiced fraud or deceit or intentionally made any false statement in obtaining or attempting to obtain a license provided for in this chapter; or 
(4)  Performed tattoo services contrary to this chapter; or knowingly aided, assisted, procured, or advised any person to perform tattoo services contrary to this chapter; or knowingly performed any act which in any way aids, assists, procures, advises, or encourages any unlicensed person to perform tattoo services; or 
(5)  Engaged in any unprofessional, unethical, deceptive, deleterious practice harmful to the public, which conduct or practice need not have resulted in actual injury to any person; unprofessional conduct shall also include any departure from or failure to conform to the acceptable and prevailing minimal standards applicable to tattoo artists or operators of tattoo establishments; or 
(6)  Failed to report to the city any act or omission of a licensee or applicant or any other person who violates the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  When the city finds that any person is unqualified to be granted a license or finds that any person should be disciplined pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the city may take such action as more fully set forth in title 1, section 1-1-8. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, a licensee or applicant, whether the same is a person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity, who may or may not perform tattoo services, and all persons having a beneficial interest in the operation of a tattoo establishment (except stockholders owning less than five percent of the stock in a corporation) shall be subject to the provisions of this section and be treated as if they were the licensee or applicant. 
(d)  Where the city refused to grant a license to an applicant or has revoked a license under this chapter, the affected licensee or applicant shall be disqualified from reapplying for such license for 12 months immediately following such action taken by the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-14. - Unlicensed practice constitutes public nuisance; injunctions. 
The provision of tattoo services and the operation of a tattoo establishment is declared to be an activity affecting the public interest and involving the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Such provision of services and operation by a person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity who is not licensed, or otherwise authorized, is declared to be a public nuisance, harmful to the public health, safety, and welfare. The City of Morrow, or any person or organization having an interest therein may bring a petition to restrain or enjoin such unlicensed practice in a court of competent jurisdiction. It shall not be necessary in order to obtain an injunction under this chapter to allege or prove that there is no adequate remedy at all, or to allege or prove any special injury. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
Sec. 9-7-15. - Location and zoning district. 
(a)  Such business of tattooing shall be located only in the light manufacturing zoning district in the city and such business of tattooing shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any church, public or private school, or alcoholic beverage establishment, and shall be located at least 1,000 feet from residential property as measured from property line to property line by way of access over public streets and roads of the city. 
(b)  No license shall be issued except upon the recommendation of the planning and zoning board and approval of the mayor and council under the conditional use provisions of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2003-08, § 1D., 7-22-03) 
Sec. 9-7-16. - Penalty. 
A person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as provided generally for violations of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-02, § 1, 1-12-99) 
CHAPTER 8. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES, FRANCHISES AND LICENSING[11] 
Footnotes: 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-8-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
Affiliated person means each person who falls into one or more of the following categories: (1) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; (2) each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (3) each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant; and (4) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the applicant; provided that affiliated person shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant. 
Cable services means cable services as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the Cable Act), but does not include telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. In the event that cable services is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, cable services shall mean cable services as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Cable system means any cable system as defined in the Cable Act. 
City means the City of Morrow. 
City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
Control or controlling interest means actual working control in whatever manner exercised, including, without limitation, working control through ownership, management, debt instruments or negative control, as the case may be, of the applicant or the telecommunications system in the streets. A rebuttable presumption of the existence of control or a controlling interest shall arise from the beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, of more than five percent of any person (which person or group of persons is hereinafter referred to as controlling person ). Control or controlling interest as used herein may be held simultaneously by more than one person or group of persons. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to: (a) furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; (b) provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; or (c) transport telecommunications services across the city along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications services at or from any person or location in the city. 
May is permissive. 
Ordinance means this article and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
Private telecommunications services means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services . 
Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in section 9-8-11 of this article. 
Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications means telecommunications as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services . 
Telecommunications service means telecommunications service as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services . In the event that telecommunications service is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, telecommunications service shall mean telecommunications service as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
Telecommunications system means the system in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 99-23, § I, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-8-2. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this article is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 99-23, § I, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-8-3. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this article or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or revocable license or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-8-4. - Application to existing telecommunications systems and providers of telecommunications services and private telecommunications services. 
This article shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for the operation of telecommunications systems or to provide telecommunications services existing on the effective date of this article, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Secs. 9-8-5—9-8-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 9-8-11. - Granting authority. 
No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services or private telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city intends to exercise its authority to franchise or license persons pursuant to this article to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, including the 1996 Act. 
A person shall not use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications services or operate a telecommunications system without a franchise, except that such person may use or occupy specific streets without a franchise if the person obtains a revocable license in accordance with the terms of this article. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets and: (a) may be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is for the sole purpose of providing private telecommunications services; or (b) shall be granted to provide telecommunications services only if the use or occupation of such streets, together with the use or occupation of any streets pursuant to revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed 500 linear feet; or (c) shall be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is by a telecommunications system that is not used by the grantee or any other person to sell, resell or otherwise provide telecommunications services to any person in the city. in the event an application for a revocable license would cause a person to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in this section, then such person must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this article, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
The city council may grant one or more franchises or revocable licenses in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. 
The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the grantee. 
Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or revocable licenses as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. 
A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license may only be granted for use of specifically identified streets. 
The grant of franchises and revocable licenses to persons providing telecommunications services by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the 1996 Act, as amended, governing telecommunications franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 99-23, § I, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-8-12. - Franchise applications. 
Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
Any application for a franchise or revocable license shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(a)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(b)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
(1)  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
(2)  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
(3)  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity; 
(4)  For purposes of determining whether an applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law, a detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for any conclusions by such lending institution or funding source regarding the applicant's financial ability to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and maintain the proposed telecommunications system in the city; and 
(5)  For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate, and repair the telecommunications system in compliance with the policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety and welfare, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiaries, and the areas served by such systems. 
(c)  In order to permit the city to manage its streets, a detailed description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
(2)  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant; and 
(3)  For purposes of assisting the city in determining whether the telecommunications system will be constructed in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets, a detailed statement setting forth the provisions in any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to such person, firm, or corporation constructing, or assisting the applicant with the construction of, the telecommunications system in the streets; and 
(d)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 99-23, § I, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-8-13. - Non-refundable application fees for new franchises and revocable licenses. 
No application for a new franchise or revocable license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise or revocable license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded, except if required by law. 
(a)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(b)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $3,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Morrow, and each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with its proposal a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $3,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Morrow. In the event the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. In the event the city's reasonable costs are less than the application amount, the city may reimburse to the applicant the amount in excess of the city's actual cost if required by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 99-23, § I, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-8-14. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 99-23, § I, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-8-15. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises or revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 99-23, § I, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-8-16. - Evaluation criteria. 
An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services, provided the city council reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors and such terms, conditions and other factors as the city council deems appropriate and not prohibited by applicable law: 
(a)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any in-kind facilities and relecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(b)  The financial and technical ability of the applicant to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the state or federal communications commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the city; 
(c)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(d)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise, the public health, safety and welfare, and the city's management of streets; and 
(e)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services and in accordance with applicable law, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the foregoing factors to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. No. 99-23, § I, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-8-17. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises or revocable licenses, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
After considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. 
Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council shall consider the application for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with this article and applicable law, including 47 U.S.C. § 253, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth in section 9-8-16 of this article. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. 
Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services, and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 99-23, § I, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-8-18. - Terms and conditions of franchise and revocable license. 
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise or revocable license granted pursuant to this article shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or revocable license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: 
(a)  The term of the franchise or revocable license, provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five years and shall not be renewed for terms exceeding five years; 
(b)  The franchise area under the franchise, or the streets that may be used pursuant to the revocable license; 
(c)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(d)  The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or cancelled; 
(e)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license; 
(f)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(g)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(h)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(i)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(j)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; 
(k)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight of the grantee by the city; 
(l)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise or revocable license without the prior written consent of the city; 
(m)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license; 
(n)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the federal communications commission; 
(o)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise or revocable license; 
(p)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise or revocable license; and 
(q)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 99-23, § I, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-8-19. - Revocation of revocable license. 
The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause or, if the revocable license is for the provision of private telecommunications services, for the city's convenience. The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than 500 linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services by the grantee, any affiliated persons or any other persons to or from any person or location in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05, § 1, 2-27-01) 
CHAPTER 9. - TAXICABS[12] 
Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, adopted June 14, 2011, repealed Ch. 9 and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 9, §§ 9-9-1—9-9-12, 9-9-12.1, 9-9-13—9-9-19, and 9-9-21—9-9-26, pertained to taxicab and limousine services and derived from Ord. No. 2000-04, § 1, adopted March 14, 2000; Ord. No. 2002-09, § 1C, adopted Oct. 22, 2002; and Ord. No. 2007-1, adopted Sept. 11, 2007. 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-9-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter have the meanings as set out herein: 
Car for hire shall mean a commercial motor vehicle operated for hire, designed for the transportation of no more than six passengers at one time, the destination of which is under the direction of the passenger transported therein, which is not marked as a taxicab, and which is not licensed and regulated by the public service commission. Cars for hire include unmarked vehicles sometimes referred to as "limousines" but which do not meet the definition of limousine below. 
Driver shall mean and include any and every person in charge of driving or operating a taxicab, as defined herein, whether as owner, agent, employee or otherwise. 
Driver's permit means the permission granted by the city to a person to drive a taxicab within the city. 
Highway means any of the public streets, alleys, lanes, boulevards, avenues, drives, circles, or roads of the city. 
License shall mean the business license granted by the governing body to engage in the taxicab business within the city. 
Limousine shall mean any commercial motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for a luxury limousine with a designed seating capacity for no more than ten passengers with a minimum of five seats located behind the operator of the vehicle and which does not have a door at the rear of the vehicle designed to allow passenger entry or exit. 
Operator of taxicab business shall mean any person who shall engage in the business of furnishing taxi service within the corporate limits of the City of Morrow, regardless of the number of vehicles, and regardless of whether an office is physically located within the corporate limits thereof. It shall not include those operations limited to delivering passengers on an occasional basis to the city from points exterior of the city limits. 
Owner shall mean and include any person having control of the operation or maintenance and collection of the revenue derived from taxicabs. 
Taxicab shall mean a commercial motor vehicle operated for hire, designed for the transportation of no more than six passengers at one time, the destination of which is under the direction of the passenger transported therein, which is marked as a taxicab, and which is not licensed and regulated by the public service commission. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-2. - Compliance with chapter provisions prerequisite to operation for both taxicabs and cars for hire; exemptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any taxicab to be operated within the limits of the city unless and until the owner and operator shall have first complied with the provisions of this chapter; provided that any taxicab licensed by another jurisdiction which maintains no office in the city, performs no solicitation in the city, originates no trips from within the city, and which drops off passengers in the city only on an irregular and intermittent basis is not subject to the requirements of this chapter. Limousine services, as that term is defined by the public service commission, are exempt from this chapter; provided that any car for hire service offering transportation for hire which does not fall within the definition of a limousine is nevertheless subject to regulation as a taxicab, regardless of the nomenclature it may apply to its operations. All cars for hire are required to comply with all regulations of this chapter except where specifically exempt. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-3. - Business location. 
Dispatch centers, vehicle storage lots or other physical facilities utilized by taxicab businesses shall be located only within the HM zoning district of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-4. - Insurance required. 
(a)  No owner of a taxicab shall operate or authorize any other person to operate a taxicab in the City of Morrow unless it is covered by a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state, which provides the following minimum coverage: 
$100,000.00 —For injury to or death of one person in one accident; 
$250,000.00 —For injury to or death of two or more persons in any one accident; and 
$50,000.00 —For injury to or destruction of property of others in any one accident. 
(b)  Each taxicab operated within the city limits shall be required to carry and maintain in effect this minimum insurance coverage. Proof of such insurance coverage, including the name of issuing company, the amounts of coverage provided, and the policy number, shall be provided to the city before a permit shall be issued. Such insurance shall provide specific coverage for the vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers. Failure to maintain such coverage shall constitute cause for revocation of a city license and/or permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-5. - Taxicab equipment; cars for hire. 
(a)  All taxicabs operating in the City of Morrow shall be equipped with a taximeter. Such taximeter shall be fastened in front of the passengers' seat and be visible to the passenger at all times. After sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. It shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. It shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect its correct reading and recording. The taximeter must be operational, turned on and in use for each fare. Log sheets of each fare are to be kept and made available to the city upon request. 
(b)  Taxicabs shall be affixed with a vehicle permit sticker issued by the chief of police or his designee. Such stickers must at all times be displayed, fully visible and unobscured in the lower right corner of the read windshield. Each vehicle will be assigned a numbered sticker and that sticker shall not be used on any other vehicle. The sticker shall be renewed annually. 
(c)  Taxicabs shall be plainly and prominently marked with the name and telephone number of the company which holds the city-issued permit. Such markings shall be affixed only by means of permanent vinyl lettering or paint. 
(d)  Taxicabs shall be marked with rates on the side of the vehicle so as to be plainly visible to persons seeking to use the taxicab. 
(e)  Taxicabs shall be equipped with a roof light that is permanently mounted on the roof of the vehicle, and maintained in good working order at all times. 
(f)  Taxicabs shall be maintained in good, safe, and serviceable mechanical condition as verified in a vehicle inspection form issued by the chief of police, or his designee. 
(g)  Taxicabs shall transport as passengers only the number of persons specified by the vehicle manufacturer. 
(h)  Taxicabs shall have a compartment for the secure storage of passengers' luggage that is separate and apart from the passenger compartment. 
(i)  No taxicab shall have less than three doors, excluding the driver's door, for loading and unloading passengers. 
(j)  Cars for hire shall not be required to utilize taximeters or be required to be marked as taxicabs. However, all cars for hire operating in the city shall establish a rate schedule, a copy of which shall accompany their application for business license. Cars for hire shall be required to comply with subsections (b), (f), (g), (h) and (i) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-6. - Unlawful acts. 
The following acts are prohibited by any owner, operator or driver of a vehicle licensed or permitted by this chapter: 
(1)  Transporting alcohol beverage(s) that are not the property of a fare. 
(2)  Failure to deliver any property of value left in a vehicle to the city police department within 24 hours. 
(3)  Allowing a passenger to alight from the vehicle while it is in motion, or discharging a passenger at any place other than the curb or pavement edge or within the confines of a private driveway. 
(4)  Allowing a passenger to consume alcoholic beverages or controlled substances in the vehicle. 
(5)  Transporting a passenger to his or her destination by a route that is not the safest or most direct, unless the passenger specifically authorizes such alternate or indirect route. 
(6)  Picking up any additional passengers without the express consent of the original passenger. 
(7)  Refusing to pick up as a passenger any person when the vehicle is available or to discriminate against any person as a passenger because of race, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age or mental or sensor handicap. 
(8)  Activating equipment indicating vehicle is in use when it is not, or failing to activate such equipment when the vehicle is in use. 
(9)  Failing to conduct oneself with proper deportment at all times while the taxicab is in use. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-7. - Parking or storing taxicabs in residential zoning districts. 
(a)  No person shall permit or cause any passenger vehicle used as a taxicab that displays on the vehicle's exterior any symbols, letters, numbers, words, phrases, codes, markings, or rooftop identification, to be parked for longer than one hour or stored in a residential zoning district. Persons who are conducting business by transporting passengers shall be allowed sufficient time under the direction of the passenger transported therein to pick up and drop off passengers and to wait under the passenger's direction. Parking for up to one hour shall also be permitted for meal breaks. 
(b)  No person shall permit parts of a taxicab to be stored or serviced on residential property, except that emergency service, such as tire changes, may be rendered to taxicabs upon permission of the chief of police or his designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-8. - Authority to regulate fares; rate schedule to be posted. 
(a)  The city reserves the right to regulate rates and fares for taxicabs. In the absence of city regulation, the owner of every taxicab operated in the city shall establish a schedule of fares which shall be filed with the application for business license. Fares shall be posted at a conspicuous place inside the taxicab where all passengers may see the rates charged for carrying passengers and the manner of determining the fare to be charged passengers. Cars for hire shall maintain a schedule of fares at the central office from which such cars for hire are dispatched in lieu of posting fares inside vehicles. 
(b)  No passenger shall be charged a fare in excess of the established fare schedule for the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-9. - Discharging or receiving passengers. 
(a)  No taxicab driver shall stop his taxicab for the purpose of discharging or receiving passengers except at a point as near the driver's right-hand curb as possible. Wherever possible, taxicabs shall be pulled into a private driveway for pickup and discharge of passengers. No taxicab operator may pick up or discharge passengers who solicit rides in a public street or highway. All pickup of passengers shall occur as a result of dispatch to the driver to a specific address. 
(b)  For bus service offered within the city limits pursuant to certificates issued by the public service commission, the city shall approve bus stops located off the public right-of-way. Such stops shall be used by all buses operating within the city. No stops on the street shall be permitted for pickup or discharge of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-10. - Driver appearance. 
Every taxicab driver, while on duty, shall keep a clean and well-groomed appearance and comport himself or herself in a professional manner. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-11. - Lost articles. 
Every taxicab driver shall inspect his or her vehicle after the departure of each passenger to ascertain that no article has been left behind. In the event that a passenger does leave an article in a cab, the driver shall immediately attempt to return it. If the driver is unable to immediately return the article, the dispatcher shall be notified and the article shall be turned in to the service company office not later than the end of the driver's shift. The taxicab owner and company shall make a diligent effort to locate the owner of any lost article. Any article left in a taxicab and not returned to the owner within 24 hours shall be retained by the taxicab company for no less than 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-12. - Safe and legal operation. 
Every taxicab shall operate his or her vehicle in accordance with the laws of the state and the city, and with due regard for the safety, convenience and comfort of passengers and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-13. - Storage or transport of hazardous materials. 
The storage or transport of hazardous material in the exterior, interior compartment, or trunk of a taxicab is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-14. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  The police department shall enforce the regulations contained in this chapter. 
(b)  Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by the payment of fines up to $1,000.00 or imprisonment up to six months, or both. Each separate occurrence shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  The violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person, corporation, partnership or other entity may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the City of Morrow. 
(d)  Violations of any provision of this chapter by any license holder shall be due cause for revocation of any city license, after notice and hearing before the mayor and council. 
(e)  Vehicles for hire operating within the city are subject to inspection at any time. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Secs. 9-9-15—9-9-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - LICENSES AND PERMITS 

Sec. 9-9-21. - License and permit prerequisite. 
No person shall operate any taxicab business within the city until a business license as provided for in this chapter has been granted and issued. No person shall drive a taxicab within the city without first having obtained a driver's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-22. - Application for business license. 
(a)  An applicant for a business license to operate a taxicab business, whether such business is physically located in the city or picks up passengers within the city, shall provide the following information to the police department: 
(1)  Name, current address and phone number of applicant, all owners, officers, shareholders and other interested persons in the proposed business. 
(2)  Name, current address and phone number of all drivers employed by the business. 
(3)  Criminal history of each person identified in paragraph (a)(1). 
(4)  Evidence of good moral character of each person identified in paragraph (a)(1). 
(5)  Information on vehicles to be operated as taxicabs within the city, including for each vehicle, the make, color, model, vehicle identification number. 
(6)  Proof of insurance on each vehicle to be utilized by the business. 
(7)  Location of the physical office of the business. 
(8)  Vehicle inspection reports for each vehicle to be utilized as a taxicab. 
(9)  Any other information deemed necessary by the city to conform with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  An applicant who will maintain a physical office or other physical location within the city shall, in addition to submitting an application for business license for a taxicab business, submit a business tax return estimating the gross receipts anticipated for the business for the remainder of the current business tax year or future year if application is made after July 1. An applicant who will not maintain a physical office or other physical location within the city shall nevertheless submit a business tax return disclosing other jurisdictions to which it is responsible for payment of business taxes and shall tender prorated tax liability for the remainder of the year to the city. 
(c)  Each applicant shall appear in person at the police department, submit to fingerprinting and sign a form allowing for a criminal background check. Each applicant shall provide the addresses of residence for the past ten years. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-23. - Application for driver's permit. 
(a)  Any person desiring a driver's permit shall make application for the same to the police department. The applicant shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name, current address and phone number of applicant. 
(2)  Criminal history of applicant. 
(3)  Evidence of good moral character of applicant. 
(4)  Any other information deemed necessary by the city to conform with the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Each applicant shall appear in person at the police department, submit to fingerprinting and sign a form allowing for a criminal background check. Each applicant shall provide the addresses of residence for the past ten years. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-24. - Application fee and permit renewal. 
(a)  The applicant for a business license shall pay to the city such sum as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council for a regulatory fee at the time application is filed. Business licenses shall run for the calendar year. A license granted during the calendar year shall expire on December 31 of the year of issuance. Business licenses for taxicab businesses shall be subject to renewal on an annual basis unless the license has been suspended or revoked by the city or the city determines the applicant for renewal has lost qualification required by this chapter. License fees shall be paid in full at the time of initial application and at the time of each renewal application. 
(b)  The applicant for a driver's permit shall pay to the city such sum as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council when the application is filed. Should the permit be granted, the applicant's permit fee will then be considered as paid until the last day of the issuing month of the following year. Prior to permit expiration, all taxicab drivers who expect to drive in the following year shall make an application for the renewal of their permits. The applicant shall pay an additional fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council with each renewal application filed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-25. - Investigation of the application. 
(a)  The chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made into the truthfulness of information provided by applicants for business licenses and driver's permits, into the personal and occupational history of each applicant and into whether the applicants meet the standards of this chapter. 
(b)  The chief shall determine on the basis of the investigation whether driver's permits should be issued. Applications for driver's permits meeting the requirements of this chapter and showing good moral character shall be granted. If the chief decides that the driver permit should be issued, he shall immediately notify the applicant; and if he decides the permit should not be issued, he shall immediately notify the applicant and inform the applicant of the reasons for the denial. 
(c)  The chief shall make a recommendation to the mayor and council as to whether business licenses should issue for taxicab businesses. Such recommendation shall be completed within three weeks of final submission by the applicant of all required information. The recommendation shall be placed on the council agenda of the next available council meeting scheduled at least six days after the finalization of the chief's recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-26. - Criminal history disqualifying applicants for licenses or permits. 
(a)  No business license or driver's permit shall be issued if the applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses within a period of ten years preceding the date of application: 
(1)  Manslaughter or negligent homicide resulting from the operation of a motor vehicle. 
(2)  Driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs. 
(3)  Any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle is used. 
(4)  Failure to stop and render aid or leaving the scene of an accident, as required under the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(5)  Perjury or false swearing in making any statements under oath, including statements made in connection with an "application for permit" under this chapter. 
(6)  Perjury or the making of a false affidavit or statements under oath relating to the ownership or operation of motor vehicles. 
(7)  The violation of any law involving moral turpitude. 
(8)  Conviction as an habitual violator by the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(b)  Convictions, pleas of guilty or nolo contendere or forfeiture of bail on three charges of a violation of the motor vehicle laws of the State of Georgia within 24 months of the application date shall disqualify an applicant from holding either a business license or driver's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-27. - Drivers' qualifications for operator's permit. 
(a)  Before operating a taxicab within the city, a driver shall: 
(1)  Possess a valid Class C Georgia driver's license; 
(2)  Be competent to operate a motor vehicle; 
(3)  Be familiar with the traffic laws and ordinances of the State of Georgia and City of Morrow; 
(4)  Provide authorization and any information necessary to enable the chief of police or his designee to investigate the driver's background, criminal history, and traffic record; 
(5)  Provide a current motor vehicle report (drivers history report) at the time of original application and at renewal time; 
(6)  Be of good character as determined by the aforesaid investigation; and 
(7)  Obtain a driver's permit issued by the city. 
(b)  A driver's permit shall be denied to any applicant who does not meet the criminal history requirements of section 9-9-26 and the standards of this section. The following additional conditions shall result in the denial of a driver's permit: 
(1)  A driver's license revoked by the department of public safety for violations within the previous five years; 
(2)  A conviction for open container and/or transporting alcohol which is not the property of a fare within five years; or 
(3)  A conviction of three or more moving traffic violations within 24 months of application date. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-28. - Denial, suspension and revocation of permit. 
(a)  An application for a business license or driver's permit issued under this chapter may be denied, suspended or revoked for due cause as defined in subsections (d) and (e) hereof. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall furnish a business license holder a notice setting forth the time, place, and purpose of a meeting at which it intends to consider the revocation or suspension of a business license. After a hearing, if the mayor and council determine due cause exists, it may suspend, revoke or place the license on probation, with or without conditions, for a maximum of 12 months. 
(c)  The police chief shall be charged with suspension or revocation of driver's permits under the standards of this chapter. The police chief shall have the right to suspend for a given number of days, or to revoke entirely, following ten days' notice and hearing, any permit issued under this chapter. 
(d)  A license or permit may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for a license or permit. 
(2)  For failure to pay all fees, taxes, penalties or other charges imposed by the provisions of this chapter and of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  For failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license or permit. 
(4)  For violation of any part of this chapter by the license or permit holder, its or his agents, partners, officers, employees or contractors. 
(5)  For allowing required insurance coverage to lapse. 
(6)  For transporting alcoholic beverages(s) that are not the property of a fare. 
(7)  Conviction of three or more moving traffic violations within a 24-month period. 
(8)  Conviction of a felony. 
(9)  Conviction of reckless driving, or being in physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(10)  Failure to retain and properly account for any property of value left in a vehicle. 
(11)  Allowing a passenger to alight from the vehicle while it is in motion, or discharging a passenger at any place other than the curb, pavement edge or on an established driveway. 
(12)  Allowing a passenger to consume intoxicating substances or other controlled substance in the vehicle. 
(13)  Transporting a passenger to destination by a route that is not the safest or most direct, unless the passenger specifically authorizes such alternate or indirect route. 
(14)  Picking up any additional passengers without the express consent of the original passenger. 
(15)  Refusing to pick up as a passenger any person or proper deportment when the vehicle is available or to discriminate against any person because of race, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age or mental or sensor handicap. 
(16)  Activating equipment indicating the vehicle is in use when it is not, or failing to activate such equipment when the vehicle is in use. 
(17)  Engaging in any unfair or deceptive acts or practices. 
(18)  Having repeated violations of traffic law or ordinances, or of any ordinance provision regulating the conduct of taxicab drivers. 
(e)  Business license holders are responsible for violations of this chapter by their vehicle operators whether such operators are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(f)  In addition to other penalties provided in the charter of the city, this Code of Ordinances, and laws of the state, the judge of the municipal court shall have the authority to revoke a driver's permit when the holder thereof is convicted of a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-29. - Transferability. 
Licenses and permits issued under this chapter are not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-30. - Content of permit and the posting thereof. 
A driver's permit shall bear the name, address and age of the driver. Additionally, the permit shall show the name of the driver's employer and shall have thereon a specimen signature of the driver and shall display a current photograph of the driver. The permit shall be posted in the taxicab being driven in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while the taxicab is being operated. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
Sec. 9-9-31. - Notification of new drivers. 
It shall be the duty of a business license holder to notify the chief of police whenever a new driver is hired or terminated from employment. Failure to so notify can result in revocation of the business license. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 1, 6-14-11) 
CHAPTER 10. - CABLE SERVICES FRANCHISING 
ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-10-1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
(a)  Cable services means cable services as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the Cable Act), but does not include telecommunications services. In the event that cable services is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, cable services shall mean cable services as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
(b)  Cable system means any cable system as defined in the Cable Act. 
(c)  City means the City of Morrow. 
(d)  City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
(e)  Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide cable services through a cable system or open video system. 
(f)  Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable services to inhabitants within the franchise area. 
(g)  May is permissive. 
(h)  Open video system means open video system as defined by section 76.1500(a) of Part 76 of the Code of Federal Regulations. 
(i)  Ordinance means this article and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
(j)  Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
(k)  Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
(l)  Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
(m)  Telecommunications services means telecommunications service as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but does not include cable services. In the event that telecommunications service is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, telecommunications service shall mean telecommunications service as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-10-2. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this article is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-10-3. - Delegation. 
Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this article to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this article or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-10-4. - Retroactivity. 
This article shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for cable services existing on the effective date of this article, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Secs. 9-10-5—9-10-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 9-10-10. - Granting authority. 
No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any cable services or operate a cable system or open video system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
The city council may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this article, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this article by amendment hereof. 
The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the grantee. 
Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and/or itself engage in the provision of cable services. 
A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. 
The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Cable Act, as amended, governing cable television system and open video system franchises and the renewals of cable television system franchises. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-10-11. - Franchise applications. 
Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(a)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(b)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
(1)  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
(2)  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
(3)  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable systems and open video systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
(4)  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed cable system or open video system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable system or open video system in the city; 
(5)  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
(6)  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable system(s) and open video system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof; 
(c)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A description of the cable services proposed to be provided; 
(2)  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
(3)  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other service charges; 
(4)  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
(5)  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable services; and 
(6)  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
(d)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and 
(e)  Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-10-12. - Non-refundable application fees for new franchises. 
No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(a)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(b)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this article, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $3,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Morrow. In the event that the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-10-13. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-10-14. - Public availability of applications. 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-10-15. - Evaluation criteria. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(a)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and cable services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(b)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(c)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(d)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services to be provided, including the type of cable services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
(e)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(f)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-10-16. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
If the city council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider any application(s), the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. 
The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 2-27-01) 
Sec. 9-10-17. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this ordinance shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(a)  The term of the franchise; 
(b)  The franchise area and the cable services which are the subject of the franchise; 
(c)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(d)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled; 
(e)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise; 
(f)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(g)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(h)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(i)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(j)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(k)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the grantee by the city; 
(l)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(m)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(n)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the federal communications commission; 
(o)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(p)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(q)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 2001-06, § 1, 2-27-01) 
CHAPTER 11. - INTERNET CAFÉS 

Sec. 9-11-1. - Definitions. 
"Internet café" means a coffee shop or other business establishment offering non-alcoholic beverages and food and that, as a service, includes wireless internet service to which customers are allowed to connect via their personal computers without a related charge or to use computers and ancillary services, such as printers and copiers, furnished by the establishment for a charge. "Internet café" specifically excludes establishments offering or making available: 
(1)  Coin-operated amusement machines as defined by section 9-4-41 of this Code; 
(2)  Any amusement machines or game devices not operated by insertion of a coin but requiring a fee of any type for use; 
(3)  Game rooms and arcades; 
(4)  Any establishment offering sweepstakes games for play; 
(5)  Any establishment set up in such a way as to encourage or permit group gaming by connecting terminals with one another; 
(6)  Any establishment licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(7)  Any establishment licensed for adult entertainment; and 
(8)  Any establishment that would be otherwise meet the definition of this section but which provides no computers or similar machines on premises for public use and which derives less than 25 percent of its revenue from charges associated with internet use. 
(Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 9-11-2. - Locations. 
Internet cafés are allowed as a permitted use in BG, CUPD and MU Districts under the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 9-11-3. - Physical standards for premises. 
Areas provided for internet use shall be in one common open area, provided that carrels not exceeding 24 inches in height above a standard table top and open on at least one side may be provided for individual computer usage. The public shall not be allowed in closed rooms or areas curtained off or screened from public view. 
(Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 9-11-4. - Hours of operation. 
Internet cafés shall operate only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. No member of the public shall be permitted to remain on the premises after closing hours. 
(Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 9-11-5. - Food service standards. 
All internet cafés shall be required to obtain a health department certificate for a food service establishment and to conform to all county health regulations for the type of food and beverage provided. 
(Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 9-11-6. - Noise restrictions. 
No sounds shall emanate from the internet café out of doors or into adjacent enclosed spaces not controlled by the business. 
(Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 9-11-7. - Obscenity. 
Internet cafés shall not be used to access pornography or other obscene materials. At least one manager over the age of 21 years shall be on the premises at all times. The internet café may employ such other employees as necessary for the conduct of business. The manager, or employees under the manager's direction, shall walk the floor from time to time to ensure that use of computer terminals and equipment is not made to access pornography or other obscene material. Any patron utilizing the premises of an internet café for accessing pornography or other obscene material shall be required by management to leave the establishment. A notice of this requirement measuring no less than 9 × 12 inches shall be posted in a prominent place at the establishment and within each carrel. 
(Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 9-11-8. - Gambling. 
No gambling shall occur on the premises of an internet café. No games of chance prohibited by state law shall be allowed within the premises of an internet café. No sweepstakes promotions shall be permitted on the premises of an internet café, nor shall any allowed use of the internet by the establishment access sweepstakes promotions. 
(Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 9-11-9. - Management control. 
The manager shall maintain order on the premises at all times the internet café is open to the public and shall bear responsibility on behalf of the business for the conduct of any patrons. 
(Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 9-11-10. - Business license required: application. 
No person shall engage in the business of providing an internet café without first having obtained a license from the city. Applicants for licensure as an internet café shall provide the following information to the city: 
(1)  Name, address and social security number or FEI number of the owner of the business; 
(2)  If the business is a corporation, the state of incorporation; proof of entitlement from the secretary of state to operate the business in Georgia; a list of all officers and directors of the corporation, providing for each, full name, social security number and home address; 
(3)  Physical address of premises on which the business is proposed to operate; 
(4)  A current lease for the business; 
(5)  Physical layout of the interior of the business as it is proposed to operate, showing all walls, electrical service, location of computer terminals and peripheral equipment; food service preparation and service areas; 
(6)  Identification of location and number of spaces for parking available to the business; 
(7)  The name and age of the on-site manager and any additional shift managers to be utilized by the business; 
(8)  The name of an agent for service of process located within the five county metro Atlanta area; 
(9)  Consent by the owners/officers/directors of the business and any managers to criminal background check, including fingerprinting by the city police department; 
(10)  Description of all equipment to be made available on the premises that may be utilized by members of the public including, for each piece of equipment, the manufacturer, model and character (computer, printer, scanner, etc.) of the equipment; 
(11)  Specification of the hours the establishment will be open to the public; 
(12)  Description of food and beverages that will be available on the premises; 
(13)  Emergency contact person, including name, complete phone number and physical address. The emergency contact person should be someone who can be physically present within 20 minutes of notification by the city of any problem with regard to operation of the business, criminal activity, such as break-ins or thefts, or fire; 
(14)  Completed application for all signs desired to be erected for the business outdoors in view of the public; 
(15)  Written acknowledgment to receipt of a copy of the city's regulatory ordinances and pledge to comply with all such requirements; 
(16)  Written certification by each owner, manager, officer and director, that such person has not been convicted, or plead guilty or nolo contendere, within the preceding ten years to any felony, crime of moral turpitude or crime involving gambling; 
(17)  Any other information required by the city to determine compliance with the standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 9-11-11. - Issuance; denial standards. 
Upon receipt of a completed application, including all required documentation, the city shall review the application materials, and shall issue a license to all applicants meeting the standards of this chapter. License shall be denied to: 
(1)  Any application failing to meet standards of this chapter; 
(2)  Any application that is incomplete; and 
(3)  Any application involving an owner, officer, director or manager who has been convicted, or plead guilty or nolo contendere, within ten years of the date of application, of a felony or crime of moral turpitude or any crime involving gambling. 
(Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 1-24-12) 
Sec. 9-11-12. - Violations; grounds for license revocation; hearings. 
(a)  Any license issued under this chapter shall be revocable for cause. Grounds for revocation include violation of any standard of this chapter, disqualification by reason of criminal history of any owner, director, officer or manager, and any gambling occurring on the premises. The city may, in its discretion, impose a lesser penalty for offenses not involving gambling; however, any gambling activity established on the premises shall result in revocation of license. 
(b)  Notice of violations shall be sent by either certified mail to the owner and/or agent designated for service of process or be served by hand delivery upon such person. In the event the owner or designated agent for service of process cannot be found or refuses certified service, the manager on site shall be personally served and the business temporarily closed pending hearing on the violations asserted. With the exception of gambling violations which will result in immediate temporary closure of the business, once notice has been served, the business may continue in operation until result of the hearing. 
(c)  Hearing on notices of violations shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by the city manager. No less than ten days notice of hearing shall be provided in the notice of violation. At the hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to representation of counsel of his choice and at his own expense, the right to present witnesses and evidence in his behalf, and the right to cross-examine all city witnesses. A decision shall be made by the hearing officer within ten business days after conclusion of the hearing. The decision shall be served in the same manner as the original notice of violations. In the event of an adverse decision, the licensee may appeal such decision to the city council, provided notice of appeal is filed within five business days with the city clerk. The decision of the city council shall be filed. Review of a final decision by the city shall be taken only by certiorari to Superior Court of Clayton County. 
(d)  In addition to license penalties prescribed above, any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided by section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2012-37, § 1, 1-24-12) 
CHAPTER 12. - HOTELS AND MOTELS 

Sec. 9-12-1. - Definitions. 
Generally. For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall have the meanings set out in this section, except in cases where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Capture means that the guest's name and the guest's address shall be written in a book/register inscribed with ink or indelible pencil. 
Extended stay hotel and extended stay motel mean any hotel containing four or more guestrooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented, or hired out to be temporarily occupied or which are temporarily occupied by tourists and travelers for sleeping purposes for more than ten days within any 30-day period and that contain fixed cooking appliances. 
Fixed cooking appliance means a stove; a hotplate that does not serve as an integral part of an appliance designed solely to produce coffee; a conventional oven; a convection oven; or any oven producing heat using resistance heating elements, induction heating, or infrared heating sources. Fixed cooking appliances do not include microwaves or outdoor grills. 
Guest means any person who occupies a guestroom. 
Guestroom means temporary living and sleeping quarters for a person or persons. 
Hotel means a building, structure or place containing ten or more guestrooms wherein tourists and travelers are temporarily provided lodging in exchange for financial compensation and in which ingress and egress to each guestroom is made through the interior of the building. 
Identification means a current and valid government-issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. 
Law enforcement personnel means any law enforcement officer, fire marshal, or any of his or her assistants, fire inspector, or code enforcement officer employed by the city. 
Minor means an individual less than 18 years of age. 
Motel means a building, structure or place containing ten or more guestrooms wherein tourists and travelers are temporarily provided lodging in exchange for financial compensation and in which ingress and egress to each guestroom is on the outside of the building. 
Natural disaster means a flood, tornado, hurricane, earthquake, or other occurrence for which the President of the United States has made a federal disaster declaration under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, 42 U.S.C. § 5121-5206. Should the State of Georgia's definition of "natural disaster" found in O.C.G.A. § 50-1-9 differ from the definition herein, the definition in O.C.G.A. § 50-1-9 controls. 
Person means any individual, firm, owner, sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, and unincorporated association governmental body, municipal corporation, executor, administrator, trustee, guardian, agent, occupant, or other legal entity. 
Record(s) means the name and home address of each tourist or traveler renting or occupying a guestroom, including adults and minors, kept electronically in the hotel's or motel's electronic guest registration system or in a book/register inscribed with ink or indelible pencil. 
Tourist and traveler mean a person who is going from one place to another for the purpose of business or pleasure. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 9-12-2. - Enforcement. 
Law enforcement personnel are authorized and shall have authority to enforce all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 9-12-3. - Access to premises and records. 
Law enforcement personnel shall have access at all reasonable times to all hotels and motels, except occupied guestrooms, unless so authorized by other laws or ordinances, for the purpose of investigating any complaint or enforcing any law, ordinance or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 9-12-4. - Numbering of guestrooms. 
Each guestroom in any hotel or motel shall be numbered in a plain, conspicuous manner. Such numbers shall be at least three inches high and shall be placed at eye level on the outside of the outer door of each guestroom, and no two guestrooms shall bear the same number. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 9-12-5. - Registration generally. 
(a)  For each person paying in cash for the occupation of a hotel or motel, every person operating a hotel or motel shall require each such person to provide identification prior to renting a guestroom. A record shall be kept on file for the duration of the occupancy and for 60 days thereafter. In the event the hotel or motel does not have an electronic guest registration system, the hotel or motel shall capture the guest's name and the guest's address and any unique identifier from the identification. Such record shall be signed by the person renting a guestroom or someone of his or her authority, and the operator of such hotel or motel, or his agent, shall thereupon electronically enter or write, opposite such name so registered, the number of the guestroom assigned to and occupied by such guest, together with the time when such guestroom is rented. Until all of the aforesaid entries have been made, no guest shall be permitted to occupy any guestroom in such hotel or motel. Such record is subject to inspection at all times provided that the city obtains consent of the owner of or person operating a hotel or motel or produces appropriate legal authorization through a warrant or subpoena. The individual paying in cash shall also be the individual occupying the guestroom. 
(b)  For each person paying with a credit card for the occupation of a hotel or motel, every person operating a hotel or motel shall require each such person to provide identification prior to renting a guestroom. A record shall be kept on file for the duration of the occupancy and for 60 days thereafter. In the event the hotel or motel does not have an electronic guest registration system, the hotel or motel shall capture the guest's name and the guest's address and any unique identifier from the identification. Such record shall be signed by the person renting a guestroom or someone of his or her authority, and the operator of such hotel or motel, or his agent, shall thereupon electronically enter or write, opposite such name so registered, the number of the guestroom assigned to and occupied by such guest, together with the time when such guestroom is rented. Until all of the aforesaid entries have been made, no guest shall be permitted to occupy any guestroom in such hotel or motel. Such record is subject to inspection at all times, provided that the city obtains consent of the owner of or person operating a hotel or motel or produces appropriate legal authorization through a warrant or subpoena. The individual paying in cash shall also be the individual occupying the guestroom. 
(c)  For each individual who pays for a guestroom via an internet site or some other digital payment before arriving at the hotel or motel, every person operating a hotel or motel, shall require each such person to provide identification prior to renting a guestroom. A record shall be kept on file for the duration of the occupancy and for 60 days thereafter. In the event the hotel or motel does not have an electronic guest registration system, the hotel or motel shall capture the guest's name and the guest's address and any unique identifier from the identification. Such record shall be signed by the person renting a guestroom or someone of his or her authority, and the operator of such hotel or motel, or his agent, shall thereupon electronically enter or write, opposite such name so registered, the number of the guestroom assigned to and occupied by such guest, together with the time when such guestroom is rented. For each person paying via the internet or other digital payment, the individual paying shall also be the occupant of the guestroom. Until all of the aforesaid entries have been made, no guest shall be permitted to occupy any guestroom in such hotel or motel. Such record is subject to inspection at all times provided that the city obtains consent of the owner of or person operating a hotel or motel or produces appropriate legal authorization through a warrant or subpoena. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 9-12-6. - False registration by guests. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to write, or cause to be written, or knowingly permit to be written, in any record in any hotel or motel, any other or different name or designation than the true name of the person registered therein. Identification shall be required to be produced at registration. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any hotel or motel owner, operator, manager, or person in charge of a hotel or motel to allow a guest to pay for or occupy a guestroom without identification. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 9-12-7. - Giving false information to obtain lodging. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain lodging for any person under the age of 18 years in any hotel or motel by giving to the proprietor, owner, manager, agent, person in charge or keeper thereof, false information as to such person's age or false information as to the relationship to such person of any alleged parent or guardian. Further, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to obtain lodging for himself or herself in any such establishment by giving any such false information. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 9-12-8. - Renting or occupying guestroom for illegal or unlawful purposes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to rent or occupy any guestroom in any hotel or motel in this city for illegal or unlawful purposes, or for the proprietor, manager, or other person in charge of any such hotel or motel to rent, assign to or permit any person to occupy any such guestroom, with knowledge that they intend to use it for illegal or unlawful purposes. 
(b)  It shall also be unlawful to rent or occupy any guestroom in any hotel or motel for otherwise legal commercial activity from guestrooms or common areas without obtaining approval from the city manager or his or her designee. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any guest or other individual to advertise on any website, social media, printed material, radio or television advertisement any business, service or product (unlawful or lawful) being delivered, offered, performed, created, distributed, or otherwise transacted from any guestroom within a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 9-12-9. - Letting same guestroom more than once in one night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to let any guestroom in any hotel or motel more than once between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the next day, except in the case of a written contract between the hotel or motel and the person (excluding a standard contract between the hotel or motel executed by virtue of payment of a deposit or room rate) in which: 
(1)  A specific business entity desires such occupation for an employment-related purpose which requires temporary occupancy, including, but not limited to, relocation services; or 
(2)  A government, charity, or insurance agency desires such occupation to house families in a natural disaster. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 9-12-10. - Length of stay. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stay at any hotel or motel for longer than ten days in a 40-day period. It shall also be unlawful for the owner, operator, manager, or person in charge of a hotel or motel or to permit or allow a person to stay at a hotel or motel in excess of ten days in a 30-day period. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, a stay in excess of ten days in a 30-day period may occur in the following situations: 
(1)  Where there is a written contract between a hotel or motel and a specific business entity for occupation for an employment-related purpose which requires temporary occupancy, including, but not limited to, relocation services; 
(2)  A government, charity, or insurance agency desires such occupation to house families in a natural disaster; or 
(3)  When the occupant of a guestroom is temporarily located while on active military duty. 
(c)  The written contract, document, and authorization noted in subsection (b) shall be kept on file and must be available for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 9-12-11. - Receipt for payment received. 
A receipt showing payment received shall be provided to the guest. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 9-12-12. - Hotel and motel guestroom and common area requirements. 
(a)  All guestrooms shall be equipped with a hard-wired smoke detector approved by the fire marshal. 
(b)  Smoking is prohibited in all areas of a hotel or motel, including but not limited to, exterior breezeways and stairwells, except for designated smoking guestrooms. 
(c)  Each guestroom shall provide both hot and cold water from all faucets and shower heads. 
(d)  All walls, carpet, floors, ceilings, and fixtures located in guestrooms or common areas shall be and remain clean, undamaged, free from dust, dirt, marks, or any obvious signs of patching or repair. 
(e)  All furniture shall be and remain durable, clean, undamaged, free from any obvious signs of patching or repair, and free from evidence of deterioration. Within any individual area (guestroom, breakroom, seating area, etc.), the color and design of all furniture must match. 
(f)  Entry doors, closet doors, bathroom doors, and guestroom doors shall be and remain clean, undamaged, free from scratches, indention, holes, scraps, stains, and free from any evidence of deterioration. 
(g)  All door hardware, including, but not limited to, latches, hinges, locks, and knobs, shall be and remain clean, undamaged, free from evidence of deterioration, free from obvious signs of patching or repair, and fully functional at all times to provide appropriate security, storage, and passage. 
(h)  Fixed cooking appliances are not permitted inside guestrooms and no guestrooms shall be allowed to operate in an extended-stay capacity. 
(i)  All interior areas of any hotel or motel shall be and remain free of insects, rodents, and other vermin. 
(j)  All interior areas of any hotel or motel shall be clean and remain free of mold and dirt. Interior areas shall be maintained with fresh paint when necessary. All decorations must be maintained in good repair. 
(k)  All windows shall be maintained free of cracks and excessive scratches, and they must be cleaned regularly according to hotel or motel industry standards. Any repairs to windows must be invisible and cannot display glue, tape, or wood. 
(l)  Exterior areas shall be maintained free of all litter and debris. Sidewalks abutting the hotel or motel, exterior breezeways, and stairwells shall be clean and clear, in good repair without trip hazards or uneven surfaces. Hotels or motels allowing pets shall keep all areas free of noxious odors and animal excrement. All trash receptacles shall be emptied and cleaned on a regular basis. Trash receptacles with excessive dents, holes, or peeling paint shall be repaired or replaced. 
(m)  Loitering is prohibited between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in the parking lot of a hotel or motel, on sidewalks abutting the hotel or motel, or in hallways outside of guestrooms. 
(n)  Storage outside of hotels or motels is prohibited. 
(o)  All exterior lights shall be maintained in good working order, and all lighting fixtures shall remain in good repair. 
(p)  Parking lots, exterior breezeways, stairwells, sidewalks, and other common areas shall not be used for unplanned seating, clothes drying, congregating or other similar conditions or activities. 
(q)  Parking lots shall remain in a reasonable state of repair and must be resurfaced in cases of excessive patching of potholes and widespread fracturing of asphalt. 
(r)  All painted surfaces, including but not limited to, handrails, fences, exteriors building surfaces, and interior building finishes, shall be free of rust, dirt, graffiti, or other evidence of deterioration. 
(s)  Grilling is only allowed in designated areas and where all applicable safety codes and regulations are met. Grilling is not permitted in guestrooms or on guestroom balconies. 
(t)  All guestroom linen shall be in good condition, clean and free of stains. Torn, damaged, stained or worn linen are prohibited. Hotels and motels shall maintain, on site, a minimum supply of linen sufficient to accommodate a daily 100 percent occupancy room turnover. All occupied guestrooms shall be supplied with a minimum of two bath towels, two hand towels and two washcloths. Guests in rooms with more than two guests at one time shall be allotted an additional towel, hand towel, and wash cloth for each additional guest. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Sec. 9-12-13. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense. Further, any hotel or motel that fails to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to citation imposing the maximum penalty allowed under the charter and ordinances of the city for each day of noncompliance. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a separate citation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 4-11-17) 
Title 10 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 

Sec. 10-1-1. - Uniform rules of the road; adopted. 
Pursuant to Georgia Code, chapter 6 of title 40, code sections 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, Code sections 40-6-1 to 40-6-395 (except for Code sections 40-6-393 and 40-6-394) of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1977, § 9-1001) 
Sec. 10-1-2. - Same; penalties for violations. 
The recorder of the city shall have jurisdiction to try, convict and punish violations of the Uniform Rules of the Road occurring within the limits of the city, by fines not to exceed those set forth in article VII, section 7.03 of the City Charter. All offenders apprehended by the city law enforcement officers shall be tried by the recorder except as hereinafter provided. All offenders apprehended by county or state law enforcement officers shall be tried by the State Court of Clayton County. Provided, however, that if the defendant elects to have the charge treated as a state offense and waives commitment, the recorder shall summarily fix the defendant's bond and bind the case over to the State Court of Clayton County. 
(Code 1977, § 9-1002) 
Sec. 10-1-3. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the chief of police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in theses congested districts, and any person who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 9-1003) 
Sec. 10-1-4. - Traffic, speed, truck, parking and other zones, signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)  Upon approval by resolution of the mayor and council, the chief of police is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)  Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; 
(4)  Speed, parking, truck or other traffic-control zones; 
(5)  Stop, yield, one-way and other directionals and devices; and 
(6)  Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(b)  All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the manual on uniform traffic-control devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic-control devices of the city. 
(c)  The city clerk shall keep and maintain an accurate official map or maps setting out all traffic zones, markings, signs and other traffic-control devices. The map or maps and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by resolution of the mayor and council, and the map or maps shall be known as the "Official Traffic-Control Map (or Maps) of the City of Morrow, Georgia." An official copy thereof shall be kept in the office of the city clerk and shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the city clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic-control device. 
(d)  No person shall be charged with violating a traffic or parking zone, marking, sign or other traffic-control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on streets involved. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic or parking zone, marking, sign or other traffic-control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this Code. 
Sec. 10-1-5. - Vehicle cover required. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 9-1004) 
Sec. 10-1-6. - Vehicles not to be driven through processions. 
No vehicle, except a fire or police vehicle or ambulance, shall be driven through a funeral or other authorized procession, except by the permission of a police officer present. 
(Code 1977, § 9-1007) 
Cross reference— Driving through parades, § 10-2-12(b). 
Sec. 10-1-7. - Marking and parking of vehicles carrying material extending over rear ends or sides. 
No vehicle carrying ladders, lumber, pipe, or any material extending four feet or more over the side or rear end of the body of the vehicle shall park overnight on any public property or on any private property within a residential area. 
State Law reference— Red light or flag required for projecting loads, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-27. 
Sec. 10-1-8. - Parking of heavy vehicles. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, "heavy vehicle" is defined as any large vehicle, cab, trailer, truck, tractor trailer, bus, or car carrier (including rollbacks and wreckers), including but not limited to, school buses, in excess of 900 cubic feet, or one ton capacity. Recreation vehicles are specifically excluded from the definition of heavy vehicle; however, such vehicles shall not be parked on through streets nor in any manner which would impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause any heavy vehicle to be pulled, pushed, or in any way moved across any curb in the city without prior permission from the police department. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause any heavy vehicle to be parked or stored on public property or in a residential area, office and institutional, commercial, or agricultural district not zoned for a warehousing facility, unless the vehicle is actually engaged in loading or unloading activity where the driver is present and in charge thereof. A minimum of two signs on interior light poles must be posted in commercial, and office and institutional parking lots to notify operators of heavy vehicles that it is illegal to park heavy vehicles in the lot unless they are parked in those areas designated and posted as loading zones and/or loading docks, in compliance with all provisions of this section. Each sign is required to be a minimum of 18 inches by 24 inches. 
It shall further be unlawful for parts of these vehicles, as stated above, and their accessories, including materials hauled by the vehicles, to be stored on residential property or to be serviced on residential property, except emergency service may be rendered upon permission of the chief of police. Requests for exemptions to the prohibition of parking heavy vehicles in residential areas should be filed with the city manager and are subject to approval or disapproval by the mayor and council. 
Notwithstanding the above restrictions, heavy vehicles will be allowed in commercial and office and institutional districts provided all of the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The size of the business parcel exceeds one acre; 
(2)  Heavy vehicles are parked in those areas designated and posted as loading zones and/or loading docks; 
A minimum of two signs, each a minimum of 18 inches by 24 inches, must be posted in the immediate area of the loading zone and/or loading dock to advise operators of heavy vehicles that parking is allowed only in this area. 
In no case will operators of heavy vehicles be allowed to use the loading zones and/or loading docks or the specially designed parking spaces for sleeping or parking overnight. 
However, heavy vehicles, other than recreational vehicles which are addressed in subsection (e), may be parked in the parking lots of hotels and motels provided the operators of these vehicles are registered guests of the hotel or motel and provided they are parked in the designated parking spaces. 
(d)  It shall be lawful for buses owned and/or leased by a recognized, established church, to be parked on property owned and/or leased by that church. Any vehicles and/or equipment, owned and/or leased by any governmental entity, must be properly stored on property owned and/or leased by that governmental entity. These vehicles shall not be placed in such a manner as to violate and/or circumvent any ordinance which is now or will in the future become effective. 
(e)  Recreational vehicles may be parked in the parking lots of business parcels exceeding one acre for a maximum of four hours in a 24-hour period. Overnight stays are considered camping; therefore, parties should use the facilities that are zoned and designed for camping and the provision of sanitary needs. However, recreational vehicles may be parked in the parking lots of hotels and motels provided the operators of these vehicles are registered guests of the hotel or motel. 
(f)  No parking lot in the city, regardless of the zoning district in which it is located, shall be used for camping or overnight stays (any period in excess of four hours in a 24-hour period). 
(Ord. No. 90-02, § 1, 2-27-90; Ord. No. 96-04, § 1, 5-14-96; Ord. No. 99-08, § 1(A), (B), 4-13-99; Ord. No. 2001-11, § 1, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1(A), (B), 5-13-03) 
Sec. 10-1-9. - Sales of vehicles restricted to certain locations. 
It shall be further unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to sell, or attempt to sell, a motor vehicle of any description from any commercial or industrial site not specifically zoned for that purpose. 
Sec. 10-1-10. - Operation of off-road vehicles. 
(a)  Off-road vehicle defined. As used in this section, the term "off-road vehicle" means any motorized vehicle designed for, or capable of, cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland, or other natural terrain,which vehicle is not intended for use predominantly on public roads. It includes, but is not limited to, motorcycles characterized as dirt bikes, four-wheel driver or low-pressure tire vehicles, amphibious machines, ground effect or air cushion vehicles, three- and four-wheel "all terrain" type vehicles, and any other means of transportation deriving power from any source other than muscle or wind. However this term shall not include any motorboat; any military, fire, or law enforcement vehicles; any vehicle used exclusively on airports; farm machinery and farm tractors; self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, for clearing land, for planting crops, for utility services and maintenance, for earth moving, construction or mining; and, self-propelled lawnmowers, snowblowers, garden or lawn tractors, or golf carts; while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes. 
(b)  Restrictions. Any person operating an off-road vehicle under any of the following conditions shall be deemed to be in violation of this section and subject to the penalties provided elsewhere in this Code for ordinance violations. It shall be unlawful to operate an off-road vehicle: 
(1)  Without operative brakes, or without mufflers, or other silencing equipment, which muffler shall meet the standards set by law. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass, or similar device on such vehicle. 
(2)  On any private property within the express written permission of the owner or occupant of the property, or of his agent. Failure to post signs does not imply consent for off-road motor vehicle use on private property. 
(3)  On public property, such as school grounds, park property, playgrounds, public recreational areas, and public golf courses, and like public property, without the express written permission, given by an appropriate official of the proper public authority exercising dominion over such property. 
(4)  In any manner which creates loud or unusual noise, which noise disturbs or interferes with the peace and quiet of other persons. 
(5)  In a careless, reckless or negligent manner which endangers the safety of any person or the property of any person. 
(6)  While under the influence of intoxicating liquors or other beverages, any controlled substances or drugs, including prescription medications or drugs. 
(7)  Unless the operator of the vehicle has attained the age of 16 years. 
(8)  Between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. the following morning, other than on the public highways and byways, if otherwise lawful to do so. No off-road vehicles shall be operated on the public streets, highways and byways unless such vehicle complies with all laws relating to motor vehicles operating upon the streets and highways, etc., of this state. 
(c)  Responsibility of vehicle owner. The owner of any off-road vehicle shall not authorize nor shall the owner permit any other person to operate such vehicle in violation of any of the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Areas of operation. There is not nor shall there be any special or authorized zone or area established or designated by the city as a special recreation zone or area for the operation of "off-road" vehicles. 
(e)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the chief of police of the city to ensure the enforcement of this section at all times, to assure the cessation of nuisances emanating from or created by the types of vehicles herein described, which are found to be operating illegally or in a manner not consistent with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 89-04, §§ 1—5, 4-25-89) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-04, §§ 1—5, adopted Apr. 25, 1989, pertaining to off-road vehicles, did not specifically amend the Code, but has been included herein as § 10-1-10 by the editor. 
Cross reference— Certain vehicles restricted on public property, § 11-1-11; nuisances generally, § 11-2-1 et seq. 
CHAPTER 2. - PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS 

Sec. 10-2-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Chief of police is the Chief of Police of the City of Morrow. 
(b)  Parade is any parade, march, ceremony, demonstration, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
(c)  Parade permit is a permit as required by this chapter. 
(d)  Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2001) 
Sec. 10-2-2. - Permit required. 
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2002) 
Sec. 10-2-3. - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2003) 
Cross reference— Driving through funeral processions, § 10-1-6. 
Sec. 10-2-4. - Application. 
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by the city. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than 48 hours nor more than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct the parade; 
b.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for; on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of that organization; 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade leader and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
d.  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
e.  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
f.  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute the parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles; 
g.  The hours when the parade will start and terminate; 
h.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
i.  The location by streets of any assembly areas for the parade; 
j.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly area or areas; 
k.  The interval of space to be maintained between units of the parade; 
l.  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf; 
m.  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(3)  Late applications. The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than two days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(4)  Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit a fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2004) 
Sec. 10-2-5. - Standards for issuance. 
The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from any other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of the parade will not unreasonably interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment enroute to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays enroute. 
Sec. 10-2-6. - Notice of rejection. 
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within two days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant within two days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of the action, stating the reasons for the denial of the permit or communicate sooner if the date for the parade requires a quicker response. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2006) 
Sec. 10-2-7. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the mayor and council. The appeal shall be taken within two days after notice. The mayor and council shall act upon the appeal within two days after its receipt. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2007) 
Sec. 10-2-8. - Alternative permit. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under, this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2008) 
Sec. 10-2-9. - Notice to city and other officials. 
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The mayor and city manager; 
(2)  The city attorney; 
(3)  The fire chief; and 
(4)  The general manager or responsible head of each public transportation utility, the regular routes of whose vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed parade. 
Sec. 10-2-10. - Contents of permit. 
Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(7)  Any other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2010) 
Sec. 10-2-11. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances of the state and this city. 
(b)  Possession of permit. The parade leader or other person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2011) 
Sec. 10-2-12. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to the effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 9-2012) 
Cross reference— Driving through funeral processions, § 10-1-6. 
Sec. 10-2-13. - Revocation of permit. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon violation of the conditions and directions attached to the permit. 
CHAPTER 3. - MOTORIZED CARTS 

Sec. 10-3-1. - Findings; definition. 
The mayor and council find that all public streets and any future paved recreational paths located within the territorial boundaries of the city and under its jurisdiction are or will be designed and constructed so as to safely permit their use by regular vehicular traffic and also the driving of motorized carts, except as stated elsewhere in this chapter. Motorized carts are defined as those electric and gasoline-powered pleasure carts, commonly called golf carts. These are the only carts authorized for use under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 10-3-2. - Registration/inspection certification. 
(a)  Motorized carts. It shall be the duty of every owner of a motorized cart that is operated over the recreation paths and streets and those areas accessible by the public to register the cart with the city within ten business days of the date of purchase. Two numerical decals shall be issued upon registration. A record of each motorized cart number, along with the name and address of the owner, shall be maintained by the police department. The decals must be affixed to the sides of the cart in such a manner as to be fully visible at all times. The registration fee for motorized carts owned by the city's residents shall be $15.00, and the registration shall be effective until such time as the cart is sold or otherwise disposed of. An annual registration/user fee of $60.00 shall be charged to nonresidents of the city. The nonresident fee is due by January 31 each year until such time as the cart is sold or otherwise disposed of. This nonresident registration/user fee shall be prorated for carts purchased after January 31 of the first calendar year of ownership. Upon occurrence of a sale of the cart to another person who shall operate the cart over the recreation paths and streets of the city, the registration must be transferred to the new owner within ten business days of the change in ownership at a cost of $5.00. If the registration is not transferred within ten business days, a $20.00 penalty will be applied in addition to the $5.00 transfer charge. The cart shall be considered an unregistered cart after the ten business day period. 
(b)  Gasoline carts. 
(1)  Every cart shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation, meeting the following specifications: 
a.  The exhaust system shall include the piping leading from the flange of the exhaust manifold to and including the muffler and exhaust pipes or include any and all parts specified by the manufacturer. 
b.  The exhaust system and its elements shall be securely fastened, including the consideration of missing or broken brackets or hangers. 
c.  The engine and powered mechanism of every cart shall be so equipped, adjusted and tuned as to prevent the escape of excessive smoke or fumes. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any cart to operate or permit the operation of such cart on which any device controlling or abating atmospheric emissions, which is placed on a cart by the manufacturer, to render the device unserviceable by removal, alteration or which interferes with its operation. 
(3)  Every two years, the cart must be inspected by a golf cart dealer holding a valid business license, and the dealer must certify that the exhaust system meets the standards as stated in this chapter. This certification must be presented to the city within ten business days following the end of each two-year period, and the registration shall be renewed for an additional two-year period at no charge. If the certification is not presented within ten business days, the gasoline cart shall be considered an unregistered cart. 
(4)  All gasoline carts must have a dealer certification in order to be registered. No gasoline-powered cart may be registered, renewed or transferred without dealer certification. 
(c)  Rental carts. Cart dealers and distributors, as well as other commercial establishments, may rent carts to the public for use on the recreation paths and streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city. Each such establishment renting carts shall be required to register each such rental cart in accordance with subsections (a) and (b) of this section and shall maintain a written record of each person who rents each cart. Renters shall be required to furnish positive identification, shall be provided a copy of this chapter to read, and must be at least 16 years of age and hold a valid motor vehicle driver's license. The registration fee and transfer fees and regulations shall be the same as those in subsections (a) and (b). Carts for temporary use by the city during special events are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(d)  Age, number of registrants limited. Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a motorized cart. Cart registration may be in one person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 10-3-3. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  Those persons who hold a valid motor vehicle driver's license may drive a motorized cart on the recreation paths and/or streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city. 
(b)  Those persons who are 15 years of age or older but do not hold a valid motor vehicle driver's license may drive a motorized cart on the recreation paths and/or streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city if they are accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(c)  No person under the age of 15 shall be permitted to drive a motorized cart on the recreation paths and/or streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city under any circumstances. 
(d)  All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the recreation paths, streets and those areas accessible by the public in the city. Where cart paths exist, they must be used in preference to parallel city streets with the exclusion of those cart paths privately owned and maintained by a private golf club as part of the golf courses and not used by the general public. 
(e)  Motorized carts may be operated on sidewalks only under the following conditions: (1) the sidewalk must be designed to accommodate motorized carts; (2) a sign is posted that advises the motorized carts are allowed on the sidewalk; and, (3) the driver must yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians, bicycle riders or others not using a motorized cart. 
(f)  Motorized carts may be operated over those authorized streets, recreational paths and those areas accessible by the public only during daylight hours unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights and taillights. 
(g)  No motorized cart shall be permitted to operate over, along, or across Highway 54 within the boundaries of the city except where authorized and duly marked crossings are provided. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any motorized cart or any other person operating, employing, permitting the use of or otherwise directing the use of such cart to operate or permit the operator of any such cart to drive over the recreation paths, streets or those areas accessible by the public in the city in violation of this chapter. 
(i)  No motorized cart shall be permitted to operate on any street within the city boundaries except where authorized and duly marked crossings are provided. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 10-3-4. - Recreation path users; authorized. 
Authorized users of asphalt recreation paths and sidewalks are as follows: 
(1)  Pedestrians; 
(2)  Non motorized vehicles; 
(3)  Roller skates, roller blades and skateboarders (daylight only); 
(4)  Registered electric-powered golf carts; 
(5)  Registered gasoline-powered golf carts; 
(6)  Emergency and authorized maintenance vehicles; and 
(7)  Bicycles. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 10-3-5. - Same; prohibited users. 
Prohibited users of recreation paths are as follows: 
(1)  Automobiles and trucks (except authorized maintenance vehicles); 
(2)  Motorcycles; 
(3)  Street and trail motorized bikes or vehicles; 
(4)  Minibikes and mopeds; 
(5)  Horses; 
(6)  Go-carts; 
(7)  Unregistered electric-powered golf carts; and 
(8)  Unregistered gasoline-powered golf carts. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 10-3-6. - Hazardous activities and special rules. 
(a)  Paths are for transportation and public recreation by the various groups of permitted users. No individual or group shall engage in hazardous activities on the paths and streets and those areas accessible by the public. Such hazardous activities, and the special rules pertaining to them, include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Racing of any form, except for special events approved by the city; and 
(2)  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the city. 
(b)  None of the prohibited users in section 10-3-5 shall use the path system or the bridges and/or their underpasses for any purpose whatsoever. 
(c)  Pedestrians, skaters and permitted vehicles shall not loiter or park on recreation path bridges or in underpasses. 
(d)  Normal rules of the road shall apply to the recreation paths. For instance, when approaching oncoming path users, each user shall move to his right side of the path. Passing shall be on the left side of the path. 
(e)  Pedestrians should be given due consideration and reasonable right-of-way by other users of the recreation paths to ensure them safe passage. 
(f)  A warning or announcement shall be given by operators of golf carts and other users of the recreation paths, such as bicyclists and skaters, when approaching pedestrians from the rear. This warning or announcement may be verbal, but it is recommended that bicyclists and golf cart operators equip their vehicles with a warning device such as a horn or bell. Each user of the recreation paths shall be considerate of the safety and welfare of other users, and dangerous conduct will not be tolerated. 
(g)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city also apply to the recreation paths. 
(h)  All litter shall be deposited in the receptacles provided along the recreation paths or retained by the path user for proper disposal later. Littering on the recreation paths shall be subject to twice the fines and penalties as littering on the streets. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 10-3-7. - Liability. 
Each person using the recreation paths is liable for his own actions. Liability insurance coverage varies, and each person operating a golf cart on the recreation paths and public streets and those areas accessible by the public should verify their coverage. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 10-3-8. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the terms of this chapter, except section 10-3-3 (b), (c) or (d), shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8; except that any fine for a littering offense shall be doubled. 
(b)  Any violation of section 10-3-3 (b), (c) or (d) shall be charged against the registered owner of the golf cart, and all fines and penalties shall be levied against the registered owner of the golf cart as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of not less than $50.00; 
(2)  For the second offense, a fine of not less than $100.00; 
(3)  If a third offense is committed within one year of conviction for a second offense, the minimum fine shall be $250.00, and the registered owner's golf cart registration shall be revoked. The registered owner or family member cannot thereafter register a golf cart for use in the city for a period of two years following a third conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
CHAPTER 4. - VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION SERVICES 

Sec. 10-4-1. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Operator shall mean any person, including a sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity, operating vehicle immobilization devices for a vehicle immobilization service. 
State law. Any reference to state law shall be deemed to refer to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and the rules and regulations published annually by the public service commission related to towing. 
Vehicle immobilization device or boot shall mean any mechanical device that is designed or adopted to be attached to a wheel, tire, or other part of a parked motor vehicle so as to prohibit the motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation. 
Vehicle immobilization service shall mean a person, including a sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity, offering services anywhere in the City of Morrow whereby vehicles are immobilized by the installation of a vehicle immobilization device. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07 , § 1, 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-4-2. - Unlawful actions and standard of practice. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to affix a vehicle immobilization device to any vehicle parked in any off-street parking facility, lot or area located on private property within the city, regardless of whether a charge for parking is assessed, unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Signs shall be located at each designated entrance to the parking facility, lot or area where such a device is to be used indicating that parking prohibitions are in effect. Additionally, a sign shall be visible from each and every parking space provided. The wording on such signs shall contain the following information: 
a.  A warning that any vehicle parked thereon which is not authorized to be parked in such area may be subject to use of a vehicle immobilization device or boot. The language on the sign shall include: "Warning: This property owner boots unauthorized vehicles." 
b.  Set forth the maximum fee for removal of the device. 
c.  The phone number of the person or entity responsible for removing the device. 
d.  The name, address and phone number of vehicle immobilization service. 
e.  A statement that no additional fee will be charged for use of cash, credit cards, or debit cards. 
f.  The size of each sign shall be a minimum size of 24 inches by 36 inches. 
g.  Copy (font) height of sign verbiage shall be no less than one and one-half inches. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity affixing a vehicle immobilization device to a vehicle within the city to charge a fee for removal of the device in excess of $50.00. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity affixing a vehicle immobilization device to fail to provide a receipt of payment of the booting fee to the owner, driver, or person in charge of a vehicle. The receipt shall have the following information: the name, address, and phone number of the vehicle immobilization service; and the name and signature of the person who affixed/removed the vehicle immobilization device. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be subject to a vehicle immobilization device and be towed simultaneously. 
(e)  A vehicle immobilization device cannot be affixed to a vehicle and a fee cannot be charged if the driver of the vehicle returns to the vehicle before the installation of the vehicle immobilization device is complete. 
(f)  A vehicle immobilization device shall be removed within one hour of the driver contacting the phone number of the person or entity responsible for removing the device as indicated on the sign visible from the parking space occupied by their vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07 , § 1, 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-4-3. - Permit required. 
No person or entity shall operate any vehicle immobilization service within the city without first having obtained a vehicle immobilization operator's permit. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07 , § 1, 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-4-4. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a vehicle immobilization operator's permit shall make application for the same to the police department. The applicant shall provide the following information: 
(1)  Name, current address and phone number of applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's addresses of residence for the past ten years; 
(3)  Occupational history of applicant; 
(4)  Criminal history of applicant; and 
(5)  Any other information deemed necessary by the city to conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Each applicant shall appear in person at the police department and sign a form allowing for a criminal background check. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07 , § 1, 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-4-5. - Application fee and permit renewal. 
The applicant for a vehicle immobilization operator's permit shall pay to the city such sum as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council when the application is filed. Should the permit be granted, the applicant's permit fee will then be considered as paid until the last day of the issuing month of the following year. Prior to permit expiration, all vehicle immobilization operators who expect to operate in the following year shall make an application for the renewal of their permits. The applicant shall pay an additional fee as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council with each renewal application filed. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07 , § 1, 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-4-6. - Denial, suspension and revocation of permit. 
(a)  The chief of police shall cause an investigation to be made to verify the information provided by the applicant. 
(b)  The chief of police shall determine on the basis of the investigation, and taking into account the requirements of this chapter, whether a vehicle operator's permit should be granted. 
(c)  The chief of police shall immediately notify the applicant of his or her determination and, in the event the application is denied, shall give reasons therefor. 
(d)  The chief of police shall have the authority to suspend or revoke any permit issued under this chapter, provided that ten days' notice and a hearing are afforded to the applicant. 
(e)  A permit may be denied, suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information or omits information requested in the application for a permit. 
(2)  Perjury or false swearing in making any statements under oath, including statements made in connection with an "application for permit" under this chapter. 
(3)  For failure to pay all fees, taxes, penalties or other charges imposed by the provisions of this chapter and of the Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  For failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a permit. 
(5)  For violation of any part of this chapter by the permit holder, his agents, partners, officers, employees or contractors. 
(6)  Conviction of a felony subsequent to the issuance of a permit or within a period of ten years preceding the date of application. 
(7)  Engaging in any unfair or deceptive acts or practices. 
(8)  The violation of any law involving moral turpitude subsequent to the issuance of a permit or within a period of ten years preceding the date of application. 
(f)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the authority to revoke a vehicle immobilization operator's permit when the holder thereof is convicted of a violation of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07 , § 1, 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-4-7. - Transferability. 
Permits issued under this chapter are not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07 , § 1, 8-11-15) 
Sec. 10-4-8. - Content of permit and the posting thereof. 
A vehicle immobilization operator's permit shall bear the name, address and age of the operator. The permit shall also show the name of the operator's employer, shall have thereon a specimen signature of the operator, and shall display a current photograph of the operator. The permit shall be worn by the vehicle immobilization operator and in such a manner as to be in full view while in the performance of vehicle immobilization service activities. 
(Ord. No. 2015-07 , § 1, 8-11-15) 
Title 11 - OFFENSES 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Municipalities are prohibited by law from enacting ordinances covering matters which have been preempted by general law and are prevented from regulating conduct which has been made a violation of any criminal law of the state, O.C.G.A., § 36-35-6(a)(2); Ga. Const. of 1983, Art. III, Sec. VI, Para. IV. 
State Law reference— Abandonment of airtight containers, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-100; fireworks, O.C.G.A., § 25-10-1 et seq.; disorderly houses, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-44; peeping toms, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-61; gambling, O.C.G.A., § 16-12-20 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A., § 16-12-4; criminal trespass, O.C.G.A., § 16-7-21. 

ARTICLE A. - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 

Sec. 11-1-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
(3)  Use direct fighting words toward another, that is, words which by their nature tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace or words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances tend to provoke violate resentment; 
(4)  Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(5)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so; 
(6)  Use any type of profane, vulgar, or lewd language in a public place that is offensive to another which threatens an immediate breach of the peace; 
(7)  Urinate, defecate, or release bodily fluids in any public place, or in the halls or elevators of commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view in the city; 
(8)  Recklessly or knowingly commit any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering, or procession; 
(9)  Obstruct or hinder a code enforcement officer of the City of Morrow by violence, threat of violence, or by fleeing or by any other unlawful means, when such officer has properly identified themselves or is otherwise identifiable as such, and is engaged in the lawful performance of his or her official duties; 
(10)  Communicate, personally, or by telephone or other means of communication, any threats of violence or words tending to cause a breach of the peace to any code enforcement officer of the City of Morrow with the intent of harassing, preventing, or intimidating such officer from the lawful enforcement of the City ordinances. 
(11)  Communicate, personally, or by telephone or other means of communication, any threats of violence or words tending to cause a breach of the peace, to the family of any official, agent, or employee of the City of Morrow with the intent of harassing, threatening, or intimidating such officer from the lawful enforcement of the City ordinances. 
(12)  Give a false name, address or date of birth, or any other information, to code enforcement officers of the City of Morrow in the lawful discharge of his or her official duties with the intent to mislead such officers in any way." 
(Code 1977, § 10-1001; Ord. No. 93-09, § 1, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 2003-09, § 1, 8-12-03; Ord. No. 2017-11 , § 1, 7-11-17) 
State Law reference— Authority to punish disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 11-1-2. - Sleeping in public places. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep on or at the foot of the stairway of any building, sidewalk or alley of the city or on public grounds, or on the private premises of any person without the consent of the person or the persons having control thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1002) 
Sec. 11-1-3. - Responsibility of parents for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the custody of or control of any minor to permit, allow or encourage that minor to violate this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the custody of or control of any minor child under the age of six years, to leave said child unattended in any vehicle or public place for any period of time. 
"Unattended," as used in this section, is defined as not in the immediate presence of a person who has attained the age of at least 12 years. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1003; Ord. No. 94-05, § 1, 6-14-94; Ord. No. 96-01, § 1, 1-9-96) 
Sec. 11-1-4. - Responsibility of proprietors as to minors. 
It shall be unlawful for the proprietor, manager or other person having charge or control of any public or other place to permit, allow or encourage any minor to violate this chapter in or around the business. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1004) 
Sec. 11-1-5. - Discharging firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearms, such as pistols, shotguns, rifles, air guns, BB guns, machine guns, dynamite caps, incendiary devices or other explosives within the corporate limits of the city unless in defense of person; by an officer engaged in the discharge of his official duties; by person or persons engaged in military duties; or with permission of the mayor and council. 
State Law reference— Discharge near public highway or street, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-103. 
Sec. 11-1-6. - Possession of small amounts of marijuana. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  No person alleged to have violated this section shall be allowed to elect to be treated as an ordinance violator other than on the first such offense. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1007) 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of recorder's court in marijuana possession cases, O.C.G.A., § 36-32-6. 
Sec. 11-1-7. - Weapons; knives, razors and ice picks regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess or carry upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks or in any public place in the city, any of the following implements unless same are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for harmful use: 
(1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle. 
(2)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which, when open, projects from the handle more than two inches. 
(3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which, when open, projects from the handle more than three inches. This is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives and/or knives which do not close and any type knife with the blade open. 
(4)  Any razor or razor blade. 
(5)  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point, except this shall not apply to any person delivering ice. 
Sec. 11-1-8. - Open wells and excavations. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or person to permit any open well or hazardous excavation to remain or exist on the property under the control of the owner, occupant or person. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1009) 
Sec. 11-1-9. - False alarms. 
No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm for police assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such an act. 
State Law reference— False reports of crimes, O.C.G.A., § 16-10-26; fires, O.C.G.A., § 16-10-27; public alarms, O.C.G.A., § 16-10-28; ambulance service, O.C.G.A., § 16-10-29. 
Cross reference— Charges for excessive false alarms, § 4-1-5. 
Sec. 11-1-10. - Maintaining standards of neighborhood; maintaining standards of business establishment; prohibition of keeping junk, abandoned appliances, inoperative vehicles, and other equipment on property. 
(a)  In order to eliminate unsightly, unhealthy or dangerous situations, and in order to protect property values and to enhance the beauty of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to own, rent, lease or be in possession of any premises, dwelling unit or other structure, place or vacant lot wherein the property is permitted to deteriorate in appearance or condition so as to be degrading to the surrounding premises. 
(b)  Conditions such as having tall grass, weeds and bushes, other undergrowth, and trash or debris of any type; the keeping of dilapidated furniture, appliances, machinery, bicycles and other toys, equipment including automobiles which are either in a wholly or partially wrecked, junked, dismantled and/or in an inoperative condition, shall be declared to be unsightly, unkempt, degrading and in violation of this section of the Code. 
(c)  Following conviction for violation of this section, the city may, at its option, proceed to remedy the unsightly, unhealthy or dangerous situation and accomplish the necessary work. The owner or occupant, or both, shall be liable for the actual cost of such work. 
(d)  Furniture, appliances, machinery or equipment, including automobiles, as hereinabove defined, which remain on the same property for a period of 30 days after either a plea or a finding of guilty shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the chief of police and shall be disposed of by destruction or sale at the owner's expense. Collection for reimbursement shall be achieved by the city manager, or his representative, by invoicing the owner for payment. Failure to pay such invoice shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 96-04, 5-14-96) 
Sec. 11-1-11. - Certain vehicles restricted on public property. 
No person shall operate any unauthorized vehicle, such as any type of powered vehicle, motor scooter, motorcycle, go-cart, moped, racer, cart, and powered bicycles on the grounds and/or property of any schools of the city or on nonpaved areas of public property not intended for motorized vehicles. 
Cross reference— Operation of off-road vehicles, § 10-1-10. 
Sec. 11-1-12. - Curfew. 
(a)  Between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m., it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 16 years to be on the public streets, alleys, sidewalks and parks of the city, or in or around any stores, stations or establishments within the city, unless accompanied by the parent, guardian or other adult responsible person vested with custody or control of the child, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business, directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the legal care and custody of the minor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the care, custody or control of any person under 16 years of age, to allow the latter to violate subsection (a) above. 
Sec. 11-1-13. - Noise; creating unnecessary noise. 
(a)  The creating of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise within the limits of the city is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity, or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any reasonable person, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare, is prohibited. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises and noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive; namely: 
(1)  Horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or any other vehicle, while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or, if in motion, only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any such device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound or the sounding of such device for an unnecessary or unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Musical instruments and radios. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any person in the vicinity, except this section, shall not apply to schools of music between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  Voices. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of reasonable persons in any hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Noisy vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise, or the starting of any such vehicle from a stopped position in such a manner as to create a squealing sound. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authority. 
(6)  Exhausts. To discharge into the open air the exhaust of any stationary steam engine, stationary internal-combustion engine, motor vehicle or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Construction work. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in any residential district or section, the excavation of streets and highways in any residential district or section, other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in cases of urgent necessity, and then only with a permit from the city manager, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed 60 days while the emergency continues. If the city manager should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he or she shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the city manager may grant permission for the work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(8)  On streets of institutions requiring quiet . The creation of any excessive noise on the street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings or sessions thereof. 
(9)  Loudspeakers on vehicles. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other purposes. 
(10)  Animals. The keeping of any dog, cat, bird, or any other animal which, by causing frequent or long-continued noise, would disturb the comfort or repose of a reasonable person and in fact does disturb the comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity. 
(c)  None of the foregoing terms or prohibitions shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged upon necessary public business; or 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways, by or on behalf of the city, county or state, at night, when the public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day; nor shall the same apply to work performed by public utility companies under like conditions and circumstances, or when there is urgent necessity therefor. 
(d)  The prohibitions shall not be applicable to any parade, celebration, or performance for which a written permit has been obtained prior thereto from the city manager. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to use, maintain or operate loudspeakers, sound trucks, amplifiers or other mechanical or electrical devices for increasing the volume of sound, in a noxious manner, upon the streets, sidewalks, parks or other public places of the city. 
(f)  No person may use, operate, or maintain a loudspeaker or other sound-amplifying device without first securing a permit from the city. The city may attach conditions to the permit limiting the duration, location, amplification level or other conditions affecting the public peace and welfare. It shall be a violation of this code to fail to comply with any condition attached to such permit. 
Sec. 11-1-14. - Transport of building materials; proof of ownership required, exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or transport any building materials by means of any vehicle between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless the driver of the vehicle has in his possession documents establishing the ownership of such building materials or the vehicle is owned by a governmental entity or public utility and is operated by an authorized employee of such governmental entity or utility, or the vehicle is subject to regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission or the Interstate Commerce Commission. As used in this section, "building materials" shall mean and include any new materials customarily used in building or construction work and which have a reasonable fair market value in excess of $100. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1015) 
Sec. 11-1-15. - Extended parking on city property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or otherwise leave unattended, an automobile, motorcycle, bicycle, or other transportation medium on city property overnight or for other extended periods of time. Parking or leaving such vehicles unattended at parks and playgrounds is expressly prohibited under all circumstances. Exception will be made only for limited "car pooling" within the resources of the city, and only then within specifically designated areas of the municipal complex. Persons who desire to use the parking spaces provided for "car pooling" must register with the chief of police, giving name, address of owner, registration number, and other information as deemed appropriate to identify the automobile and owner. Spaces will be provided on a first-come-first-served basis, based on the availability of spaces allocated for that purpose. 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicle act, O.C.G.A., § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 11-1-16. - Selling from miniwarehouse units prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter, trade, or otherwise negotiate business from any unit of a miniwarehouse facility. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1017(b)) 
Sec. 11-1-17. - Escort services and convention hostesses prohibited. 
(a)  The business of providing escort services or convention hostesses in the city is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, escort service and convention hostess shall be defined as any business, occupation or trade which provides company or companionship, whether male or female, for payment or receipt of a fee or remuneration of any kind. 
(Code 1977, § 10-1018; Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 5-25-93) 
Sec. 11-1-18. - Loitering; prohibited. 
(a)  Loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, walking about aimlessly, or sitting on cars, trucks, or other vehicles, and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter within the city on private or public property in such a manner as to: 
(1)  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
(2)  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
(3)  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
(4)  Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place; or 
(5)  Be at a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances which would warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property within the vicinity. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this subsection, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this subsection if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(b)  Relocating from one position to another and regrouping or generally "hanging around" shall be "prima facie" evidence of intent to continue an unlawful act under this section and shall constitute a new offense after having been dispersed or cited for an offense under these provisions. 
(c)  Loitering and prowling among parked vehicles. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or prowl on any property upon which there are parked vehicles. It shall be evidence of an accused person's intention to violate this subsection if said person has been observed: 
a.  Attempting entry into the vehicle of another; 
b.  Tampering with the vehicle of another, which shall mean any unauthorized interference with the vehicle or any part or accessory thereof or the contents therein; 
c.  Peering or looking into the vehicle of another; 
d.  Pulling on the door handle of the vehicle of another; 
e.  Attempting to open the hood of the vehicle of another; 
f.  Attempting to open the trunk of the vehicle of another; 
g.  Lying underneath the vehicle of another; or 
h.  Otherwise acting in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(2)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer; manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object that may be utilized for entry into an automobile or is otherwise prohibited by law; removes or attempts to remove anything of value from the vehicle; refuses to identify himself; or otherwise causes damage to the vehicle. 
(3)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to issuing any citation or effectuating any arrest for an offense under this subsection, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this subsection if the Law Enforcement Officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10 , § 1, 6-27-17) 
Sec. 11-1-19. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear in an intoxicated condition on any public property, on private property open to the public, or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own, other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant. Such condition must be made manifest by boisterousness or by indecent condition or acting or by vulgar, profane or unbecoming language, or loud and violent discourse of the person so intoxicated. 
State Law reference— Authority to proscribe public drunkenness, O.C.G.A., § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 11-1-20. - Public consumption of alcohol. 
(a)  Drinking of alcoholic beverages on any public property or any private property open to the public but not licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person at any time to drink any alcoholic beverages upon or within any parked vehicle upon parking lots or streets in the city. 
Sec. 11-1-21. - Alcoholic beverage offenses involving minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverage in the city or for any person to purchase any alcoholic beverage for and/or furnish or sell such to a minor. The holder of a pouring permit who is convicted of purchasing any alcoholic beverage for and/or furnishing or selling such to a minor shall have his pouring permit revoked for 30 days for the first offense, and will not be allowed to serve, sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage at any licensed establishment in the city during that time. Upon a second conviction, the holder of the pouring permit will have his pouring permit revoked for 90 days, and will not be allowed to serve, sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage at any licensed establishment in the city during that time. For a third conviction, the holder of the pouring permit will have his pouring permit revoked permanently and shall not be allowed to serve, sell or dispense any alcoholic beverage in the city subject to the provisions of section 9-2-50 of this Code. 
Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any minor to misrepresent his age in an attempt to purchase, possess or drink any alcoholic beverage in the city. 
(b)  No licensee hereunder shall employ any minor in his establishment; provided, however, that in restaurants and hotels minors may be employed where their duties are not in any way involved with the preparation, sale or service of any alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "minor" shall mean a person who has not attained the age at which consumption of alcoholic beverages is allowed by state law, as now or hereinafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 99-04, § 2, 2-9-99) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, § 9-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 11-1-22. - Sale of ice cream upon streets prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or operating any motor or other vehicle from which ice cream or other milk byproducts are sold to operate the motor or other vehicle upon the streets of the city for the purpose of selling ice cream or other milk byproducts from the vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 8-4001) 
Sec. 11-1-23. - Fortunetelling, phrenology, astrology, clairvoyance, palmistry, and kindred practices; prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice fortunetelling, phrenology, astrology, clairvoyance, palmistry or any other kindred practices in the city where a charge is made or a donation accepted for such services. 
(Ord. No. 85-02, 7-23-85) 
Sec. 11-1-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-13, § 1, adopted Oct. 13, 2009, repealed § 11-1-24 which pertained to resisting arrest and derived from Ord. No. 92-06, § 1, adopted April 28, 1992. 
Sec. 11-1-25. - Unwanted person on premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the violation of unwanted person on premises. A person commits the violation of unwanted person on premises when he intentionally enters or remains upon the land or premises of another person after receiving notice from the owner or rightful occupant that such entry or presence is forbidden. 
(Ord. No. 92-06, § 1, 4-28-92) 
Sec. 11-1-26. - Careless driving. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle anywhere within this municipality in a careless and imprudent manner, without due regard for road and traffic conditions, or the safety of persons or property or who operates a motor vehicle in a manner that diverts the attentiveness of the driver of any other motor vehicle, bicyclist or pedestrian whether on public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 93-09, § 1, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 11-1-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-13, § 2, adopted Oct. 13, 2009, repealed § 11-1-27 which pertained to hindering an investigation and derived from Ord. No. 94-10, § 1, adopted Sept. 13, 1994 and Ord. No. 2001-08, § 1, adopted May 8, 2001. 
Sec. 11-1-28. - Retail establishments employing loss prevention officers. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this ordinance is to require that retail establishments which employ loss prevention officers register the names and certain identifying information concerning the loss prevention officers with the police department. The registration of these officers would aid the police department in responding to calls in which loss prevention officers have offenders in custody; also, it would greatly assist in the prosecution of offenders involved in thefts and fraud from retail stores in the city. 
(b)  Loss prevention officer, defined. [A loss prevention officer is] a private sector employee hired by a retail establishment in the city to detect and prevent losses involving thefts and fraud from such retail establishments. 
(c)  Registration of loss prevention officers. Retail establishments in the city that employ loss prevention officers shall register the names and certain identifying information about those officers with the police department. Information required includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
Full name; 
Store of employment, position, assignment, duties; 
Employment date; 
Supervisor/manager; 
Home address; 
Home telephone; 
Date of birth; 
Social Security number. 
The retail stores are responsible for keeping the registration information up-to-date with the police department. 
(d)  Registration information to be kept confidential by the police department. The registration information shall be confidential to the extent allowed under the Georgia Open Records Act and shall be retained in a separate database from a police incident report. 
(Ord. No. 97-06, 8-26-97) 
Sec. 11-1-29. - Interference with operation of school buses. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
School bus shall be defined as any vehicle designed for the transportation of students of a school system, owned or operated by a public school system of this state, whether or not the bus is occupied by passengers. 
Students shall be defined as authorized passengers of a school bus as defined above, whether or not they are enrolled in a public school system of this state. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this Code to: 
(1)  Impede or obstruct the movement of a school bus or the boarding or discharge of students from a school bus. 
(2)  Engage in any conduct on or about a school bus, or in the presence of students on a school bus, boarding or being discharged from a school bus, which may reasonably be seen as likely to be immediately detrimental to the peace, good order or safety of the students. 
(3)  To board a school bus without permission for the purpose of engaging in any conduct which may reasonably be seen as likely to be immediately detrimental to the peace, good order or safety of the students. 
(4)  To knowingly follow a school bus at such a time and manner that a reasonable person would believe would create in the driver or students of the school bus an apprehension of either the students or driver suffering an assault or battery. 
(Ord. No. 97-09, § 1, 12-9-97) 
Sec. 11-1-30. - Eviction; obstructing right-of-way. 
(a)  Any personal property placed on the right-of-way following an eviction shall be removed within 24 hours of physical eviction unless an extension of time is requested on behalf of the evicted tenant. For purposes of this section, such property is deemed abandoned property two hours following eviction unless the landlord by contract specifies a shorter time. If the property is not removed within 24 hours, the city may commence removal and cite the property owner. The penalty assessed shall be 125 percent of the cost the city incurs in removing the property. 
(b)  Obstruction of street or right-of-way. 
(1)  No person shall place or cause to place in any street and/or sidewalk: debris, rubbish, irrigation water, boxes, displays, signs, poles, goods, merchandise or any other object so as to impede and/or endanger traffic on streets and/or sidewalks. 
(2)  No person shall be permitted to erect any drain, gutter, downspout, valley, flat or sloping roof of any character that will in any manner drain or shed water on any sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 2000-12, § 1, 9-26-00) 
Sec. 11-1-31. - Smoke-free Air Act of 2006. 
(a)  [Purpose and intent.] Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke (also known as environmental tobacco smoke) is a cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. The National Cancer Institute determined in 1999 that secondhand smoke is responsible for the early deaths of up to 65,000 Americans annually. (National Cancer Institute (NCI), "Health effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke: the report of the California Environmental Protection Agency. Smoking and Tobacco Control Monograph 10," Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, National Cancer Institute (NCI), August 1999.) 
The Public Health Service's National Toxicology Program has listed secondhand smoke as a known carcinogen. (Environmental Health Information Service (EHIS), "Environmental tobacco smoke: first listed in the Ninth Report on Carcinogens," U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), Public Health Service, National Toxicology Program, 2000.)A study of hospital admissions for acute myocardial infarction in Helena, Montana before, during, and after a local law eliminating smoking in workplaces and public places was in effect, has determined that laws to enforce smoke-free workplaces and public places may be associated with a reduction in morbidity from heart disease. (Sergeant, Richard P.; Shepard, Robert M.; Glantz, Stanton A., "Reduced incidence of admissions for myocardial infarction associated with public smoking ban: before and after study," British Medical Journal 328: 977-980, April 24, 2004.) Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. (California Environmental Protection Agency (Cal EPA), "Health effects of exposure to environmental tobacco smoke", Tobacco Control 6(4): 346-353, Winter, 1997.) 
Accordingly, the Morrow City Council finds and declares that the purposes of this section are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment; and 
(2)  To guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air and to recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, whenever used in this section, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
(1)  "Bar" means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges and cabarets. 
(2)  "Business" means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered. 
(3)  "Employee" means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
(4)  "Employer" means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
(5)  "Enclosed area" means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
(6)  "Health care facility" means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
(7)  "Place of employment" means an area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(8)  "Public place" means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(9)  "Restaurant" means an eating establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
(10)  "Retail tobacco store" means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
(11)  "Service line" means an indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
(12)  "Shopping mall" means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
(13)  "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
(14)  "Sports arena" means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
(c)  Application of section to city-owned facilities. All enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the City of Morrow, shall be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Prohibition of smoking in public places. Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the City of Morrow, including but not limited to, the following places: 
(1)  Galleries, libraries and museums. 
(2)  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to, professional offices, banks, laundromats, hotels, and motels. 
(3)  Bars. 
(4)  Educational facilities, both public and private. 
(5)  Elevators. 
(6)  Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance. 
(7)  Health facilities. 
(8)  Licensed child care and adult day care facilities. 
(9)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(10)  Polling places. 
(11)  Public transportation facilities. 
(12)  Restaurants. 
(13)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas. 
(14)  Retail stores. 
(15)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the city or a political subdivision of the state, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of Morrow. 
(16)  Service lines. 
(17)  Shopping malls. 
(18)  Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas. 
(e)  Prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
(1)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within places of employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(2)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this section and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(f)  Prohibition of smoking in outdoor arenas and stadiums. Smoking shall be prohibited in the seating areas of all outdoor arenas, stadiums, and amphitheaters and gathering places. 
(g)  Reasonable distance. Smoking is prohibited within a reasonable distance of five feet outside an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited, so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means. 
(h)  Where smoking not regulated. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than 20 percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(3)  Retail tobacco stores; provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this section. 
(4)  Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted; provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this section. 
(5)  Outdoor areas of places of employment except those already covered by the provisions of section (not including city-owned property). 
(i)  Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of this section is posted. 
(j)  No retaliation. No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any rights afforded by this section or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this section. 
(k)  Enforcement. 
(1)  This section shall be enforced by an authorized designee. 
(2)  Notice of the provisions of this section shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the City of Morrow. 
(3)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint may initiate enforcement with the police department. 
(4)  The fire department, or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this section. 
(5)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this section shall inform persons violating this section of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(6)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this section. 
(7)  In addition to the remedies provided city manager or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this section may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(l)  Violations and penalties. 
(1)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.00. 
(2)  A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
a.  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for a first violation. 
b.  A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within one year. 
c.  A fine not exceeding $500.00 for each additional violation within one year. 
(3)  In addition to the fines established, violation of this section by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(4)  Each day on which a violation of this section occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(m)  Other applicable laws. This section shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(n)  Liberal construction. This section shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes. 
(o)  Severability. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this section or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this section which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this section are declared to be severable. 
(p)  Effective date. This section shall be effective 30 days from and after the date of its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 2006-09, 8-22-06) 
Sec. 11-1-32. - Outdoor watering of landscape. 
(1)  Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(a)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aqua cultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(b)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable state guidelines; 
(c)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(d)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(e)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(f)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(g)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(h)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(i)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(j)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(k)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(l)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(m)  Hydro seeding. 
(2)  Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this chapter. 
(b)  The City of Morrow's code enforcement and police department shall be the enforcement authority for this chapter. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-26, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-10) 
Secs. 11-1-33—11-1-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-09, §§ 1—6, adopted April 27, 2004, repealed the former Art. B., §§ 11-1-41—11-1-53, and enacted a new Art. B, §§ 11-1-41—11-1-46, as set out herein. The former Art. B pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1977, § 10-1019(a)—(c), (e)—(r); Ord. No. 91-10, § 1, adopted Sept. 10, 1991; Ord. No. 2000-19, § 1, adopted Jan. 9, 2000. 
State Law reference— Authority of local governments to prohibit littering, O.C.G.A., § 16-7-48. 

Sec. 11-1-41. - General provisions. 
(a)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the City of Morrow of any and all littering on public or private property; and, 
(2)  Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the City of Morrow and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(b)  Applicability. This article shall apply to all public and private property within the City of Morrow. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-09, § 1, 4-27-04) 
Sec. 11-1-42. - Definitions. 
Authorized private receptacle is a container of watertight construction with a tight fitting lid or cover capable of preventing the escape of contents within. Such receptacles shall have handles or other means for safe and convenient handling and be of such size or sufficient capacity to hold all litter generated between collection periods and shall be in compliance with the regulations promulgated by the city manager. 
Construction sites means any private or public property upon which repairs to existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing structures is taking place. 
Handbill is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed matter of literature which is not delivered by United States mail, including but not limited to such as: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A., § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
Loading and unloading docks means any dock space or area used by any moving vehicle for the purpose of receiving, shipping and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons located on or adjacent to any stream, river or land. 
Newspaper means a paper that is printed and distributed, usually daily, weekly, or periodically, and that contains news, articles of opinion, features, and advertising. 
Private property means all property including, but not limited to, vacant land or any land, building or other structure designed or used for residential, commercial, business, industrial, institutional, or religious purposes, together with any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, fence, porch, steps, vestibule, mailbox and other structure appurtenant thereto. 
Public property is any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways, lakes, rivers, watercourses or fountains, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings. 
Public receptacles means any receptacle provided by or authorized by the city. 
Vehicle is every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon land or water, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 2004-09, § 2, 4-27-04) 
Sec. 11-1-43. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or, 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2004-09, § 3, 4-27-04) 
Sec. 11-1-44. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2004-09, § 4, 4-27-04) 
Sec. 11-1-45. - Handbills, and other advertising material. 
(a)  Throwing or distributing handbills and other advertising material in public places. No person shall throw, scatter or cast any kind of handbill or other advertising material in or upon any public place within the city; provided however, it shall not be unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute handbills or other advertising material in any public place to any person willing to accept such handbill or other advertising material. Such person, however, will be responsible for proper disposal of such handbill or other advertising material. 
(b)  Placing handbills or other advertising material in vehicles. No person shall deposit, fasten, throw, scatter or cast any handbill or other advertising material in or upon any vehicle. 
(c)  Premises posted against handbills or other advertising material distribution. No person shall place any handbill or other advertising material upon any premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near any entrance thereof a sign bearing notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of said premises do not desire to have any such handbills or other advertising material left upon said premises. 
(d)  Manner of handbill or other advertising material distribution on private premises. No person shall place any handbill or other advertising material in or upon private premises except by handing or transmitting any such handbill or other advertising material directly to any other parson then present in or upon the private premises. Mailboxes may not be used when prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations. 
(e)  Cleanup. Any person who voluntarily receives handbills or other advertising material shall be responsible for disposition so as not to litter. Additionally, the responsibility is extended to the owner, lessor, lessee, and occupant of any private property where distribution is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2004-09, § 5, 4-27-04) 
Sec. 11-1-46. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, handbills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be an irrefutable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,200.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and 
(3)  a.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and, 
(4)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(d)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-09, § 6, 4-27-04) 
CHAPTER 2. - NUISANCES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisance abatement powers of city, City Charter, § 1.03(1); off-road vehicles nuisance provisions, § 10-1-10. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A., Title 41. 

Sec. 11-2-1. - Definition. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
(12)  Obstruction of a storm water drainage system or drainage easement. 
(13)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(14)  Shopping carts. It is unlawful for any person to remove shopping carts from any business and its parking area. It is unlawful for any person to abandon a shopping cart upon any public street, sidewalk, driveway, way or parking lot, other than the lot belonging to the owner of the cart. 
The owner of the store in which a shopping cart is used shall post a printed copy of this Code section in three prominent locations in type no smaller than 12 points. 
(Ord. No. 2001-07, § 1, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 2005-05, § 1, 7-12-05) 
Sec. 11-2-2. - Jurisdiction to try and abate. 
The recorder's court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
State Law reference— Jurisdiction of recorder's court to determine existence of nuisance and order its abatement, O.C.G.A., § 41-2-5. 
Sec. 11-2-3. - Complaint of nuisance; hearing. 
(a)  Any official or inhabitant of the city may direct a complaint of nuisance to the police department which shall investigate and may place the complaint on the recorder's court docket for a hearing upon the basis of the investigation. The recorder's court after a 10 day notice to the party involved, shall hold a hearing thereon and upon finding that a nuisance does exist shall issue an order to the owner, agent in control of or tenant in possession, stating that a nuisance has been found to exist and that the nuisance must be abated within so many hours or days as the recorder shall deem reasonable, having consideration for the nature of the nuisance and its effect on the public. 
(b)  Animal control officers, license and building inspectors shall and may also receive complaints, investigate the same and place on the court docket such complaints in the same manner as police officers. 
Sec. 11-2-4. - Abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, in the opinion of the recorder that it must be immediately abated, the recorder may issue an order to the chief of police directing the nuisance to be abated. The chief of police in such case, shall keep a record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
Sec. 11-2-5. - Nuisance per se, exception; summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
Sec. 11-2-6. - Offense; penalty. 
It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Failure to abate nuisance after order to do so is a state crime, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6. 
CHAPTER 3. - ANIMAL CONTROL 
ARTICLE A. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-3-1. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Animal and Fowl Control Ordinance of the City of Morrow." 
(Code 1977, § 10-3001) 
Sec. 11-3-2. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
Dog shall mean any member of the canine genus. 
License tag shall mean a metal tag issued by the rabies control officer at the time of vaccination as evidence of vaccination, and bearing the words "GA. _______ (year issued)" and the license number. 
Pound shall mean the facilities operated by the rabies control officer for the confinement of dogs impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
Rabies control officer shall mean the department head of the county rabies control department or an authorized representative. 
Vaccination shall mean the injection by an authorized person of a specified dose of antirabic vaccine into the body of a dog, which vaccine shall have the United States Government license number approval stamped on the label of the vaccine container and which vaccine has been approved by the rabies control officer. 
(Code 1977, § 10-3002) 
Sec. 11-3-3. - City designated bird sanctuary. 
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city shall be, and the same is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1977, § 10-3003) 
Sec. 11-3-4. - Trapping, hunting, molesting birds prohibited; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests, or wild fowl nests; provided, that if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or proper in the opinion of the property city authorities, then in such event, city authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, or Humane Society, or as many of these clubs as are found to exist in the city after having given at least three days' actual notice of time and place of the meeting to the representatives of the clubs. 
(b)  If, as a result of the meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate the nuisance, then the birds may be destroyed in any numbers and in any manner as is deemed advisable by the city authorities under the supervision of the chief of police of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 10-3004) 
Sec. 11-3-5. - Fowl running at large, forbidden. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully permit any duck, goose, chicken or other domestic fowl belonging to the person to run at large or upon the premises of any other person within the city, without the consent of the owner or tenant in possession of the premises. 
(Code 1977, § 10-3005) 
Sec. 11-3-6. - Keeping of cows, other animals or fowl; sales and barter prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any cow or cows within the city for any purpose or for any length of time, except under the following conditions: 
(1)  For each cow there shall be provided a space of at least 20,000 square feet and not more than one cow shall be kept in that space; it being the purpose and intent of this section to require an area for the keeping of cows based upon 20,000 square feet per cow multiplied by the number of cows kept in the event more than one cow shall be kept. 
(2)  No cow or cows shall be kept in a barn, space or stable for that purpose which is nearer than 50 feet from any residence other than the owner's. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the city (other than on land zoned agricultural) any cow or cows; animals or fowl for the purpose of barter or sale. 
Sec. 11-3-7. - Uninoculated dogs or cats prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, maintain or harbor any dog or cat four months of age or over unless the animal has been vaccinated and holds a current, unexpired license tag and certificate issued by the county department of health or similar agency from another county of the state. 
(b)  Each animal which has been so licensed shall, at all times, wear its license tag on a collar or harness in a manner approved by the rabies control officer. 
(c)  A dog or cat less than four months of age shall not be required to be licensed or vaccinated as is otherwise required by subsection (a), but the animal shall be confined to its owner's premises. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having charge of any dog or cat brought into the city from outside the city to have the animal vaccinated and to obtain a license tag and certificate within 14 days from the date of entry; however, when the owner or person having charge of such an animal produces evidence satisfactory to the rabies control officer that the animal has been vaccinated with a currently valid rabies inoculation by a person duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine, the dog or cat shall not be required to be vaccinated again until the expiration date of its most recent vaccination, but the owner of the dog or cat shall obtain a license tag and certificate therefor. 
Sec. 11-3-8. - Running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog or other animal to permit the animal to run at large or upon any of the streets or public places of the city. 
Note— See the editor's note following § 11-3-8.1. 
Sec. 11-3-8.1. - Vicious animals; restraint required, evidence of viciousness. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person to maintain, harbor, raise, own, house, or hold within the city, a manifestly vicious animal unless the same is securely, but humanely, confined or restrained in such a manner as to prevent such animal from attacking or biting a person or other animal. 
(b)  It shall be prima facie evidence of the viciousness of the animal, if it, without provocation, fiercely attacks or bites a person or other animal not on the owner's premises. 
(Ord. No. 89-02, § 1, 3-14-89) 
Editor's note— Provisions pertaining to vicious animals set out as § 11-3-8(b) and (c) have been deleted as being superseded by Ord. No. 89-02, § 1, adopted Mar. 14, 1989, and included herein as § 11-3-8.1 in order to facilitate reference and indexing. 
Cross reference— Dangerous dogs and other animals, § 11-3-26 et seq. 
Sec. 11-3-9. - Noisy animals; noxious odors. 
No person shall permit a dog or other animal over which he or she has custody or control to bark, howl, whine, or emit any noises whatsoever in a continuous manner so as to disturb passersby or the occupancy of any nearby property. Further, no person shall permit the existence of noxious odors from animal excretion, of any type, to passersby or occupants of nearby property. 
Sec. 11-3-10. - Poisoning animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to put out or cause to be put out any poison within the city for the killing of any dog or other domestic animal. 
(Code 1977, § 10-3011) 
Sec. 11-3-11. - Cruelty to animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to overload, cruelly treat, maim, bruise, deprive of necessary sustenance, ill use, or in any manner whatsoever torture or abuse any animal. 
(Code 1977, § 10-3012) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; cruelty generally, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 11-3-12. - Duty to report violations and give testimony in court; duty to report rabies cases. 
(a)  Any person who has personal knowledge of a violation of any part of this article shall notify the police department and shall also make known his willingness to appear and give testimony concerning any such violation in the recorder's court of the city upon being summoned thereto at the time and place specified in such summons. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person knowing of a rabid dog or other rabid animal, or of an animal showing symptoms of rabies to report immediately to the county rabies control officer and give as much additional pertinent information as possible. 
(Code 1977, § 10-3013) 
Sec. 11-3-13. - Control of dogs. 
Any person owning, controlling, or harboring a dog within the incorporated areas of the city shall confine the dog by means of a line, chain or rope of such length that the dog is confined within the owner's property at all times or he shall keep the dog within any enclosure surrounded by an adequate fence or within a house. All dogs located on property other than that of their owner or controller shall be confined by means of a leash not more than six feet in length and controlled by a competent person, commensurate with the size of the dog. 
(Code 1977, § 10-3014) 
Cross reference— Vicious animals, § 11-3-8.1; dangerous dogs, § 11-3-26 et seq. 
Sec. 11-3-14. - Impoundment. 
The following animals in the incorporated areas of the city may be impounded by the rabies control officer or any city police officer. All rules and regulations of the rabies control officer regarding notice to owner, redemption of impounded animals, and disposition of unredeemed animals are applicable to animals impounded from the incorporated areas of the city. 
(1)  Dogs or cats running at large; 
(2)  Dogs or cats, the ownership of which is unknown; 
(3)  Vicious dogs not confined as required by section 11-3-8.1. 
(4)  Dogs or cats which have bitten a person or animal or which have been bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies; 
(5)  Dogs or cats having an expired license tag; 
(6)  Dogs or cats not currently vaccinated for rabies and properly tagged; 
(7)  Dogs or cats suspected of having rabies. 
Cross reference— Dog control officer, § 11-3-26 et seq.; confiscation of dangerous animals, § 11-3-32. 
Sec. 11-3-15. - Removal of excrement. 
(a)  Any person owning, possessing, harboring, or having care, charge, control or custody of a dog must remove any excrement left by that dog on any sidewalk, gutter, or street, to include the right-of-way along a residential front yard, lot, public park or other area traversed by the public. The dog waste shall be immediately removed from areas traversed by the public by placing said matter in a sealed container and thereafter disposing of it in a trash receptacle or refuse container. In areas along the city's trail system, dog waste shall be removed from the trail and disposed of such that it is sufficiently away from areas traversed by the public and in such a way as to not disturb those using the trail. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to visually impaired persons who have the charge, control or use of a guide dog. 
(Ord. No. 2002-06, § 1, 7-23-02) 
Sec. 11-3-16. - Penalties for violation of this article. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500.00 and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each and every violation of the provisions of this article constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2002-06, § 1, 7-23-02) 
Secs. 11-3-17—11-3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - DANGEROUS DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Provisions of Ord. No. 89-02, §§ 2—4, adopted Mar. 14, 1989, pertaining to dangerous dogs and other animals, have been included in Ch. 3 as Art. B, §§ 11-3-26—11-3-32 for purposes of classification. 
Cross reference— Vicious animals, restraint required, § 11-3-8.1; control of dogs generally, § 11-3-13. 

Sec. 11-3-26. - Authority; definitions and construction. 
This article is enacted pursuant to and in reliance on O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq., and all terms shall be defined and construed in accordance therewith. 
(Ord. No. 89-02, § 2, 3-14-89) 
Sec. 11-3-27. - Appointment of a dog control officer; conduct of hearings; inter-local cooperation. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall designate a dog control officer who shall perform the duties and exercise the powers assigned to that position by the dangerous dog act. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall conduct the hearings as required and provided for under O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. 
(c)  The dog control officer, together with the governing authority of the city shall work with the animal control board of the county, as well as the county health department, where applicable in order that the city accomplishes the intent and purposes of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 89-02, § 3, 3-14-89) 
Sec. 11-3-28. - Investigations by dog control officer. 
The dog control officer may make such investigations and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous dogs, potentially dangers dogs and other animals with similar or the same propensities and their respective owners within the municipal limits. The officer shall have the authority to investigate complaints as part of the process of identifying dangerous dogs and other animals with similar propensities. The dog control officer's authority to investigate shall include the power to enter upon public or private property for periodic inspection. 
(Ord. No. 89-02, § 4(A), 3-14-89) 
Sec. 11-3-29. - Classification of animal as dangerous; procedure, notice. 
When the dog control officer, based on his investigation, classifies a dog or other animal, as a dangerous dog or animal or a potentially dangerous dog or animal, he shall follow the procedures set out in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24; provided that a second notice shall be mailed by regular first class mail, and such notice shall be deemed received three days after it was mailed, in the event the certified notice is not accepted. 
(Ord. No. 89-2, § 4(B), 3-14-89) 
Sec. 11-3-30. - Registration required. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog or other animal, or a potentially dangerous dog or other animal, must secure a certificate of registration in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25. 
(b)  The annual registration fee shall be as adopted by the county. 
(c)  Nonregistration shall be a violation of this article and punishable under general penalties of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 89-02, § 4(C, 1—3), 3-14-89) 
Sec. 11-3-31. - Regulations concerning dangerous animals; public access, limitation re interpretation. 
The dog control officer shall maintain a copy of state and local laws applicable to dangerous animals, including dogs and potentially dangerous dogs which shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours. The dog control officer shall not be authorized to interpret laws nor give advice to owners. 
(Ord. No. 89-02, § 4(C, 4), 3-14-89) 
Sec. 11-3-32. - Confiscation and redemption. 
(a)  Dangerous animals, including dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs are subject to immediate confiscation upon the grounds set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. 
(b)  Confiscated animals shall be taken to such impound facility as shall be designated from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Animal owners shall pay a confiscation fee as adopted by the county and the daily boarding fee as adopted by the county for each day the animal remains in the impound facility. Nonpayment of either fee shall be an offense and shall be punishable under general penalties of this Code. 
(d)  Confiscated animals shall be returned to their owners pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27 and after all fees have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 89-02, § 4, 3-14-89) 
Appendix A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING COMPREHENSIVE PLANNING AND ZONING REGULATIONS FOR THE CITY OF MORROW, GEORGIA AND PROVIDING FOR THE ZONING OR DISTRICTING OF SUCH CITY FOR VARIOUS USES AND OTHER OR DIFFERENT USES PROHIBITED IN SUCH ZONES OR DISTRICTS; TO REGULATE THE USE FOR WHICH SAID ZONES OR DISTRICTS MAY BE SET APART; TO REGULATE THE PLANS FOR DEVELOPMENT AND IMPROVEMENTS ON REAL ESTATE THEREIN; AND PROVIDING FOR THE ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND AMENDMENT OF SAID REGULATIONS AND FOR THE REPEAL OF ALL ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT THEREWITH. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 86-04, adopted Mar. 21, 1986, enacted a new zoning ordinance for the city. With the city's concurrence, such provisions, as subsequently amended, have been included herein as App. A. Amended sections are indicated by a history note parenthetically enclosed following the affected section, and those sections which derive unamended from Ord. No. 86-04 bear no history note. Words appearing in brackets [ ] have been added by the editor for clarity, capitalization has been conformed, and any obvious typographical errors have been corrected without comment. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE 
This ordinance is part of a comprehensive plan designed for the purpose of reducing congestion in the roads and streets by regulating types of use and/or multiple use(s); protection of the development of both urban and non-urban areas; securing safety from fire, flood, erosion and other potential hazards, dangers or damages ensuing or being caused by the lack or absence of such regulations, rules as promulgated herein; providing adequate light and air; promoting the health and general welfare; encouraging a distribution of population and classification of land uses and distribution of land development and utilization as will tend to facilitate economic development and adequate provisions for transportation, communications, roads, airports, water supply, drainage, sanitation, education, recreation and other public requirements throughout the City of Morrow, Georgia. The mayor and city council do hereby ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 94-07, § 1(A), 6-21-94) 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE 
This ordinance shall be known as the 1986 Zoning Ordinance of the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISION FOR OFFICIAL ZONING MAP ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Section 301 - Official zoning map. 
The City of Morrow is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance. 
The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the city manager or designee, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in the 1986 Zoning Ordinance of the City of Morrow, Georgia together with the date of adoption of this Ordinance." 
Section 302 - Amendment to maps. 
If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, changes are made in district boundaries, classifications, conditional use approvals or other matters to be portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council with a notation indicating the date of the approved change. 
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the office of the city manager or designee shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 5-26-09) 
Section 303 - Replacement of official zoning map. 
In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or difficult to interpret because of the nature and number of changes and additions, the city council may adopt a new official zoning map which will supersede the prior official zoning map. Adoption of a new map shall be noticed for public hearing in accordance with the requirements of Article XVII of this ordinance. The new official zoning map should be identified by signature of the mayor, attested by the city manager or designee, and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted November 8, 1973, as part of the 1986 Zoning Ordinance of the City of Morrow, Georgia". 
Unless the previous official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant remaining parts thereof, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 2, 5-26-09) 
Section 304 - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the location of the boundaries of any zoning district in Morrow, Georgia, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a militia district line, a land lot line, a lot line or the center line of a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway, or a railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary lines. 
2.  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as being set back from a street, a county road, a state highway, an interstate highway or a railroad right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such zoning district boundary line shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the center line of the street, county road, state highway, interstate highway or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto. 
3.  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the lot lines. 
4.  In the case of a double frontage lot fronting on two approximately parallel streets that is divided by a zoning district boundary line paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the zoning district in which each frontage of the double frontage lot lies shall apply to that portion of the double frontage lot. 
5.  Where zoning district boundaries are in doubt, the Morrow Planning and Zoning Board shall make such interpretation using the appropriate scale from the official zoning map. 
Section 305 - Districts listed. 
For the purposes of this ordinance incorporated area of Morrow, Georgia is divided into zoning districts designated as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 99-14, § 1, 6-8-99; Ord. No. 2004-12, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 2004-13, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2007-09, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 2009-06, § 3, 5-26-09) 
Section 306 - Annexation. 
The zoning of property to be annexed into the City of Morrow is a zoning decision in accordance with O.C.G.A. 36-66-3(4)(D). Therefore, the procedures for zoning property to be annexed into the City of Morrow shall be as follows: 
(1)  The City of Morrow may begin the process of zoning property to be annexed into the city any time on or after the date the notice of the proposed annexation is provided to the governing authority of the county as required under O.C.G.A. 36-36-6; 
(2)  The hearing required by O.C.G.A. 36-66-4(a) shall be conducted before the annexation of the subject property into the city; 
(3)  In addition to the other notice requirements of O.C.G.A. 36-66-4, the city shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the county in which the property to be annexed is located a notice of the hearing as required under the provisions of O.C.G.A. 36-66-4(a) or (b), as applicable, and shall place a sign on the property when required by O.C.G.A. 36-66-4(b); and 
(4)  The zoning classification approved by the city following the hearing required by O.C.G.A. 36-66-4(a) shall become effective on the later of: 
(A)  The date the zoning is approved by the city; or 
(B)  The date that the annexation becomes effective pursuant to O.C.G.A. 36-36-2. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 10-8-96) 
ARTICLE IV. - INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITIONS 

Section 401 - Interpretation. 
For the purpose of this ordinance the following interpretations shall apply: 
All words used in the present tense include the future tense. All words in the plural number include the singular number, and all words in the singular number, include the plural number, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. The word "used" shall be deemed also to include "designed", intended or arranged to be "used". 
Section 402 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words and terms used herein shall be defined and shall have their customary dictionary definition. 
Accessory apartment: A dwelling unit created within an existing single-family home or on the same lot. It is an independent unit, but it may share an entrance, yard and parking with the principal unit. 
Accessory building: In a residence or apartment district, a subordinate building, attached to or detached from the main building, without separate utilities, not used for commercial purposes and not rented and containing servants quarters, a washroom, a storage room for domestic storage only, and space for one or more automobiles; in any other district, a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to, and used only in conjunction with, the main building. 
Accessory use: A use or structure on the same lot, and of a nature customarily and subordinate to, the principal use or structure. Examples of accessory uses include, but are not limited to, free standing garages, storage buildings, tennis courts, swimming pools and satellite dish antennas. 
Alley: A paved surface with curb and gutter utilized to access private garages, loading areas, or refuse containers behind commercial, office, multifamily or other use and generally located on private property. 
Apartment: A room, or suite of rooms, in a multi-family building arranged, designed or occupied as a residence by a family. 
Automobile service station: A building or premises where products necessary for automobile service or maintenance are sold, provided there is no storage of automobiles, and only minor services are rendered. An automobile service station is neither a repair garage nor a body shop. 
Awning: A roof-like cover extending over or before a place as a shelter from the elements. 
Basement: An area below the first floor having not more than one-half of its height above grade. Basements meeting this definition that are used for storage, garages for use of occupants of a building, janitor or watchmen's quarters, or other utilities common to the rest of the building shall not be counted as a story. 
Berm: An earthen mound designed to provide visual interest, screen undesirable views and/or decrease noise. 
Boarding or rooming house: A dwelling in which meals and lodging or lodging only are furnished for compensation to more than two but not more than ten nontransient persons. 
Breezeway: A covered passage one story in height connecting a main structure and an accessory building. 
Buffer: The portion of a lot set aside with adequate natural or planted vegetation to accomplish visual and sound screening to separate residential zoning districts from other zoning districts as required in the city zoning ordinance. 
Buildable area: The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
Building: Any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. 
Building inspector: The official designated by the city council and charged with the responsibility of permit and certificate of occupancy issuance. 
Building, height of: See Height. 
Building, principal: A building or structure in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
Business: Includes office, retail, commercial and manufacturing uses and districts as herein defined. 
Certificate of zoning compliance: A certificate of occupancy permit issued by the building inspector indicating that the use of the building or land in question is in conformity with this ordinance or that there has been a legal variance therefrom as provided by this ordinance. 
Church or synagogue shall mean a building and related lands and/or a structure used for and generally open to the general public for group religious worship. Churches shall not include any building or property used solely for administrative activities related to an institution or group practicing group religious worship. 
City council: The mayor and city council of the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
City Street: See Street. 
Clinic: An establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment by one physician or dentist or group of physicians or dentists practicing medicine. 
Club: A building or facilities owned or operated by and for special educational or recreational purposes, but not primarily for profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on for gain. 
Commercial solid waste container: A manufactured container designed for the storage of solid waste and suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment approved by the public works director, or his designee. 
Commercial establishment: Any hotel, motel, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a residential unit. 
Conditional use: A use which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions contained in this ordinance or required by the planning and zoning board and approved by the city council. 
Condominium: The ownership in fee-simple title of a single unit in a multi-unit structure characterized by undivided ownership of the common elements of the structure, including the land and its appurtenances in common with all other purchasers. 
Consumer fireworks: Any small fireworks devices containing restricted amounts of pyrotechnic composition, designed primarily to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, that comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission as provided for in Parts 1500 and 1507 of Title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations, the United States Department of Transportation as provided for in Part 172 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and the American Pyrotechnics Association as provided for in the 2001 American Pyrotechnics Association Standard 87-1, and additionally shall mean Roman candles. The definition of consumer fireworks shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 and National Fire Protection Association Code (NFPA) 1124 should that definition differ from the definition in this subsection. 
Consumer fireworks retail sales facility: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 and NFPA 1124. 
Consumer fireworks retail sales stand: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 and NFPA 1124. 
Courtyard: An open space which may or may not have direct street access, around which is arranged a single building or a group of related buildings. 
Deciduous tree: Any tree which drops its leaves at the end of a growing season. 
Decorative paving: Paving that is made up of solid, precise, modular units, stamped concrete, seeded concrete, colored concrete or any combination of the above. 
Deck, parking: See Garage. 
Dedicated pedestrian entrance: A pedestrian entrance to a retail, office, or business location which opens on a city street and which provides access to that business location. 
Development: The erection, alteration or extension of any building or part thereof, or the change or use or occupancy of any building or land for which a building permit or certificate of occupancy is required under this ordinance or the project involving such activity. 
Development project: A unified development where one or more pieces of property have been assembled for the purpose of new construction. The developer is responsible for outlining the development boundaries by any development project. 
District: A section of the city for which the regulations governing the area, height or use of the buildings are uniform. 
Dormitory: A building or part of a building owned, leased or managed by a university containing a room or rooms forming one or more habitable units which shall be used by residents of the institution for living, sleeping, and studying. 
Drive-in restaurant: Any place or premises used for sale, dispensing or service of food, refreshment, or beverages in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may eat or drink the food or beverage on the premises. 
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, including single-family, two-family, multiple-family dwellings, rooming and boarding houses, but not including hotels or motels. 
Dwelling unit: A building or portion of a building which is arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as living quarters for a family. 
Dwelling, mobile home: A detached dwelling unit with the following characteristics: 
A.  Designed for long-term occupancy as opposed to transient locations, containing sleeping accommodations, toilet facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided. 
B.  A structure built in a factory, transported to its site on a chassis which is a distinct part of the floor system and built to arrive at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete, with the exception of a double-wide mobile home which is in one or more sections, including major appliances, and ready for occupancy except for necessary unpacking and assembly operations, or integration into a prepared structure. 
C.  All units built since June 15, 1976, shall have documentation of compliance with the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standard Act (department of housing and urban development certification). 
D.  All units built prior to June 15, 1976, shall have documentation of compliance with specifications prescribed by the American National Standards Institute. 
Dwelling, multiple-family: A building or portion thereof designed for three or more dwelling units, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. 
Dwelling, single-family: A detached residential unit other than a mobile home, hotel or motel, designed for and occupied by one family only. 
Dwelling, single-family attached: A structure subdivided by a coincidental property line and wall which separates the structure into a maximum of two dwelling units, each occupying its own lot. The two lots created by the coincidental property line and wall shall each contain at least: (a) 50 percent of the minimum lot area in the zoning district in which they are located; and (b) 50 percent of the minimum lot width in the zoning district in which they are located; and (c) 50 percent of the minimum gross floor area in the zoning district in which they are located. 
An attached single-family structure must meet all front, rear and side yard setback requirements in the zoning district in which it is located, except for the coincidental property line and wall. Each unit must be separately metered for all utilities and the coincidental property wall must be fire-rated and extend from the foundation to the roof decking of the structure. Otherwise, an attached single-family structure must meet all standards that would be required for two-family dwellings in the zoning districts in which they are located. 
Dwelling, two-family: A detached residential building containing two dwelling units, designed for occupancy by not more than two families living independent of each other. 
Evergreen: Any tree which retains its foliage throughout the year. 
Extended stay hotels and extended stay motels: Any hotel or motel containing four or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be temporarily occupied or which are temporarily occupied by tourists and travelers for sleeping purposes for more than ten days within every 30-day period and which contain fixed cooking appliances. 
Family: A single family may consist of not more than one of the following: 
1.  One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship living together and occupying a dwelling as a single housekeeping unit or household; or 
2.  A group of not more than three nonrelated persons occupying a single dwelling unit and using common cooking facilities (excluding legally recognized state foster homes). 
3.  The term family does not include any organization or institutional group, nor does it include persons who rent, lease or barter for compensation a room or rooms, basement or portion of a single-family dwelling unit. 
Fee simple townhouse: See Townhouse, fee simple. 
Fixed cooking appliances: A stove top burner; a hotplate that does not serve as an integral part of an appliance designed solely to produce coffee; a conventional oven; a convection oven; or any oven producing heat using resistance heating elements, induction heating, or infrared heating sources. Fixed cooking appliances do not include microwaves or outdoor grills. 
Floor area: The floor area is the gross horizontal area of the several floors of a structure, exclusive of carport, basement, attic and open porches. 
Frontage (lot): The distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
Frontage (street): All of the property on one side of a street located between the street intersections. 
Garage (private): A building or portion thereof, including decked structures, designed for the storage of motor-driven or non-motorized vehicles and reserved exclusively for the use of the residents served thereby and their invited guests. 
Garage (public): A building or portion thereof, including decked structures, designed for the storage of motor-driven or non-motorized vehicles and open to parking by the general public; such facilities may include servicing, but not repair, of stored or parked vehicles. 
Garage (repair): A building or portion thereof, designed and used for the mechanical repair of motorized or non-motorized vehicles as a commercial enterprise and where no vehicles are stored outdoors on the premises exceeding the limits of the zoning district in which located and from which no auto body or collision repairs are made. 
Greenspace: Permanently protected land and water, including agricultural and forestry land, that is in its undeveloped, natural state or that has been developed only to the extent consistent with, or is restored to be consistent with, one or more of the following goals: 
(A)  Water quality protection for rivers, streams, and lakes; 
(B)  Flood protection; 
(C)  Wetlands protection; 
(D)  Reduction of erosion through protection of steep slopes, areas with erodible soils, and stream banks; 
(E)  Protection of riparian buffers and other areas that serve as natural habitat and corridors for native plant and animal species; 
(F)  Scenic protection; 
(G)  Protection of archaeological and historic resources; 
(H)  Provision of recreation in the form of boating, hiking, camping, fishing, hunting, running, jogging, biking, walking, and similar outdoor activities; and 
(I)  Connection of existing or planned areas contributing to the goals set out in this definition. 
Ground coverage: The area of a lot covered by buildings, roofed areas or parking structures, determined by dividing that area of the lot occupied or covered by the total horizontal projected surface of all buildings and parking structures by the usable area of the lot. 
Group home: A facility to provide temporary care for persons undergoing physical or emotional trauma, or for those persons residing apart from their immediate family and engaged in counseling or rehabilitation as a function of the facility. The number of clients occupying the group home at any one time shall not exceed six. 
Group religious worship shall mean the practice of praying to, giving thanks to, or otherwise worshipping or studying about a god or gods or other such higher entity or entities, which practice may include instructional, recreational, utility and maintenance activities. 
Hardscape: Brick, stones or other warm toned, natural materials approved by the city council to be used as paving materials for sidewalks and other walkways. 
Height: The height of a building, or portion of a building, shall be measured from the average established grade at the street lot line or from the average natural ground level, if higher, or, if no street grade had been established, to the deck line of mansard roofs; and the mean height level between eaves and ridge for hip and gable roof. In measuring the height of a building, the following structures shall be excluded: chimneys, cooling towers, ornamental cupolas, domes or spires and parapet walls not exceeding four feet in height. 
Hobby shop: An accessory use housed in a dwelling or in an accessory building in which the residents of the premises engage in recreation activities, none of which shall disturb the neighbors on either side or in the rear thereof, and from which no revenue may be derived, in which no goods may be publicly displayed, offered for sale or advertised for sale, nor may any sign be used in connection therewith. 
Home occupation: Any occupation or activity conducted by a member of the family residing on the premises, in connection with which there is: 
(1)  No group instruction, assembly or activity and no signage is used to indicate from the exterior that the building is being utilized in any part for any purpose other than that of a dwelling; 
(2)  There is no commodity sold upon the premises; 
(3)  No person is employed other than a member of the immediate family residing on the premises; 
(4)  No mechanical equipment is used except that which is normally used for purely domestic purposes; and 
(5)  The same activity complies with all regulatory provisions contained in Title 9, Chapter 5 of the City of Morrow Code of Ordinances. 
Hotel: A building, structure or place containing ten or more guestrooms wherein tourists and travelers are temporarily provided lodging in exchange for financial compensation and in which ingress and egress to each guestroom is made through the interior of the building. 
Inn: A building in which 15 or fewer individual sleeping rooms or suites are offered for compensation to the public for temporary lodging and which includes a kitchen and dining room in which food is cooked on the premises for guests at least one meal per day. 
Inoperable vehicle: Any motorized vehicle incapable of immediately being driven and not properly licensed or inspected for safety in accordance with state law. 
Interior retail: A retail business whose primary retail sales operation is not accessed through a dedicated pedestrian entrance. 
Junk or salvage yard: A place where waste, discarded or salvaged metals, building materials, paper, textiles, used plumbing fixtures, used cars or trucks in inoperable condition, or used vehicle parts, are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, bailed or cleaned. 
Landscaping: Any additions to the natural features of a plot of ground to restore construction disturbances and to make it more attractive, as by adding lawns, trees and shrubs, etc., to the natural environment. 
Launderette: A self-service laundry. 
Laundromat: A self-service laundry. 
Laundry: A commercial laundering establishment. 
Loading space, off-street: Space logically and conveniently located for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to the size of delivery vehicles expected to be used. 
Loft apartment: An apartment having a combination living and bedroom. (No separate bedroom.) 
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a building or use, and any accessory building and use incidental to it, and including open space not less in extent than that required by this ordinance and having its principal frontage upon a public street. 
Lot coverage: See Ground coverage. 
Lot frontage: That portion of a lot adjacent to a street. 
Lot line: A boundary of a lot. Lot line is synonymous with property line. 
Lot of record: An individual lot or a lot which is part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of Clerk of Superior Court of Clayton County, Georgia, following all required approvals; or a parcel of land the deed of which has been recorded in the office Clerk of Superior Court of Clayton County, which deed was filed prior to adoption of a subdivision ordinance by the City of Morrow. 
Lot width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the minimum front yard setback line. 
Lot, corner: A lot situated at the intersection of two streets, or bounded on two or more adjacent sides by street right-of-way lines. 
Lot, double frontage: A lot having frontage on two non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot or a double-frontage lot. 
Mayor and city council: The mayor and city council of the City of Morrow, Georgia. 
Medical office: An office for the examination and treatment of outpatients, including dental examinations and treatments. 
Mini-warehouse: A building or portion thereof used for dead storage, mainly of the excess personal property of an individual or family, but also of small amounts of goods or merchandise for businesses or individuals. Mini-warehouses shall not include retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing or any other commercial use or other uses except for removal and/or deposit of goods. 
Mixed use: A building containing more than one authorized use. 
Mixed use residential and commercial purposes: Property used for both residential and commercial purposes. 
Mixed use including retail: Any development which includes as a principal use on the same parcel both residential uses and retail uses. 
Mobile home park: A tract of land that is used, designated, maintained, or held out for rent having a minimum acreage of 30 acres. Mobile homes located in a mobile home park are used only to provide living and sleeping accommodations; a mobile home park does not include an automobile or mobile home sales lot on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for inspection or sale. 
Motel: A building, structure or place containing ten or more guestrooms wherein tourists and travelers are temporarily provided lodging in exchange for financial compensation and in which ingress and egress to each guestroom is on the outside of the building. 
Multi-family: Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or owned by three or more families living independently of each other and maintaining separate cooking facilities. 
Multi-level retail: A retail business whose primary retail sales operation is on the same level as a city street and which is directly accessed by a dedicated pedestrian entrance from that street which gives customers immediate access to retail shopping but which may contain one or more than one levels. 
Natural state: A property that has natural vegetation and trees that has not been graded or developed in ten years (access roads, paths, utility easements, or trails shall not be considered as grading or development). 
NFPA 1124: Shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1. 
Non-conforming use or structure: Any building, structure or use of land lawful at the time of construction or institution of the use or structure, but which does not conform after passage or amendment of this ordinance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Nursing home: A home for the aged, infirmed or incapacitated persons in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are kept or provided with food or shelter or care for compensation; but not including hospitals, clinics, group homes, or other similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of sick and injured. 
Off-street parking: See Parking, off-street. 
Office: Any building, or portion thereof, wherein the primary use is the conduct of business, professional services, administration, research or uses by sales/manufacturer's representatives. An office shall not involve manufacturing, fabrication, production, processing, assembling, cleaning, testing, repair or storage of materials, goods or products; or the sale and/or delivery of any materials, goods or products which are physically located on the property. 
Open space: Area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projection of cornices, eaves or porches. Land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common ownership and use by the residents of the development and may include complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and appropriate for recreation or other complementary activities. Streets, buffers and parking areas do not count toward required open space. 
Ornamental tree: A deciduous or evergreen tree planted primarily for its ornamental value or for screening purposes; tends to be smaller at maturity than a shade tree. 
Outside sales/commercial promotions: Any outdoor sales or commercial promotion which shall last for no longer than ten days. 
Parking space: An area meeting the standards of Article XII of this ordinance, not on a public street or alley, surfaced with an all-weather surfaced drive-way connecting the parking space with a street or alley permitting free ingress and egress. Head-in parking adjacent to public thoroughfare wherein the maneuvering is done on a public street, shall not be classified as off-street parking in computing the parking requirements for any use. 
Parking space, off-street: An off-street parking space meeting the standards of Article XII of this ordinance, consisting of a space adequate for parking an automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly related access to a public street or alley and maneuvering room, design standards for which are contained in this ordinance. Head-in parking adjacent to public thoroughfare wherein the maneuvering is done on a public street, shall not be classified as off-street parking in computing the parking requirements for any use. 
Pavement: Having a concrete or asphalt surface consistent with adjacent development. Areas of pavement may include decorative paving. 
Pawn shop: A retail operation which provides for the lending of money with personal items held as collateral, or the purchasing, or the repurchasing of gold, silver, jewelry, watches and gems in addition to other merchandise. 
Permitted uses: That use of a lot which is among the uses allowed as a matter of right under the zoning district classifications. 
Place of assembly shall mean a structure, portion of a structure, or area (either indoor or outdoor), designed primarily for people to gather to observe or participate in a single event or series of events which are not related to group religious worship. A group home is not considered a place of assembly. 
Place of worship . See Church. 
Planning and zoning board: The planning and zoning board of Morrow, Georgia. 
Private deed restrictions or covenants: Private deed restrictions or covenants imposed on land by private land owners. They bind and restrict the land in the hands of present owners and subsequent purchasers. They are enforced only by the land owners involved and not by the city or other public agency. 
Residential purposes: Improvements to property undertaken to provide single-family, two-family or multi-family dwelling units for rent or sale. Such purposes include new construction, conversion and rehabilitation of pre-existing built-out space for residential units. 
Restaurant: A place of business whose primary source of revenue is derived from the sale of prepared food to the general public for consumption on, or off, the premises. The term shall not include a bakery, pastry shop, meat market or ice cream parlor if on-premises consumption of food is not allowed. 
Retail business: A business which sells tangible personal property taxable as defined under Georgia Retail Tax and Sales Use Statute (O.CG.A. § 48-8-2(6)) but for the purpose of this article including: eating and drinking establishments, grocery stores, catering establishments, delicatessens and bakeries with products sold at retail on the premises. A retail business may be a part of a development identified as "mixed use including retail." 
Right-of-way: Access over or across a particularly described property for a specific purpose. 
Rowhouse: A one-family dwelling, both sides of which typically rest directly on the side lot lines. 
Screen: A method of reducing the impact of noise and unsightly visual intrusions with less offensive or more harmonious elements, such as plants, berms, fences, walls or any appropriate combination thereof. 
Shade tree: Sometimes evergreen, usually deciduous tree planted for its high crown of foliage or overhead canopy; a large woody perennial having one or more self-supporting stems and numerous branches reaching a mature height of at least 25 feet and a mature spread of at least 20 feet. 
Shell: A framework or exterior structure. 
Shopping center: A group of commercial establishments having a building composition that is an architectural unit and is not a miscellaneous assemblage of stores; planned, developed, analyzed as a unit, related in location, size and type of shops to the trade area that unit serves, and providing on-site parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of stores. 
Shopping centers are classified by type, each distinctive in its own function: 
•  Neighborhood shopping center provides for the sale of convenience goods (foods, drugs, sundries, etc.) and personal services (laundry pick-up stations, barbering, shoe repair, etc.) for the day to day living needs of the immediate neighborhood. 
•  Community shopping center in addition to the convenience goods and personal services of the neighborhood center, provides a wider range for the sale of soft lines (apparel, etc.), hard lines (hardware and appliances), and includes eating facilities, making more depth of merchandise and services available. 
•  Regional shopping center provides for general merchandise, apparel, furniture and home furnishings in full depth and variety. It is built with one or more full line department stores as the focal point. 
Shrub: A woody plant or brush of relatively low height (two to six feet), distinguished from a tree by having several stems rather than a single trunk. 
Sign: See city sign code for definitions related to signage. 
Specimen tree or stand: Any tree or grouping of trees which has been determined to be of high value because of its species, size, age or location. 
Stable, private: A building or facility used for the housing of horses, mules or other draught animals with a capacity of not more than two such animals. 
Stable, public: A building or facility used for the housing of horses, mules or other draught animals other than a private stable and with a capacity of more than two horses, mules or other draught animals. 
Storage: All buildings and structures used primarily for the keeping or sheltering of goods, merchandise, and products. 
Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it, provided that a room, suite or story, with more than one-half of its height below grade shall not be considered a story for the purposes of height regulations. 
Street: A right-of-way for vehicular traffic whether designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, drive, expressway, boulevard, lane, place, circle, alley, or otherwise. Various classifications of streets shall be defined as follows: 
A.  Arterial: A street which is used primarily for fast and heavy traffic flow; is of considerable continuity; and is used as a traffic artery for intercommunication between large areas. 
B.  Major collector: A street which carries traffic from activity centers and minor collector streets to arterial streets and streets of a higher classification. 
C.  Minor collector: Principal entrance streets to subdivisions and the main streets for circulation within a subdivision which serve a network of four or more local streets. Minor collector streets are designed so that traffic circulation in a subdivision would cause such a street to be used as a link between local streets and major collector or arterial streets. 
D.  Local: A street used primarily in residential subdivisions for access to abutting properties as opposed to the collection and dispersion of traffic. 
E.  Cul-de-sac: A local street with only one outlet, closed and terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
F.  Marginal access: A street which is parallel to, and adjacent to an arterial street or highway and which provides access to abutting properties and protection through traffic. 
Street level retail business: A retail business whose primary retail sales operation is on the same level as a city street and which is directly accessed by a dedicated pedestrian entrance from that street which gives customers immediate access to retail shopping. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include buildings, gasoline pumps, mobile homes, walls, fences, signs, swimming pools and satellite dish antennas. 
Tenancy: The temporary possession or occupancy of something that belongs to another. 
Thoroughfare: A street conforming to the standards shown in the thoroughfare plan of the city. 
Townhouse: A type of dwelling that is more than one story in height which has outside, individual front and rear entrances, is separated from other dwellings by fire-rated common party walls extending from the foundation to the roof decking, and is part of a contiguous group of at least three townhouses and shall be considered a multifamily structure. 
Townhouse, fee simple: A townhouse unit, as defined above, owned as a unit in fee simple title, that has the common wall or walls between it and the adjoining townhouse unit or units as its property line or lines between that unit or those units, that has individual meters for all utilities, and that has access to a public street, and meets the standards described herein. 
Trailer (motor home): A motorized vehicle, designed and/or maintained for use for travel or recreation purposes exclusively off the premises, having no foundation other than wheels or jacks. 
Trailer (travel): A non-motorized vehicle, pulled by an automobile or truck designed and/or maintained for use off the premises for travel or recreation purposes exclusively. 
Trailer park: A parcel of land which is used solely for the rental or lease of lots for transient campers, trailers, motor homes or temporary parking of any other recreational vehicle that is not a mobile home. 
Understory tree: Any tree or woody plant which is of lesser height and spread than the surrounding evergreens or deciduous trees but which still provides shade and a degree of protection to the earth and vegetation beneath it. 
University: An educational institution recognized by an accredited regional accreditation body and authorized to award degrees at the post-secondary level. 
Use: The purpose or purposes for which land or a building is designed, arranged, or intended, or to which said land or building is occupied, maintained or leased. 
Variance: A variance is a relaxation of the terms of this ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Yard: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of a side yard or the depth of a rear yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
Yard (front): A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yards lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of uncovered steps, uncovered balconies or uncovered porches. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimensions. 
Yard (rear): A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lots and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear of the main building and any projections of uncovered steps, uncovered balconies or unenclosed porches. On all corner lots the rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
Yard (side): A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the front lot line to the rear yard and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of the main buildings or any projections thereto. 
Zoning enforcement officer: The individual designated by the city council whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 94-07, § 1(B), 6-21-94; Ord. No. 97-10, § 1, 12-10-97; Ord. No. 98-19, § 1, 12-22-98; Ord. No. 98-20, § 1(A), (B), 12-22-98; Ord. No. 2003-01, § 1(A), (B), 1-28-03; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 7-22-03; Ord. No. 2003-11, §§ 1(A), (B), 9-23-03; Ord. No. 2004-12, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 2004-13, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 2009-06, § 4, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 2015-11 , § 3, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 2017-03 , §§ 1, 2, 3, 2-28-17; Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 2, 4-11-17) 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMING PROVISIONS 
This ordinance provides for, and as future amendments are adopted it is conceded that there exist lots, structures and uses of structure and premises in combination which were lawful before this ordinance was adopted or amended but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this ordinance or future amendment. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their survival. It is further the intent of this ordinance that nonconformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
Nonconforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of structure and premises in combination shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of this ordinance. 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption of this ordinance. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where excavation or demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially began preparatory to rebuilding, such excavation or demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction. 

Section 501 - Nonconforming lots of record. 
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory building may be erected on any single lot of record nonconforming as to size at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this ordinance. Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and requirements other than these applying to area or width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the planning and zoning board and city council. 
If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purposes of this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel shall be used or sold in a manner which diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance, nor shall any division of any parcel be made which creates a lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this ordinance. 
Section 502 - Nonconforming uses of land (or land with minor structures only). 
Where at the time of passage of this ordinance lawful use of land exists which would not be permitted by the regulations imposed by this ordinance, and where such use involves no individual structure with a replacement cost exceeding $1,000.00, the use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, provided: 
1.  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance; 
2.  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot or parcel other than that occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance; 
3.  If any such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 90 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such land is located. 
4.  No additional structure not conforming to the requirements of this ordinance shall be erected in connection with such nonconforming use of land. 
Section 503 - Nonconforming structures. 
Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance that restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its location on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  No such nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity, but any structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its nonconformity. 
2.  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
3.  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
Section 504 - Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and premises in combination. 
If lawful use involving individual structures with a replacement cost of $1,000.00 or more, or of structure and premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, which is prohibited under the provision of this ordinance. Such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions: 
1.  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located, provided however, that all codes are met; 
2.  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building; 
3.  Any structure, or structure and premises in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed; 
4.  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six months (except when government action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located; 
5.  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. Destruction for the purpose of this subsection is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50 percent of the replacement cost at time of destruction. 
6.  Structures incurring damage of less than 50 percent of fair market value above the foundation may be restored, reconstructed and used as before, provided that such restoration is commenced within six calendar months from the date damages were incurred. If reconstruction is not commenced within six months, the use of said land or structure shall thereafter conform with the provisions of this ordinance. Fair market value shall be determined by reference to current statutory provisions pertaining to real estate assessment and the records of the county assessor. 
Section 505 - Repairs and maintenance. 
On any nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing, to an extent not exceeding ten percent of the current replacement cost of the nonconforming portion of the structure as the case may be, provided that as a result of such repair the structure shall not be expected to occupy any additional land area. 
If a nonconforming structure or portion of a structure containing a nonconforming use becomes physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance, and is declared by any duly authorized official to be unlawful by reason of physical condition, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Section 506 - Amortization and discontinuance. 
There are found to be certain uses of land, buildings and structures which have an adverse effect on the carrying out of the land use plan and which can reasonably be discontinued after a reasonable time irrespective of aforementioned rules as to nonconforming uses. The following uses shall be removed or made conforming within the specified amortization period. Said amortization period shall commence upon the effective date of this ordinance. 
1.  Fences, walls and foliage which constitute a hazard by virtue of impairing sight distances at a curve or intersection shall be made conforming within 30 days. 
2.  Reserved. 
3.  All provisions in business or industrial districts of this ordinance setting forth specifications for the operation of a business or industry requiring fencing or opaque shielding shall be complied with within one calendar year. 
4.  Nonconforming open storage operations, such as truck parking, automobile wrecking or salvage material storage and similar uses shall be made conforming within one calendar year. 
5.  Nonconforming commercial or industrial, frame, block or light metal structures shall be made conforming within 25 calendar years. 
6.  All other nonconforming structures shall be made conforming within 40 calendar years. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 6, 5-26-09) 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 601 - Accessory uses or structures. 
Accessory uses or structures shall be permitted only in rear yards, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
No accessory building or structure shall be erected on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
Accessory uses or structures shall be permitted if they meet the following: 
1.  Only one detached accessory structure or building shall be permitted on a lot, and it shall be located in the rear yard. 
2.  It shall be set back not less than ten feet from any lot line. 
3.  An accessory building or structure located on a lot within a platted subdivision shall not be any larger than 16' × 20'. However, a free standing garage may be as large as 20' × 24' provided it is used solely to house automotive vehicles and personal use yard and garden equipment. 
4.  When an accessory building or structure is attached to the principal building it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
5.  The height of an accessory building or structure shall not exceed 15 feet or surpass the adjacent primary structure gabled roof line. 
6.  Accessory buildings or structures in residential districts shall not be used for any type of commercial operation whether permanent, part-time or as part of a limited home occupation except as otherwise provided for in this ordinance. 
7.  An accessory building or structure built after January 1, 2000 must adhere to the following: 
a.  The exterior building material of any accessory building or structure must be composed of a material that would be permitted on the exterior of a residential structure in the city and must coordinate with the exterior of the principal building on the lot; 
b.  The accessory building or structure must not detract from the value of the neighboring properties; 
c.  The accessory building or structure must have a gabled roof design; 
d.  Installation of the accessory building or structure requires proper permitting by the City of Morrow. 
8.  In no event shall consumer fireworks retail sales facilities or consumer fireworks retail sales stands be permitted as an accessory use in any district. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § I, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 2009-06, § 7, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 2017-03 , § 5, 2-28-17) 
Section 602 - Minimum setback requirement-corner lots. 
In any zoning district, where a lot is located on a corner the minimum front yard setback and the side yard having street frontage shall have the same minimum setback. Where a zoning district requires a greater side yard setback, the stricter provision shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § I, 4-12-05) 
Section 603 - Minimum floor area requirements. 
The floor area requirements as contained in this ordinance refer to heated living space. Heated living space is not to include porches, carports, decks or garages. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § I, 4-12-05) 
Section 604 - City and county approvals that are required. 
All city and county approvals that are required for the use of land and structures and for the location and operation of businesses and industries shall be obtained by the applicant and transmitted by him with his request for a building permit, an occupancy permit, a zoning amendment, or a variance. Except as otherwise required by state law, no local action shall be taken and no public hearings shall be held until the above required approvals have been obtained by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § I, 4-12-05) 
Section 605 - Approvals for commercial and industrial developments on state highways. 
For all business and industrial developments fronting on a state highway, no building permit shall be issued until the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation has been obtained by the applicant on entrances and exits, curb radii, drainage and other matters that are the appropriate concern of the department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § I, 4-12-05) 
ARTICLE VII. - EXCEPTIONS, MODIFICATIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS 

Section 701 - Height exceptions, general rule. 
Any structure hereafter erected or altered shall comply with the height limitations of the district in which it is located except as specified below: 
1.  Churches, public schools, public hospitals, sanitariums and other public buildings. There shall be no restriction on the height of these buildings. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1(B), 4-11-95; Ord. No. 2005-02, § II, 4-12-05) 
Section 702 - Yard space, general rule. 
Any building, structure or use hereafter erected, altered or established shall comply with the yard space requirements of the district in which it is located except as specified below. The required yard space for any building, structure, or use shall be contained on the same lot as the building, structure or use and such required yard space shall fall entirely upon land in a district or districts in which the principal use is permitted. 
1.  In the case of a double frontage lot, the minimum front yard shall be provided on each fronting street. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § II, 4-12-05) 
Section 703 - Fences, general rule. 
As used in this section, "fence" means any structure constructed or installed around a dwelling unit or a principal building to provide a barrier, either physical or visual, for the purpose of protecting property, providing for security and privacy, and properly containing activities on the property. 
1.  Fences are permitted in certain zoning districts, subject to the following limitations: 
A.  A permit from the department of community development is required to construct or install any proposed fences or repair an existing fence in all zoning districts. 
B.  Barbed, chicken or similar-type wire is not allowed in any zoning district, which can be viewed from a public or private right-of-way. 
C.  Painted chain link fences are prohibited from being constructed after the effective date of this amendment. 
D.  Fences shall not be installed within or allowed to encroach upon an undisturbed buffer. 
E.  Fences shall not be included when counting the total number of allowed accessory structures on a property. 
F.  A new fence may not be tied or attached to an existing fence for support, but must be installed with separate fence posts to ensure its ability to stand on its own. Fence posts shall be installed on the interior side of the fence, which is the side closest to the dwelling unit or principal building on the property containing the permitted proposed new fence. 
G.  Fences shall be installed within the property lines of the property containing the permitted proposed new fences. 
2.  Fences in districts zoned residential (RS-80 and other single-family & multi-family residential) 
A.  All residential fences installed after the effective date of this amendment shall be constructed from the following materials. See Figure 703(3). 
1)  Wood materials shall be pressure-treated. Wood finishes may be natural unfinished, water-resistant sealant or stain. Wood planks shall be a minimum of five-eighths of an inch thick 
2)  Vinyl coated chain link (dark brown, green or black) 
3)  Vinyl or PVC Composite 
4)  Aluminum 
5)  Wrought Iron 
6)  Split-rail fencing is only allowed on lots with a minimum of three acres 
7)  Combination Masonry- Brick, Stone or Stucco with Wrought Iron 
B.  Chain link fences constructed before or after the effective date of this amendment must be properly maintained in good condition and free of damage, rust, or debris. In the event that an existing chain link fence needs repair or replacement, a permit must be obtained before any construction is to begin. The repair of an entire existing chain link fence is prohibited; however, a permit may be granted for the repair of a section of an existing chain link fence, provided such section is not greater than 49 percent in length of the total fence area. 
C.  All approved fence materials shall be allowed along all sections of a property in which fences are permitted to be constructed. 
D.  Fences on side and rear property lines may have a maximum height of eight feet. 
E.  Fences on corner lots shall be no closer than ten feet from the curb of the bordering roadways to ensure easements and sidewalks are not impeded. Administrative variances may be obtained, subject to approval by the department of community development. See Figure 703(F). 
F.  Fences originating from anywhere between the front corner edges of the foundation of the dwelling unit and the rear property line, and extend perpendicular to the side property lines are permitted, and may have a maximum height of eight feet. 
G.  Fences shall not be installed beyond the front edge of the foundation of the dwelling unit, such that they approach the front property line abutting the street. See Figure 703 (G). 
H.  Vinyl coated chain link fences on corner lots shall be installed with shrubs to provide additional screening along public right-of-ways. 
I.  Homeowners Association written approval shall be required with submittal of fence permit application, if applicable. 
3.  Fences in districts not zoned residential (commercial, manufacturing, and public institutional) 
A.  Fences and gates in districts zoned commercial or public institutional within the City of Morrow, which can be viewed from a public or private right-of-way, shall be constructed of masonry, wrought iron, or aluminum after the effective date of this amendment. 
B.  Fences and gates in districts zoned manufacturing shall be constructed of masonry, wrought iron, aluminum, or vinyl coated chain link after the effective date of this amendment. However, chain link fences shall have a vinyl coating of black, brown or green. 
C.  The design, type, and material used must be included with a landscape plan and shall be submitted to the department of community development for approval prior to the installation or repair of any proposed fences. 
D.  In the event the city council approves any wooden fence in response to a formal variance request, a water-sealing product or paint shall be applied annually to maintain its original appearance. All weathered and warped boards must be replaced and repaired as they become worn or damaged. 
E.  Fences may have a maximum height of eight feet. 
F.  Except for those in districts zoned manufacturing, fences shall not be installed beyond the front edge of the foundation of the principal building, such that they approach the front property line abutting the street. 
Figure 703(3). Allowed fence materials. 
Vinyl/PVC  
Wood-grain vinyl  
Wood with protective sealant  
Wood(painted)  
Vinyl coated chain link  
Chain link (existing/repair only)  
Wrought iron or aluminum  
Figure 703(F). Fence location for corner lots. 

Figure 703(G). Fence location for interior lots. 

(Ord. No. 99-01, § 2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2005-02, § II, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 2014-07 , § 1, 8-12-14; Ord. No. 2018-03 , §§ 1—4, 3-27-18) 
Section 704 - Open uses in undeveloped areas. 
A temporary building, signs, or buildings for use in connection with a construction project or land subdivision development shall be permitted on the land of the project only during the construction period. Temporary buildings and signs related to a subdivision development shall be removed when 100 percent of all lots are occupied by completed homes or within four years, whichever occurs first. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § II, 4-12-05) 
Section 705 - Parking, storage or use of major recreational equipment, and other trailers and equipment. 
For the purposes of this section, major recreational equipment is defined as including boats and boat trailers, travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches (designed to be mounted on automotive vehicles), motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and the like, and cases or boxes used for transporting recreational equipment, whether occupied by such equipment or not. Such major recreational equipment and other recreational trailers may be parked or stored on lots that exceed 15,000 square feet only in side yards behind the front line of the building or in rear yards. Such major recreational equipment and other recreational trailers shall not be parked in driveways in front or side yards in front of the principle building except for temporary loading and unloading operations; such temporary use shall not exceed an accumulated two hours in duration in any 48-hour period. In any residential area except where prohibited by protective covenants, major recreational equipment can be stored in a completely enclosed building. In the case of corner lots, no vehicles may be parked or stored in the side yard on the street side of the lot. No such equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, housekeeping or home occupation purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use. 
(Ord. No. 99-06, § 1, 2-23-99; Ord. No. 2005-02, § II, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 2010-24, § 1, 9-28-10) 
Section 706 - Parking and storage of certain vehicles. 
Automotive vehicles or recreational trailers of any kind or type without current license plates and stickers or incapable of immediately being driven shall not be parked or stored on any residentially zoned property; other than in completely enclosed buildings. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § II, 4-12-05) 
Section 707 - Projection into required yards. 
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and unobstructed except for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, eaves, chimneys, buttresses and other ornamental and architectural features, provided, however, that these features do not project more than one and one-half feet into any required yard. 
An open unroofed porch or paved terrace may project into a required front yard for a distance not to exceed ten feet and into a side yard to a point no closer than five feet from any property line. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § II, 4-12-05) 
Section 708 - Burglar bars, roll up doors and other security devices. 
(a)  This section applies to all commercial, residential, retail, office and institutional, CUPD, mixed use and industrial property in the city. 
(b)  No permanently installed burglar bars shall be visible from any public street. Burglar bars may be installed on rear doors and windows where a planted buffer or privacy fence screens the view of those bars from the public street and/or neighboring properties. This prohibition does not preclude owners of single-family residences in the city from installing decorative wrought iron screen doors at their residences. 
(c)  Businesses, offices and institutions in the city may install fully retractable metal security screening that secures windows and doors when the business, office or institution is not open for business. Such security screening shall be installed only on the interior of the business, above doors and windows, and must retract within a fully enclosed decorative cabinet placed entirely above the doors and windows so that no evidence of such screening is visible from any public street or sidewalk during times the business, office or institution is open. Only open lattice or woven screening that allows a complete view of the interior through all points of the doors and windows is permitted. No solid metal shades, screens or coverings are allowed. Any such security screening, including the cabinet, is required to be maintained in proper working order, free from rust, scratches, and bent or missing elements. Decorative cabinets shall be painted a color that coordinates with the interior of the building. 
(d)  The use of internal security devices, such as bullet proof glass, inside businesses, offices and institutions in the city is permitted provided the security devices are clear and well maintained. Such security devices may not be scratched, hazy or discolored. Any business, office or institution utilizing internal security devices shall comply with the key box requirements to ensure public safety personnel have access to all portions of the premises in the event of emergency. 
(e)  Security cameras, magnetic security systems and other similar security devices are specifically encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 2, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2003-08, § 1E., 7-22-03; Ord. No. 2005-02, § II, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 2010-24, § 2, 9-28-10) 
Section 709 - Kiosks within commercial premises. 
(a)  Commercial premises located within the City of Morrow may establish or permit the use of kiosks only in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  "Kiosk," for the purpose of this section, means any portable structure composed of wood, plastic, pipe or other material and designed in such a manner as to form a self-enclosed area for display of merchandise or the offering of services. Kiosks are generally designed to set themselves apart from the surrounding commercial activity and are not built into the underlying commercial structure. The fact that parts of the structure may be kept open for access does not negate the status of the structure as a kiosk. 
(c)  Kiosks are only permitted indoors and are limited to retail establishments with publicly accessed areas of 25,000 or more square feet under common ownership or lease. 
(d)  Within retail facilities large enough to utilize kiosks, only one kiosk per 25,000 square feet is permitted, subject to a limitation that not more than three kiosks shall be permitted within a single retail premises at any one time. 
(e)  No kiosk shall be attached to the floor with bolts, nails, screws or other hardware or adhesive. 
(f)  A minimum of eight feet of space shall be maintained between the kiosk and any other display, shelving, merchandise tables, registers or equipment in the retail establishment. Kiosks may be located against and adjacent to permanent walls, provided people are not allowed to walk between the kiosk and the wall. 
(g)  All kiosks located within a single retail premises shall be of an identical design. 
(h)  No kiosk shall be operated in a manner as to constitute a hazard to the public. If a kiosk is positioned against a permanent wall, there shall be no electrical bank on that wall serving the kiosk. No electrical cords shall be extended across the floor into a kiosk. Signs on the kiosk shall be securely fastened. 
(i)  Kiosks which allow staff to enter and interact with the public from a counter or table cannot exceed ten feet by 12 feet in overall size. Cart kiosks which do not allow entry for staff shall not exceed ten feet by six feet in size. 
(j)  Enclosed kiosks shall be a minimum of eight feet in height. No kiosk shall exceed ten feet in height. 
(k)  Plastic pipes, raw wood and cloth are prohibited as framing material or walls for kiosks. 
(l)  Signs on kiosks shall be professionally printed or silk screened. No spray paint, stencils, handwriting, poster board or cotton and polyester fabrics can be utilized to create signage for the kiosk. No signage for kiosks shall be permitted on the exterior of the retail premises. 
(m)  No alcoholic beverages or tobacco products shall be sold from a kiosk. No food preparation or handling of foods that are not packaged by a manufacturer is permitted from kiosks. 
(n)  Operation of kiosks is limited to the business hours of the host retail establishment. 
(o)  Business conducted from a kiosk is subject to all City of Morrow regulations and codes governing commercial enterprises, including but not limited to, signage, business taxes, and fire safety regulations. 
(p)  Regional shopping centers are exempt from the three kiosk per premises limit for indoor hallways and corridors not otherwise leased to tenants, provided they adhere to the other requirements of this section. In addition, they shall develop an overall plan for kiosk establishment that leaves ample room for customers to maneuver the hallways without obstruction and submit such plan to the city fire marshal for his safety approval. 
(Ord. No. 2010-24, § 3, 9-28-10) 
Section 710 - Clear views of business interiors. 
Businesses operating in the City of Morrow shall maintain glass windows and doors to such establishments in such manner that allows a clear view of the interior from all windows and doors. All glass shall be cleaned daily. No furniture, packing material, debris, trash receptacles or other fixtures shall be placed in front of or behind windows and doors in such a manner as to reduce window visibility or to block ingress and egress from the premises. Additionally no such material shall be placed against doors and windows in such manner as to appear unsightly from the building's exterior. In the event a business desires to permanently remove any existing windows or doors, such removal and all replacement material shall conform to all applicable building codes adopted by the city and shall be done under applicable city permits. 
(Ord. No. 2010-24, § 4, 9-28-10) 
ARTICLE VIII. - APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
The regulations set by this ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 

Section 801 - Applicability to land, buildings and open space. 
No building, structure, land or open space shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
Section 802 - Height and density. 
No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the height or bulk limits of this ordinance; to accommodate or house a greater number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; or to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or be in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
Section 803 - Yard and other spaces. 
No part of a yard or other open space or off-street parking or loading spaces required about any one building shall be included as part of the yard or off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building, except as specifically provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
Section 804 - One principal residential building on a lot. 
Except for planned center developments, only one principal residential building and its accessory building may hereafter be erected on any one lot. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
Section 805 - Minimum lot sizes for residences using septic tank systems. 
No single-family residence shall be permitted on a lot of less than 25,000 square feet in a new subdivision which is to be served by septic tanks, regardless of the zoning district classification. With respect to existing platted lots, the Clayton County Board of Health will evaluate each individual request for a permit on a case-by-case basis. This restriction on lot size does not apply to residential development served by community sewer systems. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
Section 806 - Street frontage requirement. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on a lot that does not abut for at least a distance of 25 feet upon an open street which shall be either a public street, a publicly approved street or a publicly maintained street. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
Section 807 - Classification of streets. 
For purposes of this ordinance, all of the streets, roads and highways in the City of Morrow are classified as state highways, arterial thoroughfares (major streets), collector streets or local streets on the land use and thoroughfare plan. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
Section 808 - Keeping and raising of livestock. 
The keeping and raising of all farm animals and fowl and use of private stables shall be limited to property located within a single-family residence district having a minimum lot area of three acres. Any structure, pen, corral, or other building appurtenant to the keeping and raising of livestock must be located a minimum of 60 feet from any property line. The keeping and raising of all farm animals and fowl shall be subject to all regulations promulgated by the Clayton County Health Department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
Section 809 - Extended stay hotels and extended stay motels. 
Extended stay hotels and extended stay motels are prohibited in all zoning districts. No existing hotel or motel shall convert to an extended stay hotel or an extended stay motel. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 3, 4-11-17) 
Section 810 - Merchandise for show or sale. 
Offerings of merchandise for show or sale; for advertising or promoting a product or for any other purpose whether or not for profit from any location other than inside a place of business is not permitted and shall not be considered under the provisions provided for under variances. Gasoline stations are covered under other provisions of the Code as pertains to lubricants, kerosene and other related items sold thereat. 
This section includes but is not limited to such sale items as Christmas trees, soft drinks, pumpkins, cakes, candies, B-B-Q's and others and sales thereof from, in or on parking lots, sidewalks and/or porches, lawns, driveways or garages and must be approved by the city manager prior to the commencing of sales of any type. 
(Ord. No. 94-07, § 1(C), 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
Section 811 - Restrictions. 
1.  It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person, corporation or company or any combination thereof to establish a mixed use retail establishment without specific approval of mayor and council where the nature of the merchandise to be sold presents imminently hazardous conditions which could develop into a danger to occupants, customers, adjacent property owners or tenants and/or the general public. 
2.  Such uses and/or combination thereof shall include but not be limited to: service stations, used or new car sales, or leasing convenience stores; gasoline sales only in combination with vehicular sales or leasing, or gasoline sales in combination with storage of vehicles for any purpose whatsoever except as may be permitted by mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 89-11, § 1, 7-25-89; Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
Section 812 - Parking spaces. 
1.  Parking spaces for vehicles at all businesses shall be as stated in the zoning ordinance of the City of Morrow and shall additionally provide ample turnaround areas, fire apparatus ingress and egress capability to include fire lanes where appropriate and as directed and general overall reduction of congestion of the area for convenience of the public, the owner/operator and the city. 
2.  Under no circumstances shall there ever be stored at any retail establishment which sells petroleum products or automobile or internal combustion engine vehicle parts or supplies any vehicles for sale, lease, rent or for hire at anytime. 
Ord. No. 89-11, § 2, 7-25-89; Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
Section 813 - Redevelopment, maintenance, and revitalization. 
1.  A.  Whenever any major remodeling, exterior renovations, additions or new construction occurs on parcels of commercial, retail, office and institutional, mixed use, CUPD, and industrial property, the property shall be required to update to the current ordinances concerning tree and vegetation protection, landscaping, lighting, sidewalk, acceleration and deceleration lanes, and sign codes. This shall include but not be limited to the paving and restriping of parking lots, underground utilities, and the exclusion of certain types of exterior building materials. The perimeter of all parking lots must have 24-inch high-back curb and gutter. 
Furthermore, pedestrian lighting is required to be installed to further upgrade and revitalize all areas of the city when a change of ownership, lessee or lessor occurs. The pedestrian lighting must be approved by the city based on development guidelines maintained in the public works department. 
B.  All commercial, retail, office and institutional, mixed use, CUPD, and industrial property shall be required to update to the current ordinances concerning tree and vegetation protection, landscaping, lighting, sidewalk, acceleration and deceleration lanes, and sign codes when, at any time after the initial construction, there is a 60 percent change in tenants or more than 50 percent of the retail space changes at any one time. 
This shall include but not be limited to the paving and restriping of parking lots, underground utilities, and the exclusion of certain types of exterior building materials. The perimeter of all parking lots must have 24-inch high-back curb and gutter. 
Furthermore, pedestrian lighting is required to be installed to further upgrade and revitalize all areas of the city when these changes occur. The pedestrian lighting must be approved by the city based on development guidelines maintained in the public works department. 
C.  Certificates of completion. 
1.  Two certificates of completion (shell certificate and tenancy certificate) shall be issued simultaneously for the initial construction of buildings on commercial, retail, office and institutional, mixed use, CUPD, and industrial property. 
The first certificate, the shell certificate, shall remain in effect until there are any changes in the character of the building, square footage of the building, or if the structure is modified, altered, or damaged. The above conditions are contingent upon the structure not having any violations of the provisions of the building code or other laws that are enforced for public safety. The shell certificate shall run the life of the building. 
A shell certificate must be obtained before the city will issue an occupation tax certificate, sign permits, promotional permits, or establish garbage service. 
2.  The second certificate, the tenancy certificate, shall remain in effect until the tenancy changes. In the case of individual tenants in buildings located on commercial, retail, office and institutional, mixed use, CUPD, and industrial property, the tenancy certificate expires when a tenant moves out of an individual space. Each new tenant must obtain a tenancy certificate before the city will issue an occupation tax certificate, sign permits, promotional permits, or establish garbage service. 
3.  Whenever any remodeling, renovations, additions or new construction occurs on parcels of commercial, retail, office and institutional, mixed use, CUPD, and industrial property, the above certificates of completion and their accompanying provisions must be met before the city will issue an occupation tax certificate, sign permits, promotional permits, or establish garbage service. 
4.  The certificates of completion will be issued based on compliance with Title 8 Planning and Zoning, Chapter 2 Building Requirements and Code Enforcement, Article A Constructions Standards, Section 8-2-1 State Minimum Standard Codes (b), with Georgia amendments, or any subsequent edition of the same as adopted by the city council. 
D.  The requirements for updating of properties on parcels of commercial, retail, office and institutional, mixed-use, CUPD, and industrial property do not include parcels currently developed for single-family residential purposes and containing no more than one acre of property. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 3, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2000-11, § 1, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 2000-15, § 1, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 2, 7-22-03; Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 2009-06, §§ 8, 9, 5-26-09) 
Section 814 - Public or private bus systems and stops. 
A.  Public or private bus systems intended for the transportation of nonschool related individuals are prohibited from stopping to pick up passengers on any thoroughfare in the City of Morrow outside of the designated stops that have been approved by the city. All intra subdivision travel and stopping is prohibited. 
B.  All bus stops must be approved by the mayor and council. 
C.  Each approved bus stop must have a 12-foot by 50-foot pull over lane, and the bus must pull completely off the roadway and into the lane before picking up or dropping off its passengers. Each stop must also have a bus shelter with a bench that seats four adults with over head lighting. The design of the shelter, and light poles shall be landscaped and architecturally approved per the direction of the public works director and the city manager. 
D.  Temporary staffing offices, labor halls, private and non profit employment companies, and individuals shall be prohibited from offering a transport service, taxi service, bus service, courtesy drop off/pick up service or any other type of non-personal use transportation without a Morrow taxi license and obtaining the proper taxi zoning and conditional use permits from the City of Morrow. Tourism hotels and motels that pay a six percent, or other rate as determined by state law and the city, tourism tax on 100 percent of their room revenue are exempt from the license requirement. Extended stay hotels do not qualify as tourism hotels. 
E.  City council defined and approved entertainment districts or city council approved family oriented entertainment businesses that own or lease more than 30,000 square feet of entertainment space in the City of Morrow may operate a courtesy limousine service specifically for their guests if they have a City of Morrow alcohol pouring license. Drop off, pick up, and over night parking of the vehicles shall be coordinated with the city manager. 
F.  No provision of this zoning ordinance, as it exists now or as it is from time to time amended, shall apply to the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority's ("MARTA") provision of public transit service within the city for so long as there is a written agreement between MARTA and the city providing for the terms and conditions of MARTA's provision of public transit service within the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 3, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 2015-03 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Section 815 - Property maintenance. 
A.  Open or outdoor storage. The open or outdoor storage of appliances, building materials, equipment, garbage, goods, glass, materials, merchandise, rubbish, trash or similar items shall not be permitted, maintained or stored on any premises for more than 24 hours. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Property where outdoor storage is authorized by the zoning ordinance; 
2.  Cut fire wood not to exceed two cords on individual property, for the personal use of the owner or occupant and maintained as follows: 
(1)  Neatly stacked 12 inches above ground level in narrow rows; 
(2)  Kept free of high grass or weed growth; 
(3)  Kept free of rodents and such. 
3.  Residentially zoned property five acres or greater in size. 
B.  Trees. 
1.  Hazardous trees. Dead, dying, damaged or diseased trees shall not be allowed to exist or to be maintained on any premises which are hazardous to adjacent property or to persons on adjacent property. A finding by the public works director or a registered forester or certified arborist shall constitute prima-facie evidence that a tree is in danger of falling upon adjacent lots or public streets due to the death or impending death of the tree, or due to damage by weather conditions or due to disease infestation. 
2.  Tree stumps. Tree stumps shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises for more than 15 days after the tree has been cut, unless prior arrangements are made by the public works director or his designee. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Property covered by a valid land disturbing permit; 
2.  Property one acre or greater in size; and 
3.  Property zoned agricultural. 
3.  Tree debris. Felled trees, slash, removed tree limbs, or other portions of any tree shall not be permitted or maintained on the ground on any premises for more than 15 days, unless prior arrangements are made by the public works director or his designee. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Property covered by a valid land disturbing permit; 
2.  Cut fire wood not to exceed two cords on individual property, for the personal use of the owner or occupant and maintained as follows: 
(1)  Neatly stacked 12 inches above ground level in narrow rows; 
(2)  Kept free of high grass or weed growth; 
(3)  Kept free of rodents and such. 
3.  Property one acre or greater in size; and 
4.  Property zoned agricultural. 
C.  Swimming pools. Stagnant water in swimming pools conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects shall not be permitted or maintained on any premises. A finding by a health official of the Clayton County Environmental Health Department shall constitute prima-facie evidence that stagnant water in a swimming pool is conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects. 
D.  Vehicle repairs. Vehicle repairs in all residential areas may only be done on vehicles belonging to that home and must be done inside an enclosed garage. In the case of an emergency, the city manager, police chief, or their designee may grant an exception for a limited time. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
Section 816 - Building maintenance. 
A.  Exterior surface treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches and trim shall be maintained in good repair. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking, and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry joints shall be maintained weather resistant and watertight. 
B.  Exterior walls. Exterior walls of buildings shall be maintained free from holes, breaks, loose, or rotting materials, and shall be maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated as needed to prevent deterioration. 
C.  Roofs. Roofs of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound and in a safe condition and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the interior portions of a building. All portions, additions or sections of a roof including, but not limited to, the fascia, eave, soffit, sheathing, rafter tail, barge rafter, vent screening, gutter, downspout, roof jack, lead or metal flashing, shall be complete with all trim strips, moldings, brackets, braces and supports attached or fastened in accordance with common building practices. 
D.  Exterior stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Exterior stairways, decks, porches, and balconies, and all appurtenances attached thereto, of buildings shall be maintained so that they are structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage, and capable of supporting the imposed loads. 
E.  Windows. Windows of buildings shall be fully supplied and maintained with glass window panes or with a substitute approved by the building inspector, which are without open cracks or holes. Screens, if provided, shall be securely fastened to the window. 
F.  Exterior doors and frames. Exterior doors of buildings shall be maintained so that they fit reasonably well within their frames so as to substantially prevent rain and wind from entering a building. Exterior door jambs, stops, headers and moldings shall be securely attached to the structure and maintained in good condition without splitting or deterioration. Additionally, exterior doors shall be provided with proper hardware and maintained in proper working condition. 
G.  Decorative features. Cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings, and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 3, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2005-02, § III, 4-12-05) 
ARTICLE IX. - SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 901 - Adoption of district regulations. 
Zoning district regulations are set forth herein in the schedule of district regulations which is hereby adopted by reference as a part of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § IV, 4-12-05) 
Section 902 - Uses common to all residential districts. 
There exist certain uses which are deemed to be compatible and acceptable when located in a residential district provided each use meets the space limits of the particular residential district. 
The following uses are allowed in all residential districts subject to the restrictions imposed by the district regulations. 
Permitted Uses: 
Single-family residences. 
Existing cemeteries. 
Accessory Uses: 
Accessory buildings and structures. 
Home occupations. 
Subdivision recreation areas owned, operated and maintained by Homeowners' Associations exclusively for the use of residents and their guests. 
The parking of one unoccupied travel trailer, motor coach or pleasure boat subject to provisions of this ordinance provided the lot is at least 15,000 square feet. 
Utility sub-stations when located in accordance with the requirements and space limits set forth in the district provisions. All sub-stations shall have a landscaped and/or masonry barrier on all sides. 
Conditional Uses: 
Cemeteries. 
Public, parochial and private schools and colleges including dormitories, convents, and monasteries when located on the same site as the school or college. The minimum site shall be five acres for such facilities. 
Churches, synagogues, chapels, and other places of religious worship and instruction shall have a minimum lot area of four acres. No building or structure shall be located within 25 feet of the property line and a planted buffer strip of minimum width of ten feet shall be installed along the side and rear property lines. No church, synagogue, chapel, or other place of religious worship and instruction shall be located within 100 yards (or 300 feet) of any establishment that sells or offers to sell any distilled spirits in accordance with the licensure and permitting requirements of the state and the city. 
Country clubs, including golf courses, swim clubs, tennis clubs, and neighborhood clubhouses, all of which shall be located on a site of not less than one acre and open only to paid membership. Sleeping quarters for other than one caretaker, security guard, or manager shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 98-06, § 1, 8-25-98; Ord. No. 2005-02, § IV, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 2013-48, § 1, 9-24-13) 
Section 902A - Residential construction standards. 
Purpose: Section 902A, Residential construction standards, is designed to provide continuity of quality in existing neighborhoods, to protect property values, to preserve the health and welfare of the citizens of this community, and to continue the tradition of using high quality building materials in all residential construction. The following standards shall become effective upon passage of this ordinance and shall apply to all residential developments, whether single residence or multiple residences. Existing residential lots or developments may remain as developed under previous construction standards, but must come into compliance subject to the provisions contained in Section 502(3) and Section 503(2) and (3) of the city zoning ordinance. 
Permitted uses: 
Single-family dwellings, pools and related structures. 
Recreation areas, including tennis courts or other facilities. 
Accessory uses: 
Those accessory uses normally associated with residential development (either as a single residence or multiple residences). 
Conditional uses: 
Those conditional uses normally associated with residential development, as defined in related ordinances. 
Space limits: 
Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
Maximum ground coverage: 40 percent of the impervious area. 
Additional development requirements (single residence, multiple residences, or multifamily residences.) 
Entrances: No more than three entrances shall be permitted in any development. Said entrances shall have a formalized entrance constructed of brick or stone, noting the name of the development. 
Utilities: All utilities including gas, electric, telephone, cable TV, water and sewer shall be located underground. All utility easements shall be reflected on the subdivision plat. 
Sidewalks: Sidewalks, five feet in width, shall be installed continuously along both sides of the street; a two-foot grassed strip shall be placed between the back of the curb and the sidewalk. All sidewalks shall have handicap accessible ramps. 
Streetlights: Streetlights shall be installed at the expense of the developer; the number and location shall be approved by the public works director or his designee. 
Landscaping: Landscaping for the project and the typical landscaping layout for the individual lots must be submitted to the public works director or his designee for approval prior to the approval of the subdivision plan. All lots shall have sodded front and side yards with underground irrigation systems installed. Land clearing and landscaping shall be done in conformance with the city's tree preservation and replacement policy as well as the landscaping ordinance. 
Screening: The outer boundary of such development shall be screened. If the topography of the land allows, landscaped berms shall be placed along the boundary of such development to provide an effective screen between this development and the adjoin ing land use. Otherwise, privacy fencing and plantings shall be used in combination to provide an effective screen. Screening of the proposed development shall be reviewed by the public works director or his designee. Final approval of all screening shall rest with the city manager or his designee. 
Driveways and walkways: 
A.  All lots, buildings, structures and uses of land shall provide off-street parking in an amount sufficient to meet the needs required by the building or use of the land. All off-street parking must be on a paved, dust-free surface subject to specifications on file in the public works department. Parking on the street, the sidewalk, the walkway or on the grass is prohibited. All impervious areas must comply with maximum ground coverage and setback requirements in accordance with the other provisions of this zoning ordinance. Paving in the front setback area of a single-family parcel is limited to the lot size designated by the zoning classification, primary structure, and total impervious surface. No driveway shall connect to an arterial or collector street. 
B.  Parking in any multi-family residential development is permitted only in designated parking spaces in accordance with regulations contained in this ordinance. 
C.  Driveways are required to connect enclosed garages with the public street for all residential development. All such driveways shall be paved with concrete or asphalt surfaces consistent with adjacent lots in the development. The number of required spaces under the off-street parking standards of Article XII shall be met with respect to driveways. Long-term use of driveways (over 48 hours) for resident parking is prohibited. Such driveway spaces are used for the occasional and interim use of guests. Additionally, no boats, campers or other RVs are allowed for storage outside of an enclosed garage. 
D.  A driveway for a single-family parcel may not exceed 24 feet in width along any roadway. Paving in the front yard shall be limited to a maximum of 24 feet in width measured by the line of sight from the roadway to the garage or carport. Driveway aprons shall be installed according to specifications on file in the public works department. The general design of the driveway includes, but is not limited to, curbing, gutters, sidewalk and grass strip. 
E.  On corner lots, the paving shall be limited to one driveway. Dual entrances on a single parcel are not allowed. Paving in the side-yard may be considered, but in no case shall be closer than five feet from the property line. 
F.  Walkways shall be composed of stone, cast-stone, brick, concrete or special concrete masonry service and used as a passage for walking. Walkways in residential developments may not exceed five feet in width. Parking on a walkway is prohibited. 
G.  Minor exceptions to these standards not exceeding 15 percent of the allowable standard may be made by the zoning enforcement officer where substantial conformance with the intent of this section can be shown. 
H.  Where extension or expansion of an existing sidewalk or driveway is desired, or necessitated by new construction or renovation work, any extension or addition to the existing driveway or walkway shall be required to match existing materials obtained both in composition and in color. Where new concrete is poured next to an existing driveway, if the new concrete cannot be made to appear similar to the existing concrete, then the existing concrete shall be removed and the entire driveway redone. 
Solid waste: Refuse containers and related refuse storage areas shall be screened from view and there shall be no common dumpsters. 
Exteriors: The exterior finish of all dwelling units shall be either brick, stone or portland cement-based stucco, installed over wire lathe, backed with ten pound felt. A combination of these finishes will be considered by the city manager or his designee. All exterior finishes are subject to the final approval or disapproval by the mayor and council. 
Recreation: 
1.  Fifteen percent of the developable area shall be set aside for recreation facilities, and access to these facilities shall be readily available to all of the residents of the individual residential community, including their guests if permitted by the bylaws, rules or other regulations of that community. The proposed recreation improvements shall be illustrated as part of the preliminary plat process. All recreation improvements shall be reviewed by the public works director or his designee. Final approval shall rest with the city manager. The recreation area must be maintained in its original conditional, and the method of maintenance and payment for the same must be included in the subdivision maintenance agreement. 
2.  All permanent basketball goals and courts must be in the backyard. No goal shall be in the public street as a court or playing surface. Exceptions because of house location on corner lots may be granted by the city manager. Portable goals are allowed in the front but must be pulled to the side yard after use. 
Garages: 
1.  An attached, two-car enclosed garage is required for each house, condominium, or apartment. Each garage shall have a side entrance unless other approval is granted during the plan review or by the mayor and council. 
2.  A carport or garage addition must be designed and constructed of material, along with a gable roof that will match the primary structure. A lean-to and/o metal pole vertical supports are prohibited. 
3.  Carport enclosures must be designed and constructed of materials that match the primary structure. Adequate parking must be included as part of the construction plan. 
Storage sheds: All storage sheds constructed after January 1, 1999, must be made of the same exterior building materials as the dwelling. The shed shall be maintained in a fashion that prevents the attraction of vermin and does not subtract from the visual appeal of the surrounding neighborhood. 
Covenants: All residential developments built after January 1, 1999, must have protective covenants that prevent the renting of the property to nonfamily members. Furthermore, the covenants must include all elements of the City Code. 
Gated communities: All multifamily developments built after January 1, 1999, must have a gated access that is in use at all times. (A card access system is preferred.) All other multifamily properties must provide gated access to their city properties at the change of ownership. All current properties must submit a plan of compliance at the change of 60 percent of their tenants or within three years, whichever comes first. The property must be in full compliance two years after the plan is submitted and approved by the public works director and the city manager. 
Residential occupancy limitations: 
Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, rooming units, and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces. 
Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than ten feet in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than four feet between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls. 
Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet. 
Exceptions: 
1.  In one-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four feet on center and projecting not more than six inches below the required ceiling height; 
2.  Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches with not less than six feet four inches of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions; and provided that these rooms are equipped with a hard-wired smoke detector with battery back-up; 
3.  Attic or the top habitable floor in a multi-floor dwelling that has rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least seven and one-half feet over not less than 50 percent of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet or more shall be included. 
Bedroom requirements. 
1.  Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one occupant shall contain at least 100 square feet of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
2.  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of the following table: 

 
Note a: See paragraph 2 of this section for combined living room/dining room spaces. 
Note b: See paragraph 1 of this section for limitations on determining minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. 
1.  Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by the above table shall not be included as sleeping area in determining minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with the section that addresses bedroom requirements. 
2.  Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces shall comply with the requirements of the above table if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination of living room/dining room. 
Mailboxes: All mailboxes must be compatible with the development. The mayor and council have final architectural approval of said mailboxes. House numbers shall be displayed on the mailboxes in such a manner as to be visible for a distance of 150 feet. 
Additional maintenance requirements: 
Rental or leased property: All residential property for rent or lease that is not owner occupied is required to pass a fire inspection upon the signing of a lease by a new tenant. Also, when the lease is executed, the owner must meet the current residential landscape, underground utility and irrigation requirements within the Code. All exterior buildings and structures that are in violation of the current codes must be removed. A poured driveway is required under all parked vehicles, and it is the property owner's responsibility to ensure compliance or pour additional driveway to meet the needs of the tenant. 
Homeowners' associations and maintenance agreements: All new subdivisions are required to have a homeowners' association and current maintenance agreements. 
(Ord. No. 99-01, § 1, 1-12-99; Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 2002-04, § 1, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 2005-02, § IV, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 2009-06, § 10, 5-26-09) 
Section 903 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-06, § 11, adopted May 26, 2009, repealed § 903 which pertained to the RS-25 single-family residence 25,000 square foot district and derived from Ord. No. 86-04, adopted March 21, 1986. 
Section 904 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-06, § 11, adopted May 26, 2009, repealed § 904 which pertained to the RS-15 single-family residence 15,000 square foot district and derived from Ord. No. 86-04, adopted March 21, 1986. 
Section 905 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-06, § 11, adopted May 26, 2009, repealed § 905 which pertained to the RG general residence district and derived from Ord. No. 86-04, adopted March 21, 1986. 
Section 905A - RS-80. 
Purpose: The RS-80 zoning district provides for the development of single-family residential structures on smaller, individual lots. This district will also allow for more flexibility within the buildable area of the lot. Developments completed within this district will require the installation of various improvements to enhance the aesthetics of this development. 
Permitted uses: Single-family dwellings, pool and related structures. Recreation areas including tennis courts, or other facilities. 
Accessory uses: Those accessory uses normally associated with residential development. 
Conditional uses: Those conditional uses normally associated with residential development. 
Space limits: 
Minimum lot area: Every lot shall have a land area of not less than 8,000 square feet. On average, there can be no more than four houses per net acre. Net acreage is defined as that property remaining when the set asides (15 percent of the gross) are deducted from the total acreage. No detached outbuildings, clothes lines or chain link fences will be permitted. 
Minimum lot width: The minimum lot width shall be 70 feet at the building line. No building shall be constructed on a lot which has less than 25 feet of immediate frontage on at least one public street. 
Minimum front yard: A minimum of 35 feet at the street right-of-way; the street right-of-way shall be reduced to 30 feet at the street right-of-way for an attached garage. 
Minimum rear yard: Each dwelling shall have a minimum rear yard depth of 25 feet. Houses with rear yards abutting a street shall be provided with an approved buffer/screening and appropriate landscaping between the buffer/screening and the street. 
Minimum side yard: The side yard setback shall be no less than eight feet; however, no building shall be closer than 35 feet to the boundary of this district. 
Maximum ground coverage: 40 percent of the lot. 
Maximum floor area: Dwellings shall have a floor area of not less than 1,400 square feet of heated space, excluding garages and porches. Developments under this district must adhere to the following percentages: 
1,400 to 1,499 square feet, no more than 25 percent of the total houses built. 
1,500 to 1,699 square feet, no more than 65 percent of the total houses built. 
1,700 square feet or more, no less than 35 percent of the total houses built. 
Each dwelling shall have a garage or a carport for at least two automobiles, 400 square feet minimum. 
Additional development requirements. 
Entrances: No more than one entrance per street with a maximum of three entrances shall be permitted. Said entrance shall have a formalized entrance constructed of brick or stone, noting the name of the development, less any form of advertising. 
Utilities: All utilities including gas, electric, telephone, cable TV, water and sewer shall be located underground. All utility easements shall be reflected on the subdivision plat. 
Sidewalks: Sidewalks, four feet in width, shall be installed continuously along both sides of the street; a three foot grassed strip shall be placed between the back of the curb and the sidewalk. All sidewalks shall have handicap accessible ramps. 
Streetlights: Streetlights shall be installed at the expense of the developer; quality, number, and location shall be approved by the public works director or his designee. 
Landscaping and exteriors: Landscaping for the project and the typical landscaping layout for the individual lots must be submitted to the public works department for approval prior to approval of the subdivision plan. Landscaping for all lots shall use sod grass (no seed or straw) for the entire yard (front, back, side and any additional area). All lots shall have underground irrigation systems installed. Land clearing and landscaping shall be done in conformance with the city's tree preservation and replacement policy. 
One hundred percent of the exterior finishing on the sides and back of a dwelling will be either brick, stone or portland cement based stucco, installed over wire lathe, backed with ten pound felt. A combination of these finishes will be considered. 
(The city manager can approve administrative de minimis variances.) 
The front surface of a dwelling will be a minimum 75 percent of the aforementioned materials. The remaining 25 percent may incorporate only approved materials to enhance the aesthetics of the dwelling. (see Exhibits A*, B* and C*) No more than one side of a dwelling can be the front, for the purpose of exterior finishes. 
The front surface of houses located on a corner lot shall be considered the side which incorporates the main entrance of the dwelling. 
*Note— Exhibits A, B and C, referenced above, are not set out herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the city offices. 
Screening: The outer boundary of such development shall be screened. If the topography of the land allows, landscaped berms shall be placed along the boundary of such development to provide an effective screen between this development and the adjoining land use. Otherwise, privacy fencing and plantings shall be used in combination to provide an effective screen. Screening of the proposed development shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning board. Final approval of all screening shall rest with the mayor and council. 
Driveways: All lots developed shall be provided with a paved driveway. No driveway shall connect to an arterial or collector street. On-street parking is prohibited. 
Solid waste: Refuse containers and related refuse storage areas shall be screened from view and there shall be no common dumpsters. 
Exteriors: The exterior finish of all dwelling units shall be either brick, stone or portland cement based stucco, installed over wire lathe, backed with ten-pound felt. A combination of these finishes will be considered. 
Recreation: 15 percent of the developable area shall be set aside for recreation facilities. The proposed recreation improvements shall be illustrated as part of the preliminary plat process. All recreation improvements shall be reviewed by the city manager or his designee. Final approval shall rest with the mayor and council. 
Homeowners' associations and maintenance agreements: All new subdivisions are required to have a homeowners' association and current maintenance agreements. All initial homeowner's association rules and bylaws and maintenance agreements shall be submitted with the original preliminary plat. Additionally, all changes to the maintenance agreements must be approved by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 98-09, § 1, 9-8-98; Ord. No. 99-14, § 1, 6-8-99; Ord. No. 2005-05, § V, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 2005-10, § I, 12-13-05) 
Section 906 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, adopted July 13, 2004, repealed § 906, which pertained to RMA Multiple-family residence district (apartments) and derived from Ord. No. 86-04, adopted March 21, 1986. The users attention is directed to section 915 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Section 907 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, adopted July 13, 2004, repealed § 907, which pertained to RMC Multiple-family residence district (condominiums) and derived from Ord. No. 86-04, adopted March 21, 1986. The users attention is directed to section 915 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
Section 907A - Community university planned district (C.U.P.D.).[2] 
Purpose and intent: The purpose and intent of this article is to establish a uniform procedure for review and approval of projects; to protect, enhance, preserve or reuse places, sites, buildings, structures, objects, streets, street furniture, sidewalks, neighborhoods, and landscape features; provide for aesthetic, economic, and functional value of properties, neighborhoods, and structures; and to promote aesthetics of the built environment, business viability, neighborhood preservation and public safety in the City of Morrow Community University Planned District (CUPD). 
The added purposes of this Community University Planned District allows developers the opportunity to maximize the building floor area on each lot, locate parking off the street frontage so that businesses can move close to the sidewalk and more readily attract pedestrians, place buildings at a minimal front setback line close behind a sidewalk of adequate width, encourage construction of at least three-story buildings, locate retail uses on the ground-floor street frontage preferably adjacent to other retail uses, locate on second and higher floors office, service, or residential uses that generate pedestrian traffic from the general public to utilize the continuity along the street frontage of retail uses, provide better access to the land areas remaining undeveloped or underdeveloped, develop sidewalks and building features (e.g., entrances, weather protection) so as to maximize safety, comfort, ease of movement, and convenience for pedestrians. 
The scope of this zoning also includes standards for sidewalks; pedestrian and site lighting; street trees; site development; design, materials, location and orientation of buildings and accessory structures; landscaping; screening and material. These standards are necessary to implement the goals contained in the City of Morrow Livable Community Initiative Study. Such goals include, but are not limited to, implementing an integrated transportation and land use plan; creating a town center, applying design guidelines; improving traffic and the pedestrian environment, aesthetics of the built environment, and business viability; preserving neighborhoods and promoting public safety. Community University Planned District (CUPD) standards apply to all properties within the district for which initial development or redevelopment is taking place; provided that nothing in this article shall prohibit homeowners of existing single-family homes from improving their homes in accordance with traditional standards of the RS-80 District and city adopted codes of technical regulations. This proviso shall exempt from compliance, improvements to homes that would otherwise be affected by the 40 percent trigger of the review process below; provided further that any single-family home for which demolition of 50 percent or more of the existing home is sought, shall comply with the full terms of this article. 
Studies and master plan. The City of Morrow received money from the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC) in 2001 to study and design a pedestrian and transportation friendly town center. The Sizemore Floyd Company was hired to hold public hearings, develop community support, and to create a preliminary design plan that met the desires of the Morrow community and the smart growth concepts required for Metro Atlanta. The master design plans, visual aids, and model shall be used as a guide to create new development within the Livable Centers Initiative (LCI) area. Most of this area is commonly known as Gateway Village, but really represents the Community University Planned District (CUPD) in our comprehensive plans and land use maps. Should a concern relating to our intent for the CUPD district arise by developers, staff, or future Morrow leaders, the LCI study and findings shall offer visual and empirical data proving our community's intent and the ARC's approval of our plans. 
Review process. Applications for improvements to developed sites and/or existing structures shall meet the standards contained in this article for installation of sidewalks, pedestrian lighting, and street trees, when the proposed interior and/or exterior renovation of a building and/or site redevelopment improvements have a declared value equal to or greater than 40 percent of the property's most recent tax assessment, building or expansion of floor space of an existing building. 
Estimated costs of, including but not limited to, demolition, construction, installation, and fabrication, including labor and materials, for both interior and exterior improvements, shall be submitted at the time a building and/or land disturbance permit application is filed. 
The declared value of improvements under multiple permits shall be cumulative and shall include the value of improvements under permits issued for the previous seven years, from the date the most recent application is filed. 
All land disturbance permit applications for new construction shall meet the standards contained in the CUPD district. 
All building permit applications for new buildings shall meet the standards contained in the CUPD district. 
Where two or more properties, lots or parcels are located within the same block or have frontage on the same side of the street between two intersecting streets, and are under common zoning or ownership and are being developed or re-developed as a single development operation or a series of coordinated development operations, these properties shall be considered as a single property for purposes of this article. 
When a portion of any parcel, lot, property, or development, falls within the boundary of the CUPD district, the entire development shall meet these standards. 
Section 1. Purpose of district. The intent of the Community University Planned District (CUPD) is designed to create a site for mixed-use development that forms a new town center for the City of Morrow. A mixing of residential, office and retail space will allow for a district with a pedestrian-friendly atmosphere, shared utility lines and better use of green space. The district will also: 
•  Encourage a pedestrian environment that will limit the number of necessary vehicle trips. 
•  Limit congestion and improve air quality. 
•  Create green space through the preservation of environmentally significant, scenic and functional open space. 
•  Include the use of open space, public meeting areas and recreational uses as a part of any project. 
•  Provide for parking in a way that does not diminish the pedestrian environment. 
•  Promote opportunities for residential and commercial development. 
•  Encourage additional street level activity. 
•  Provide continuing quality in existing residential and business districts by improving the aesthetics of the area. 
Section 2. Use regulations. 
A.  Authorized uses. The following uses are permitted within CUPD. 
1.  Residential. In this district, the residential uses are limited to the following: 
•  Rowhouse. 
•  Townhouse/condominium. 
•  Multi-family use. 
2.  Retail. In this district, retail, office and business are limited to the following: 
•  Antique and art shops. 
•  Apparel stores. 
•  Aquarium shops. 
•  Banks, savings and loan associations, credit unions and similar financial institutions; this does not include any drive-in service window. 
•  Books, stationary and card shops. 
•  Barber shops, beauty shops, manicure shops, day spas and any similar personal service establishments. 
•  Caterer and wedding service, office only. 
•  Drug stores and apothecary shops. 
•  Dry cleaning collection stations. 
•  Electrical goods and fixtures for consumer use. 
•  Electronics store. 
•  Florists and gift shops, retail only. 
•  Grocery, fruit, vegetable and meat markets; do not include the killing, eviscerating, skinning, plucking or smoking of products. 
•  Household and office furniture, furnishings and appliances, retail sales only. 
•  Jewelry stores. 
•  Medical/dental clinics and offices with a maximum allowable size of 3,000 square feet. 
•  Museums, art galleries, libraries and similar nonprofit, cultural arts facilities. 
•  Music stores. 
•  News, cigar, tobacco and candy shops, retail only. 
•  Offices, studios, clinics, laboratories and similar uses but not blood donor stations. 
•  Optical goods. 
•  Photographers, including the sale of supplies, film development and equipment. 
•  Professional or service agencies, but not hiring halls. 
•  Professional offices for architect, attorney, engineer and real estate. 
•  Quick-copy centers. 
•  Restaurants, coffee shops, bakeries, catering establishments and delicatessens; no drive-thru service allowed. 
•  Retail establishments which do not exceed 8,000 square feet. 
•  Shoe stores and shoe repair shops. 
•  Studios for dance, music and drama. 
•  Supermarkets which do not exceed 15,000 square feet. 
•  Tailoring, custom dress making, millinery and similar establishments. 
•  Other retail and service uses as may be determined by the city council to be similar, and compatible with the above listed permitted uses. 
3.  Accessory uses. In this district, the following accessory uses are permitted: 
•  Community, social, hobby or laundry facilities for use by occupants of a development within the district. 
•  Recreation space and facilities including exercise facilities and weight rooms, tennis, racquetball, handball and volleyball courts, spas and swimming pools for use by occupants of a development within the district. 
•  Parking and parking structures. 
B.  Free-standing uses. The following uses are permitted within CUPD and are the only structures within this district that do not have to be mixed use provided that they are at least three stories in height: 
•  Hotels. 
•  Office complex. 
•  Rail station. 
•  University owned and occupied buildings. 
C.  Prohibited uses. Prohibited retail, business and office uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
•  Adult businesses. 
•  Coin operated laundry facilities. 
•  Drive-thru service windows, stacking lanes and circulation. 
•  Free standing retail. 
•  Pawn shops. 
•  Pool halls, billiard parlors, amusement arcades and game rooms. 
•  Repair shops. 
•  Automobile service or repair shops. 
•  Automobile sales or lease. 
•  Service stations. 
•  Storage, train yards and warehousing switching for MARTA or similar public utility. 
•  All commercial sales and service shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings; there shall be no unenclosed displays of merchandise; outdoor sales or displays are permissible only by special permit. 
•  No storefront establishment shall be used for storage of merchandise. 
•  No outside storage is permitted. 
•  Any use or form of operation which is offensive by means of odor, smoke, noise, glare, fumes, gas vibration, unusual danger of fire or explosion, emission of particulate matter, or interferes with radio or television communication, or is by any other means considered incompatible with the quality of CUPD, is prohibited. 
•  Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. 
D.  Conditional uses. Forms of retail, office or business not listed under the authorized or free-standing use, and not prohibited in this district, may be submitted to the planning and zoning board for approval of a conditional use. A report and detailed site plan of the proposed use shall be submitted by the applicant documenting specifically how the provisions of the zoning district will be complied with. The report shall also document impacts of the proposed use upon community facility and/or adjacent properties. 
1.  The city council shall consider all of the following in rendering a decision on conditional uses: 
a.  The report submitted by the applicant. 
b.  That all provisions of this ordinance have been met. 
c.  That the applicant has made a binding agreement for any specific limitations or conditions necessary to protect the public interest and assure the continued beneficial use and enjoyment of nearby properties or that no special limitations are necessary to protect the public. 
d.  That the conditional use with specific limitations and design features as may have been required will further the aims of the land use plan and will not be unduly detrimental to nearby properties. 
2.  The city council shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the request for conditional use. Additional conditions may be imposed by the city council in the interest of ensuring the public health, safety and welfare in accordance with the requirements of Section 10 herein. 
E.  General conditions. To provide further development plans which are consistent with the overall plan for CUPD, the following conditions shall be applied. 
1.  To ensure the proper mixed-use development, all buildings within this district, with the exception of those marked free-standing use, shall consist of at least three stories with ground level retail, office or residential uses. 
F.  Home occupations. Home occupations are permitted but subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Generally, such home occupations as may be permitted are those which are conducted solely indoors, do not generate significant levels of pedestrian or vehicular traffic and give no indication outwardly of a commercial activity. Those uses permitted as home occupations would include, but not be limited to, those types of occupations such as: 
a.  Typing services. 
b.  Manufacturer's representative. 
c.  Bookkeeping. 
d.  Accounting. 
e.  Computer software. 
f.  Development offices. 
g.  Clergymen. 
h.  Contractor's office (administrative only). 
2.  Specifically prohibited as a home occupation would be: 
a.  Mechanical or body repair of vehicular equipment. 
b.  Contractors, specifically where there is storage of material, equipment, inventory or vehicle(s) advertising or indicating such business is located on the premises. 
c.  Activity requiring persons traveling to and from the permitted location. 
d.  Activity where a commodity and/or product is sold on the premises. 
3.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation, including but not limited to any type of identifying signs. 
4.  No home occupation shall be permitted to generate or produce obnoxious odors, glare, noise, vibration, electrical or electronic disturbances, or generate radioactivity or other emanation detrimental to the health, welfare and/or environment of the adjoining premises or affecting the character of the area in which the home occupation in located. 
5.  Only that equipment customarily used in the practice of any business or profession may be installed or used, and all such equipment must be located completely within the premises. In no event shall such equipment, or the use thereof, cause any intrusion in any form upon adjoining properties. 
6.  No home occupation permit will be issued to any premises where any accessory building or outside storage unit is involved in the storage of materials and/or equipment for use in connection with the home occupation. 
7.  Such use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and shall be supervised by one or more persons living within the premises. 
8.  The written consent of the owner of the property is required in all cases and is to be submitted along with the application for a home occupation permit. 
9.  No more than 25 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for the business operation. 
10.  Those persons involved in the home occupation shall be limited to the use of passenger vehicles only being parked on the premises wherein the home occupation is being practiced. These vehicles shall not display any symbols, letters, numbers, words, phrases, codes or markings of any kind which would indicate in any manner that a home occupation was being practiced. 
11.  There shall be no deliveries of supplies for use in the home occupation or pickup of the items produced by the occupant by commercial carriers. 
12.  No home occupation shall be permitted wherein group instructions or group assembly or activity is involved. To that end, dance instructions, exercise classes, group sales presentations and similar activities would not be permitted as a home occupation. 
13.  Terms for a home occupation application and permit can be found under Title 9, Licensing and Regulation, Chapter 5, Home Occupations, of the City of Morrow, Georgia, Code of Ordinances. 
G.  Special provisions. The only exception to outdoor retail is accessory outdoor dining. 
1.  Accessory outdoor dining is permitted only when all other sidewalk requirements are met. 
2.  The outdoor dining area may only be separated from the sidewalk by movable planters or fencing with a maximum height of 36 inches. 
3.  The preparation of food outside is prohibited. Food service facilities must be provided in accordance with the Morrow Food and Food Establishment Ordinance. 
4.  Proper trash and waste removal and clean-up of the area must be provided for. 
5.  Morrow noise ordinances must be met. 
H.  Outdoor sales and commercial promotions. Any outside sales and/or commercial promotions shall be required to obtain a permit subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Outdoor sales and/or commercial promotions may be permitted for a period of ten days each calendar year with a maximum of two permits per calendar year. 
2.  Goods, products and merchandise displayed during outside sales and/or commercial promotions shall be displayed on a sidewalk within ten feet of the business building. 
3.  In order to qualify for a permit, the applicant must: 
a.  Provide a map, plan or drawing to indicate adequate off-street parking for patrons, employees and delivery trucks; such map, plan or drawing should also indicate that no fire lanes, streets or other pubic rights-of-way will be blocked as a result of the sale or promotion. 
b.  If food is served, provide food service facilities in accordance with the Morrow Food and Food Establishment Ordinance. 
c.  Provide for adequate trash and waste removal and clean-up of the area. 
d.  Comply with all requirements of the Morrow Noise Ordinances. 
e.  Comply with all other reasonable conditions imposed by the city manager. 
Section 3. District and building requirements. 
A.  Size of district. Establishment of CUPD shall require contiguity with land already designated as a part of such district on the city zoning map or, in lieu thereof, a minimum of one acre of land located within one-half mile of Clayton State University. 
B.  Open space. A minimum of 20 percent of the development property shall be reserved for open space, parks, other recreational purposes or other public uses, subject to the following: 
1.  While such open space shall not be required to be contiguous, the open space must be useable and functional for open space, parks, other recreational purposes or other public uses. 
2.  The required parking and right-of-way area shall not be credited toward the minimum open space requirements. 
3.  The amount of required common open space may be reduced as the density of development is increased. 
4.  Land proposed to be dedicated as public open space shall be clearly shown on the concept plan, preliminary development plan and final development plan submittals. 
5.  Sufficient land for open space shall be provided in each phase of the development to assure that the recreational needs of district residents are satisfied, taking into consideration the nature of open space required to serve the district, and the amount of land previously provided, or to be provided, in conjunction with the phase of the development under consideration. 
6.  In its approval of the concept plan and development plan, the city shall impose such conditions as deemed necessary to assure that the intent and purpose of this section are satisfied. 
C.  Structure development. These restrictions apply for the building/development of any type of structure within CUPD. 
1.  The following materials shall be prohibited as primary cladding materials: 
•  Aluminum siding or cladding. 
•  Galvanized steel or other bright metal. 
•  Synthetic stucco. 
•  Unfinished concrete block. 
•  Hardi Plank or other siding. 
•  Vinyl siding. 
•  Wood or plastic siding. 
2.  The following materials shall be prohibited as primary roofing materials: 
•  Composite shingle. 
•  Wood roof shingle. 
3.  Building colors shall be limited to the following guidelines: 
•  Dominant colors shall be shades of warm grey, red, beige and/or brown. 
•  Accent colors shall be any color, except for fluorescent shades. 
•  Roof colors shall be shades of cool grey, brown, or green. 
4.  At least 90 percent of the exterior cladding of all exterior walls fronting or visible from public streets (including above grade parking structures) shall be brick construction. An applicant, however, may submit a design for construction of parking structures that employs alternative construction materials for exterior cladding with an application for a development plan. The alternative may be approved by the city upon determination that such construction will result in an appearance that is compatible with surrounding buildings and the overall character of the district. Upon finding that the alternative design for parking structures will result in an appearance that is compatible with surrounding buildings and the overall character of the district, waivers may be granted employing a minimum of 40 percent brick cladding, provided that the ground floor of the structure (up to a height of 12 feet) is at least 90 percent brick. 
5.  At least 80 percent of exterior cladding of all walls not fronting or not visible from public ways (including above grade parking structures) shall be brick construction, exterior cement plaster or a combination thereof. 
6.  Buildings shall have a continuous street-fronting ground level commercial, office or residential use. 
7.  The exterior cladding (excluding glass) of all buildings (including above grade parking structures) shall be composed of not more than three materials (excluding roofs). 
8.  Architectural features required: The principal entry area of a building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. Individual tenant space entries shall also be articulated and express greater architectural detail than the building wall. 
a.  Encouraged architectural elements include: columns, arcades and covered entry walkway, arches, facade offsets, windows, balconies, undulating walls, clock towers, cupolas and courtyards. 
b.  Building harmony: Out-parcel buildings or spin sites, which are identified on a site plan approved pursuant to a single zoning case, shall have architectural features consistent with the principal buildings. 
9.  Windows: 
a.  When a retail use occupies the first floor, at least 70 percent of the first floor exterior wall facing a thoroughfare, street, boulevard or parking plaza shall be transparent glazing. 
b.  The exterior wall surface of all buildings above the first floor shall not be more than 50 percent glass. 
c.  Buildings shall have display windows (which need not be open into the interior), or entrances, which openings are determined by the city council to be well-distributed along the face of the building or addition so as to minimize the lengths of blank wall areas. 
d.  For building faces oriented toward a street, windows shall be placed at distances no greater than ten feet apart. 
e.  Glass is to be clear or tinted, not reflective. 
10.  Showering facilities: All office buildings containing over 50,000 square feet of gross office space shall provide showering facilities, which shall include showers and lockers, in a ratio of at least two showering facilities for every 50,000 square feet of gross office space, which facilities shall be available to all building tenants and their employees, provided that no office building shall be required to exceed a maximum of four showering facilities. 
11.  Street lighting: The developer shall provide a street lighting standard at each street intersection and at an interval not exceeding 200 feet. Costs of such installation shall be borne by the developer and shown on all plats for approval by the planning and zoning board. Upon notification that the street light systems are approved as to adequacy by the Georgia Power Company, the city will furnish to the developer and the Georgia Power Company the city's intent to pay future energy bills on said approved system. Contact the public works department for light specification for designated area's. 
12.  Pedestrian lighting: The developer shall provide lighting standard as approved by the city and Georgia Power based on new and existing conditions. Costs of such installation shall be borne by the developer and shown on all plats for approval by the planning and zoning board. Upon notification that the light systems are approved as to adequacy by the Georgia Power Company, the city will furnish to the developer and the Georgia Power Company the city's intent to pay future energy bills on said approved system. Contact the public works department for light specification for designated area's. 
13.  Mailboxes, stop sign poles, and street sign poles: Mailboxes, stop sign poles, and street sign poles shall be installed at the expense of the developer; quality, number, architectural design, and location shall be approved by the public works director or his designee. When the final plat is submitted, the director or his representative will inform the developer of the location and type of signage required. The developer must then install the signage and post to city specification before the streets can be accepted by the city. Please refer to the city's redevelopment guidelines, appendix C, for more details on sign materials and construction. 
14.  Interior sprinkler system: All residential dwellings must have interior sprinkler systems installed upon construction. Sprinkler design plans must be submitted and approved by the City of Morrow Fire Marshal. 
15.  Fences and walls: The following standards apply to common fences and walls around businesses, residential developments, and detached and attached residential subdivisions along public street frontages. The following standards are in addition to the standards set forth in the regulations, fences and walls. 
A.  Allowable materials include: natural and man-made stone, brick, ornamental decorative or wrought iron or aluminum, or architectural concrete. 
B.  Fencing made of barbed wire, razor wire, plastic, cloth wood, or chain-link is prohibited, 
C.  When the building fronts and sides are visible to a public street, any wall or fence over two feet in height from finished grade shall not be opaque and shall have a minimum opening ratio of 50 percent. 
D.  When the back of the building is visible to a public street, fences or walls shall be opaque. 
E.  Application for fence and wall permits shall be reviewed by the city manager and approved by the city council. 
D.  Additions to district. Additions made to a structure within CUPD shall take the architectural integrity of the structure into consideration. Additions will not subtract from the overall design of the district. 
1.  Equipment such as satellite dishes and air-conditioning units will be placed on the side or rear of a building with proper screening so as to shield the equipment from view on public rights-of-way and adjoining properties. 
2.  If walls are attached to a building, they shall be made of the same material and style of the building. No walls shall be permitted between the street and any building, with the exception of off street loading areas. No barbed wire, razor wire, chain link fence or similar elements shall be used in CUPD. 
E.  Street address. A street address number shall follow these requirements: 
1.  It shall be located above the building entrance. 
2.  It shall be clearly visible from the sidewalk and street. 
3.  It shall be a minimum of six inches in height. 
F.  Building heights. Building heights shall be subject to the following minimum and maximum requirements: 

 
* Buildings less than 50 feet from a single-family residential district shall have a maximum height of 50 feet. 
Homeowners associations and maintenance agreements: All residential or mixed use dwellings, rowhouses, townhouses, condominiums or other living spaces created after January 1, 2000, are required to have a homeowners' association and current maintenance agreements. All initial homeowners' association rules and bylaws and maintenance agreements must be reviewed and approved by the city council to ensure continued compliance over time with the standards and purposes of this article. Additionally, all future changes to such documents shall be submitted to the city for review and approval in accordance with the same standards. 
Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted as a matter of right in any mixed use zoning: Town house, dwellings, condominiums, or multi-family dwellings. However, in each development, at least 70 percent of the residential units shall be fee-simple owned and occupied. 
Physical requirements. Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in any CUPD zoning district shall conform to the following standards: 
A.  The development shall not adversely affect the developed or undeveloped neighboring properties; 
B.  Water, sewage, and recreational facilities shall be adequate for the proposed development; 
C.  Minimum floor area per dwelling, townhouse, rowhouse, loft, or multi-family unit: 
1.  1,400 to 1,499 square feet, no more than 25 percent of the total built. 
2.  1,500 to 1,699 square feet, no more than 65 percent of the total built. 
3.  1,700 square feet or more, no less than 35 percent of the total built 
4.  Each dwelling, townhouse, rowhouse, loft, or multi-family unit shall have an attached two car garage (400 square feet minimum that is located behind the building. Front entry garages are prohibited on any public or private street, unless the city council has approved otherwise in a development plan for the project) 
5.  Two dedicated spaces in a parking deck can be substituted for the dwelling, townhouse, rowhouse, loft, or multi-family unit garage requirement if the deck is attached to the structure that contains the dwelling, townhouse, rowhouse, loft, or multi-family unit. Offsite spaces shall not count for residential uses. 
6.  Garages located on the bottom floor shall count as the first floor as long as the dwelling, townhouse, rowhouse, loft, or multi-family unit for those spaces is located above that garage and retail or office space is located on the ground floor side facing the street and other public areas. 
G.  Lot coverage and floor area. The following guidelines shall be conformed to concerning lot coverage and floor area of structures in CUPD: 
1.  The width and depth of lots shall be based on the minimum sizes for specific unit types: 

 
2.  Lot coverage shall be based on the maximum lot coverage for specific unit types: 

 
# The area of an above grade parking structure is included in the calculations of lot coverage. 
* The area of a porch or arcade fronting a public street is not included in the calculation of lot coverage. 
H.  Building facade line. The building facade line shall be no more than 35 feet and no less than 25 feet from the street curb. The only exception would be the provision for public parks or plazas. 
J.  Outside storage. Except for the equipment and/or the materials stored on a construction site and used for a temporary construction project, the outside storage of equipment, building and/or other materials, goods and products shall be prohibited within the district. 
K.  Landscaping. Landscaping requirements shall comply with the provisions found in this section and in Ordinance 98-15, Chapter 8, Tree and Vegetation Protection. 
1.  Street trees shall be large shade tree species having a minimum caliper of four inches and shall be a uniform type for CUPD as determined by the public works director. All shrubs shall be a minimum three gallon and all green ground cover must be sod, all selected in accordance with the city's landscape regulations. 
2.  Front yards shall be landscaped except at building entries, seating areas and adjacent to commercial uses, where the front yard may be hardscaped or developed as a public plaza or terrace. Plant materials shall consist of shade trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, evergreen groundcovers, vines and seasonal color. 
L.  Front and side yards. Front and side yards shall comply with the following guidelines: 
1.  Any yards adjacent to a street shall have the same requirements as front yards. 
2.  Front yards shall be permitted between the required sidewalk and the building facade and shall be a maximum width of ten feet. 
3.  Balconies shall encroach into front yard area a maximum distance of five feet. 
4.  The front yard shall be hardscaped or developed as a public plaza or terrace with a maximum finished floor height of 24 inches above the sidewalk elevation; accessory outdoor dining or other similar types of uses are also permitted. 
5.  Accessory outdoor dining is permitted on or adjacent to the sidewalk only when all other sidewalk requirements are met, and may be separated from the sidewalk only with movable planters or fencing which shall have a maximum height of 36 inches; accessory dining shall not be enclosed with any permanent or nonpermanent element. 
M.  Accessory structures. Any accessory building or structure shall be located to the rear of the primary structure and at least 100 feet from any property line. 
1.  Any accessory building or structure must have the approval of the city manager or his designee as to the location, architectural design and size prior to the commencement of construction. A set of plans must be submitted for approval. 
2.  The city manager or his designee shall consider the following criteria for determining the appropriateness of the architectural design and size of the accessory building or structure: 
a.  Compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood. 
b.  Style of exterior. (The exterior is to be compatible in style with the primary structure.) 
c.  Use of the proposed accessory structure. 
d.  Impact on adjacent properties. 
e.  Requirements, deemed appropriate, as set forth in this subsection. 
3.  Accessory buildings, structures, uses and decks shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Maximum height is two stories or 35 feet. 
b.  Accessory uses shall include garbage pads, heating and air conditioning units, jacuzzis, tennis courts, swimming pools (private), playhouses and playgrounds. 
c.  The rear of the principal building shall be where the main portion of the building ends without consideration of wings. 
d.  Architectural style and design shall be approved by the city manager or his designee. 
e.  Such structures or buildings shall be located on the same lot as and to the rear of the principal building to which they are an accessory. Decks may be located to the rear or side of the principal buildings subject to limitations in this subsection. 
f.  No accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal building has commenced. 
g.  On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
h.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by a breeze way, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. This shall not apply to decks. 
N.  Storage area. Loading, service and trash storage areas shall be screened from all public roadways according to the following stipulations: 
1.  Business, commercial, educational and other nonresidential buildings and any multi-family residential building for which the use of a commercial or multi-user dumpster, and other commercial waste container, cooler, refrigeration equipment and HVAC equipment has been authorized by the city shall screen any portion of the dumpster, any other commercial waste container, cooler, refrigeration equipment and HVAC equipment which is visible to an average person from a public street, parking lot or residential building which is within 500 feet of such dumpster, any other commercial waste container, cooler, refrigeration equipment and HVAC equipment. 
2.  Said screening shall be constructed of building or masonry materials that are of sufficient opacity to conceal the dumpster, any other commercial waste container, cooler, refrigeration equipment and HVAC equipment from view. Evergreen shrubs or evergreen trees may be used for screening when a plan for such screening has been approved in writing by the city manager or his designee. 
3.  Restaurant containers shall be placed on a poured concrete pad. Screening materials for these containers will be architecturally compatible with the building, either block or brick, and must match the building color. Drain plugs are required in dumpsters, and restaurant containers shall be maintained in accordance with the Clayton County Health Department requirements. These containers must be placed out of sight, preferably in the back of the building, with a gate. Each restaurant shall have its own container or share a container with another restaurant, but shall not share a container with another type of business. Restaurant containers must be maintained so as to be free of rodents, odors and other nuisances. 
O.  Signage. Within CUPD, signage must comply with the following standards: 
1.  Free standing signs: 
a.  Freestanding signs must be monument type (ground level signs not exceeding six feet in height). The primary structural material shall compliment the primary building material so as to achieve similarities and consistency of building materials on the site. 
b.  Monument signs shall be centered 15 feet behind the property line and shall be fully contained within the property lines with the edge of the sign being at least five feet off the right-of-way. Monument signs shall be centered within the landscape buffer area perpendicular to the fronting street and shall be fully contained within the property lines. No freestanding sign shall be located within 100 feet of an existing freestanding sign, provided this restriction shall not apply to properly installed instructional signs. 
c.  Freestanding signs shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
1.  Each such sign shall have a decorative base sufficient to house all sign supports within a single structure. Such base shall utilize construction materials that match the construction materials of the multi-tenant development. Each sign shall not block the sidewalk or other pedestrian areas. Each sign shall not obstruct the view of the traveling public. 
2.  Signage shall be submitted with the development plans and allocated to each space. In the event that all spaces or leased areas are not given signage, a written property deed restriction shall state the intended allotment and shall be binding on the property. The subdivision of the property will not change the original restrictions. 
3.  Landscaping shall be required at the base of all such signs in accordance with the following standards: 
i.  Plantings shall be at a height of at least 12 inches but no more than 18 inches measured from the adjoining grade. Use of a berm with low plantings may be utilized to meet the height requirement for landscaping. 
ii.  Plantings shall be designed to provide a decorative foundation for the sign and shall utilize a mixture of greenery and/or flowering plants to create a solid landscaped appearance. 
iii.  All plantings shall be maintained free of weeds, with sufficient water and fertilizer. Plantings shall be maintained in a healthy state. 
iv.  A landscape plan meting the requirements of this section shall be submitted for approval to the director of public works or his designee. 
4.  Address numbers eight inches in height shall be applied tot he base of the sign in a contrasting color for emergency identification. No structural supporting members shall be visible for such address numbers. 
5.  All disconnects shall be installed internally. 
6.  A master sign plan submittal for all ground signage shall be provided should the proposed signage not meet the specifications of this section. The City Council shall approve, deny or approve with modifications. 
2.  Wall or fascia signs; awning signs: 
a.  Wall, fascia or awning signs shall be securely fastened to the building surface. Such signs may not project above the parapet wall. 
b.  Wall or fascia signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than eight inches and shall use channel letter design standards. No boxed or pan and embossed copy is allowed for any wall or fascia signs. 
c.  Maximum square footage of wall or fascia signs: 
1.  Wall or fascia signs on buildings shall not exceed 40 square feet. 
d.  Maximum sign letter height on wall or fascia signs: 
1.  The maximum sign letter height is three feet. 
e.  On wall or fascia signs that in whole or in part are placed above an entrance to a building, there must be a minimum of 24 inches of clear vertical space between the top of the building entrance and the bottom of the wall sign, and there must be a minimum of 24 inches of clear vertical space between the top of the wall sign and the top of the building. 
f.  Projecting signs shall be mounted a minimum of eight feet from grade level above pedestrian areas and 14 feet above vehicular areas. 
g.  Direct painting of murals, or any hand painting, etchings or drawings, painted directly upon the fascia surface of a building is prohibited. 
h.  A master sign plan submittal for all wall signage shall be provided should the proposed signage not meet the specifications of this section. The city council shall approve, deny or approve with modifications. 
P.  Floodplains and wetlands. Any development must meet all state and federal requirements relating to floodplains and wetlands. 
Q.  Exterior approval. The mayor and council or their designee shall have the final approval or disapproval of all building exterior plans. 
R.  Minimum requirements for trees. The landscaping plan shall provide a minimum of one specimen tree with a minimum diameter of four inches and an one understory tree with a diameter of three inches for every 1,500 square feet of impervious surface for which a development permit is sought. All trees must be planted in areas large enough to accommodate a full-grown tree of the species planted. All calculations must be shown on plans. 
S.  Minimum requirements for shrubbery. The landscaping plan shall provide for one three gallon minimum bush per 100 square feet of impervious surface of an industrial, commercial, office and institutional, business park and multi-family site. All calculations must be shown on plans. 
T.  Minimum requirements for ground cover. Areas on the site which are not covered by trees and/or shrubbery shall be planted with sodded grass or other ground cover. No site shall seed and straw or hydroseed as permanent cover. Where appropriate, other permeable ground cover, such as mulch and stones, may be used; however, alternative forms of ground cover must be specifically approved by the mayor and council of the City of Morrow. 
U.  Irrigation system. The landscaping plan must include an irrigation plan to sustain plant life. Any and all plant material that fails to survive must be replaced by the property owner. 
V.  Tree, shrub, and ground cover types: 
Specimen trees. Four-inch minimum caliper measured six inches from ground level: 
Florida Maple, Red Maple, Sugar Maple. 
Understory trees. Three-inch minimum caliper, total multi-trunk trees, measured six inches from ground level: 
Crape Myrtle, Cherry (Yoshino, Kwanson), American Holly (Nellie Stevens, Burford, Savannah, Fosteri, Emily Burner), and Dogwood. 
Shrubs. Three gallon minimum: 
Junipers, Nandina, Privet, Holly, Lingstrum, Azalea, Barberry, Indian Hawthorn, Otto Luken, Laurel, and Laurapedlum. 
Ground cover: 
Ivy, Liriope, Ferns, Cottoneaster, Pachysandra, Vince, Ajuga, Euongmus, Juniper, Thrift, and Sod Grass (no seed and straw). 
Section 4. Utilities. 
A.  All electrical, cable, telephone and similar services shall be installed underground. 
B.  Large transformers shall be placed on the ground within pad mounts, enclosures or vaults. It is the developers responsibility to provide proper landscaping to screen all above-ground facilities. 
Section 5. Sidewalks. 
A.  Public sidewalks. Public sidewalks shall be located adjacent to all public streets and shall be provided throughout the development of CUPD. The sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete material, with brick paving accents consisting of a minimum of 20 percent, a minimum width of 15 feet, and must conform to the uniform CUPD guidelines, approved by the public works director. 
B.  Sidewalk zones. Public sidewalks shall consist of a street furniture and tree planting zone, which shall be located adjacent to the curb, and a clear zone. 
1.  Street furniture and tree planting zone shall have a minimum width of five feet. This zone shall be continuous and located adjacent to the curb. This zone is intended for the placement of trees and street furniture, including pedestrian light poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, bus shelters, bicycle racks and similar elements as approved by the mayor and council. 
2.  The clear zone shall have a minimum width of ten feet. It shall be hardscaped and located adjacent to the street furniture and tree planting zone. It shall be unobstructed by any permanent or nonpermanent element for a minimum width of ten feet and a minimum height of eight feet. The only exception is awnings and canopies which can encroach a maximum distance of five feet over the public sidewalk. 
C.  Building entrances. The primary pedestrian entrance to all retail and office uses with street frontage shall face and be visible from the street, shall be directly accessible from the sidewalk adjacent to such street and shall open directly onto the adjacent sidewalk, public park, outdoor dining area, public area or plaza adjacent to the sidewalk. The primary entrances for nonresidential uses shall remain unlocked during normal business hours. The purpose of this requirement is to encourage the development of buildings that complement pedestrian activity in CUPD by providing direct access to the building. 
D.  Outdoor dining. Accessory outdoor dining areas shall be permitted on a public or private sidewalk area where adjacent to and directly abutting a restaurant located in a building. However, the outdoor dining area shall not reduce the clear zone of a public sidewalk to a width of less than eight feet. Tables, chairs, umbrellas and similar items shall be stored in the interior of the restaurant or in similar enclosed areas so that a minimum clear zone of ten feet is unobstructed when the outdoor dining area is not in use because of inclement weather or when the restaurant is closed. 
E.  Prohibited paving material. Asphalt and gravel as paving materials is strictly prohibited. 
F.  Outdoor dining. Accessory outdoor dining areas shall be permitted on a public or private sidewalk area where adjacent to and directly abutting a restaurant located in a building. However, the outdoor dining area shall not reduce the clear zone of a public sidewalk to a width of less than eight feet. Tables, chairs, umbrellas and similar items shall be stored in the interior of the restaurant or in similar enclosed areas so that a minimum clear zone of ten feet is unobstructed when the outdoor dining area is not in use because of inclement weather or when the restaurant is closed. 
Section 6. Parking. No parking, driveway, or other area for vehicles shall be placed between the building and the street. Parking on the street (unless in a marked space), the sidewalk or on the grass is prohibited. 
A.  Parking facilities. Parking decks or other structured parking shall be used to provide the necessary number of parking spaces for office, retail, or other commercial parking. Residential uses may use first floor garages built into or under the building or structured parking. Areas under high tension utility lines, that cannot be used for building construction, can be used for typical surface parking lots if they meet the approved guidelines. 
1.  Parking garages shall conceal automobiles from visibility while maintaining the appearance of a horizontal storied building. 
2.  All forms of parking facilities shall be maintained in a clean, safe, sanitary and attractive condition. If any damage impairs the drivability of the parking lot, the parking facility shall not be operated until conditions are repaired. 
3.  Curb cut widths shall be 24 feet for two-way entrances and 12 feet for one-way entrances, unless otherwise permitted by the director of public works. 
4.  When adjacent to a public street, above street level parking structures and decks shall create visual interest through the articulation of openings, cornice lines, and belt courses or similar architectural details. 
5.  Steel parking garages and steel guard cables on garage facades are prohibited. 
B.  Front parking. 
1.  Existing parking in front of buildings. Upon adding floor space to a lot with an existing building, where parking requirements are otherwise met, existing parking in front of buildings shall be replaced by uses such as the expansion of the existing building, including a one-story expansion such as a porch, outdoor seating for serving food or beverages, or a pedestrian courtyard. 
2.  Bicycle parking. A minimum of one bicycle parking space shall be provided for every 20 auto spaces. 
C.  Off-site parking. Where alternative off-site parking (either public parking or private parking obtained by lease or easement) is provided within 200 feet of the property, the on-site parking requirement may be reduced to as little as zero, provided that the total of on-site and alternative off-site parking together shall meet the requirement for the proposed use and 
1.  The building meets the requirements regarding number of stories or the use of existing floor space is proposed to be altered in a manner that requires more parking spaces (e.g., an existing space is being changed from office to retail use, or a restaurant is expanding the number of seats). 
2.  The availability of alternative off-site parking for a particular development shall be determined based on the total number of off-site parking spaces that will be available by the time of occupancy of the new floor space, the cumulative amount of new floor space for which the off-site parking spaces are counted in meeting the parking requirement, and the maximum number of such off-site parking spaces likely to be utilized at any one time by the cumulative new floor space. 
D.  Parking ratios. The number of parking spaces provided for a site shall meet but shall not exceed the number calculated from the parking ratios required by the Zoning Ordinance, unless such higher number is justified to and approved by the city council. For a building of three or more stories, floor area lost to stairwells and elevator shafts shall not be included in total floor area for parking calculations. 
Minimum number, maximum number. The following are the minimum and maximum number of off-street parking spaces and loading stalls required by type of permitted uses in CUPD. Twenty percent of the total required parking spaces may be set aside for compact and sub-compact cars. For any use not listed the city council shall determine the proper requirements by classifying the proposed use among the uses specified herein so as to assure equal treatment follows the principles set forth. In making any such determination, the city council shall follow the principles set forth at the beginning of this article. 

 
The minimum standards are available to properties which comply with the streetscape standards and have pedestrian access to the street. 
1.  All parking, except residential, shall be shared. 
2.  Parking spaces are permitted off-site. 
3.  Parking areas are not permitted between the sidewalk and the front of the building. 
E.  Shared parking. Where a parking area will serve two or more uses for which peak parking demand occurs at different times, the city council may permit an appropriate number of such spaces to count toward the parking requirement for more than one of those uses. Grandfathered parking spaces that were not approved as part of the development can not be used for shared parking. 
F.  Parallel parking. Where parallel parking is allowed on a street section abutting the property and on the same side of the street as the property, such parallel parking shall count toward meeting the parking requirement for the property. Parallel Parking must be part of the site plan and approved by the city council. 
G.  Parking lot islands. For all non-structured parking areas allowed under the CUPD classification a landscape island having a minimum dimension of ten feet by 38 feet shall be installed and at each end of the parking aisle, a landscape island having a minimum dimension of 20 feet by 38 feet shall be installed in order to separate the last space from any adjacent travel ways. Every parking row must be divided by a minimum ten foot wide landscape strip. (For landscape purposes) Parking spaces shall not exceed ten spaces in a row without being interrupted by a landscaped island. Island must be a minimum of nine feet. Islands shall be planted with a minimum of two shade trees per every ten cars. 
H.  Alleys. As development or redevelopment of the area permits, alleys shall be created for access to parking on the rear of properties for residential uses. 
I.  Handicapped spaces. Parking spaces for the handicapped must be provided in accordance with the guidelines of the Americans With Disabilities Act and Federal and State laws. 
J.  Lighting. Lighting shall be provided throughout all parking facilities. 
1.  Lighting in parking facilities must equal a minimum of one-half foot candle of light. 
2.  Public street lighting may be utilized to fulfill the lighting requirements; however, where such street lighting is removed, it shall be the responsibility of the parking facility to independently provide the required level of illumination. 
3.  Parking facilities adjacent to residential areas shall reduce light spillage onto residential properties by providing cutoff luminaries which has a 90 degree illumination. 
K.  Surface parking lots. For all non-structured parking areas allowed under the CUPD zoning classification the following additional requirements shall be met. 
1.  Surface parking lots shall be screened from all adjacent public streets and neighboring sites. The screen must extend along all boundaries of the parking lot and be a minimum of three feet in height and be 80 percent opaque. Masonry walls, evergreen plant materials or a combination thereof may be used to meet these requirements. 
2.  Site plans must allow for pedestrian paths, cart paths, or other transportation methods. The City of Morrow shall be consulted prior to design and the city's transportation plan must be incorporated into the development's design. 
L.  Painted lines. Lines dividing parking spaces on all parking surfaces shall be painted with white paint. Yellow paint is prohibited. 
Section 8. Preliminary development plan approval procedure. 
A.  A development plan is necessary to ensure that the project proceeds in an orderly fashion while complying with the approved concept plan. Applicable standards shall be met for each development within the project. 
B.  No permits for development will be delivered until a preliminary plan has been approved according to the procedures outlined in this section. 
C.  The preliminary development plan shall contain the following information: 
1.  Drawings required for this plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Project name, street address, and lot and block description. 
b.  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the property owner, developer and the engineer, plus an individual point of contact for each. 
c.  Date, scale and north arrow. 
2.  Preliminary development plans shall have a minimum scale of one inch equals 40 feet or larger and be on standard drawing paper with a minimum size of 24 inches by 36 inches. 
3.  A boundary survey of the tract with an error of closure within the limit of one in 10,000 related to the true meridian and showing the location and type of boundary survey. 
4.  The following elements shall be included: 
a.  The location, arrangement and proposed use of all buildings, including building footprints. 
b.  The height and number of floors of all buildings above, below and partially below finished grade. 
c.  The setback dimensions of buildings from the development boundaries and street R.O.W. 
d.  The location and width of all streets, including prototypical street sections. 
e.  The location and number of spaces of all on-street and off-street parking areas, structures and loading areas. 
f.  The location and size of existing and proposed public open spaces, together with private recreational areas. 
g.  The schematic location and size of utilities required to service the proposed development, including water, storm drainage, sewer, gas, electric, telephone and cable television. 
5.  Prototypical elevations of all building facades, indicating materials, window openings and height of all buildings. 
6.  Conceptual landscape plan and prototypical cross sections for project roadways showing general plant locations and types, areas of special pavement and special landscape features. 
7.  A statement in tabular form which sets forth the following data, when such data is applicable to a given development plan: 
a.  Total number of dwelling units by type, size and average dwelling unit size. 
b.  Residential density in units per acre. 
c.  Total floor area, and floor area ratio, for each type of use. 
d.  Total area in open space, both public and private. 
e.  Total number of off-street parking and loading spaces. 
8.  Any variations or alterations anticipated, or contemplated, by the developer to any of the above required elements. 
9.  Any other information required to satisfy conditions established in the concept plan for the development, subject to the preliminary development plan. 
D.  Once the plan is considered complete by the zoning administrator, it shall be submitted for comment and review to appropriate city departments and agencies. The zoning administrator shall also prepare a report describing whether or not the elements incorporated in the project meet the standards required for CUPD. These reviews shall be submitted to the planning and zoning board. 
E.  The planning and zoning board shall determine whether the preliminary development plan is in accordance with the reasonable intent of the CUPD regulations. The board shall make a recommendation within 30 days following receipt of the plan. The board's recommendation, including any modifications to the plan, shall then be submitted to the city council for approval, disapproval or approval with modifications In the event the planning and zoning board fails to issue a recommendation within the allotted timeframe, the preliminary development plan shall be transferred to the mayor and council for approval or disapproval. 
F.  Once the preliminary development plan is received from the planning and zoning board, the city council shall hold a public hearing to approve, approve with modifications or disapprove of the plan. 
G.  The planning and zoning board shall consider the following when determining the approval or denial of a preliminary development plan for CUPD: 
1.  The preliminary development plan is consistent with the approved concept plan and standards set forth in the adopting ordinance. 
2.  The preliminary development plan has an adequate design for the development of roads and other public facilities serving the development. 
3.  Preliminary development plan shows an adequate buffer between this district and adjoining ones. 
4.  Landscaping plans meet the ordinance standards set forth in the adopting ordinance. 
H.  The planning and zoning board may recommend, such reasonable conditions and alterations of the preliminary development plan to assure that the preliminary development plan is consistent with the standards set forth in the adopting ordinance. 
Section 9. Final development plan approval. 
A.  The purpose of a final development plan is to assure that the development of structures within the district are in accordance with the approved preliminary development plan and standards outlined in the adopting ordinance. 
B.  The final development plan shall contain the following information: 
1.  Drawings required for this plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  Project name, street address, and lot and block description. 
b.  Names, addresses and telephone numbers of the property owner, developer and the person developing the plan. 
c.  Date, scale and north arrow. 
2.  Final development plans shall have a minimum scale of one inch equals 40 feet or larger and be on standard drawing paper with a minimum size of 24 inches by 36 inches. 
3.  A boundary survey of the tract with an error of closure within the limit of one in 10,000 related to the true meridian and showing the location and type of boundary survey. 
4.  A final development plan shall include the following elements: 
a.  The location, arrangement and proposed use of all buildings, including the building footprints. 
b.  The height and number of floors of all buildings above, below and partially below finished grade. 
c.  The dimensions of buildings from the development boundaries, street R.O.W. and adjacent buildings. 
d.  The traffic circulation system and the pedestrian circulation system, including the location and width of all streets, driveways, entrances to parking areas and parking structures, walkways and bicycle paths. 
e.  The location, number of spaces and layout of all on-street and off-street parking areas, structures and loading areas, including aisle widths, stall dimensions and calculations of impervious coverage of parking lots and interior landscape areas. 
f.  Existing and proposed utilities required to service the proposed development, including water, storm drainage, sewer, gas, electric, telephone and cable television. 
5.  Elevations of all facades of each building, indicating materials, window openings and height of all buildings. 
6.  A landscape plan which contains the following information: 
a.  Location, height and material of proposed screening and fencing (with berms to be delineated by one-foot contours). 
b.  Complete description of plant materials (this includes existing trees) shown on the land, including the common and botanical names, locations, quantities, container or caliper sizes, heights, spread and spacing. 
c.  Complete description of landscaping and screening to be provided in or near off-street parking and loading areas, including information as to the amount (in square feet) of landscape area compared to total square feet of the parking area. 
d.  Size, height, location and material of proposed seating, lighting, planters, sculptures, decorative paving and water features. 
7.  Signage plans providing the locations, dimensions and elevations of all proposed signs. 
8.  A final statement in tabular form which sets forth the following date, when such data is applicable to a given development plan: 
a.  Total number of dwelling units by type, size and average dwelling unit size. 
b.  Residential density in units per acre. 
c.  Total floor area and floor area ratio for each type of use. 
d.  Total number of off-street parking and loading spaces. 
9.  Any variations or alterations anticipated, or contemplated, by the developer to any of the above required elements. 
C.  The zoning administrator shall review the final development plan for complete compliance to the standards set forth in the adopting ordinance within 30 days that the application is determined to be complete. Preceding this, the planning and zoning board shall recommend to the city council to approve, approve subject to modification or deny the final development plan. 
D.  The city council shall determine whether the final development plan is consistent with the approved preliminary development plan, the standards set forth in the adopting ordinance and the standards set forth in CUPD regulations. 
E.  The city council may require such reasonable conditions and alterations to assure that the final development plan is consistent with the standards set forth in the preliminary development plan. 
F.  The city council may require submission of additional maps, data or proposed methods of addressing other pertinent matters relative to the proposed development where, owing to the nature, size and location of the proposed development, particular elements critical to the health, safety and welfare of the community and its citizens should be addressed. Such elements may be, but are not limited to, traffic impact, emergency, preparedness and response, environmental preservation, historic preservation, public access, community linkages, public education and the like. 
G.  CUPD and its associated master plans are not exempt from future ordinance changes dealing with: landscaping, tree protection, signage, storm water runoff, ground water recharge, sewage disposal and treatment, and protection of rare and endangered species. 
Section 10. Conditional use procedure. 
A.  No building permit shall be issued for any use designated as a conditional use within CUPD unless a conditional use permit has first been approved in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this section. 
B.  When making the determination on issuance of a conditional use permit, the planning and zoning board and city council must consider the impact and compatibility of the proposed use on surrounding properties to ensure its appropriateness. The planning and zoning board and city council shall specifically consider the extent to which: 
1.  The proposed use at the specified location is consistent with the future land use policies and map in the City of Morrow's adopted Comprehensive Plan. 
2.  The proposed use is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the zoning district regulations as applied to the site and, in particular, is consistent with the concept plan and/or development plan approved for the site, together with any conditions attached thereto. 
3.  The proposed use is not materially detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience and welfare, or results in material damage, or prejudice, to other property in the vicinity. 
4.  The proposed use is compatible with, and preserves the character and integrity of adjacent properties and neighborhoods, and includes improvements or modifications that mitigate development-related adverse impacts, including but not limited to: 
a.  Adequate ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to vehicular and pedestrian safety and convenience, and access in case of fire. 
b.  Off-street parking and loading areas where required. 
c.  Paving of streets, alleys and sidewalks. 
d.  Provisions for drainage. 
e.  Utilities with reference to location, availability, and compatibility. 
f.  Screening and buffering features to minimize visual impacts, and/or set-backs from adjacent uses. 
g.  Control of signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district. 
h.  Required yards and open space. 
i.  Height and bulk of structures. 
j.  Hours of operation. 
k.  Roadway adjustments, traffic control devices or mechanisms, and access restrictions to control traffic flow, or divert traffic as may be needed, to reduce, or eliminate, development generated traffic. 
C.  In approving a conditional use permit, the planning and zoning board may recommend, and the city council shall impose, such conditions as are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with these standards and the purpose and intent of this section. Any conditions imposed shall be set forth in writing by the city council. The city shall maintain a record of such approved conditional uses and conditions attached thereto. 
D.  The following guidelines shall be adhered to when considering a conditional use application: 
1.  The planning and zoning board shall schedule and conduct a public hearing in order to formulate its recommendations to the city council on the conditional use permit application. Following the public hearing, the board shall recommend approval, modification, or denial of the proposal to the city council. If the appropriateness of the use cannot be assured at the location, the board shall recommend denial of the application as being incompatible with existing uses or uses permitted by right in the district. 
2.  Following a public hearing and in consideration of the board's recommendations, the city council shall approve, modify or deny the proposal for a conditional use permit. If the appropriateness of the use cannot be assured at the location, the application for conditional use permit shall be denied as being incompatible with existing uses or uses permitted by right in the district. 
E.  No proposed or existing building, premise or land use authorized as a conditional use may be established, enlarged, modified, structurally altered or otherwise changed from the approved in the conditional use permit unless such amendment is authorized in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this section for initial approval of the permit. 
F.  If no building permit has been issued within one year of date of approval of the conditional use permit, such permit shall lapse and no construction shall be permitted, nor use be established, until a new application for conditional use permit is submitted and approved for the intended use. 
G.  If the applicant requests an extension of the conditional use permit in writing at least 60 days prior to the date of lapse to the city council, the council shall consider such extension request, prior to the expiration date. For good cause shown, the permit may be extended for a period not to exceed one year. 
Section 11. Amendment of plans. 
A.  Amendments of any concept plan or development plan, other than minor amendments, shall be made in accordance with the procedure required for approval of the initial plan. Amendments to a concept plan shall be considered amendments to the zoning district. 
B.  Minor amendments, which may be authorized by the city manager, shall include, but are not limited to, those changes of detail which do not: 
1.  Alter the basic relationship of the proposed development to the adjacent property. 
2.  Alter the uses permitted or increase residential density by more than five percent. 
3.  Change the minimum number of units necessary. 
4.  Decrease off-street parking ratios. 
5.  Significantly alter the architecture or landscape as indicated by the approved development plan. 
6.  Alter special conditions attached by the planning and zoning board or city council to the approved concept plan or development plan. 
C.  An applicant may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council for review and decision as to whether an amendment to the development plan is required. 
Section 12. Lapse of approvals. 
A.  If a building permit has not been obtained within one year following approval of the development plan for a use authorized therein, such plan shall lapse unless the property owner requests and extension prior to the expiration of the one-year period. The city council may initiate review of the development in order to determine whether significant progress is being made. If significant progress is not found, the city council may terminate the final development plan or may attach additional conditions to the extension of the plan. 
Section 13. Legal status provisions. 
A.  In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinance, deed restrictions or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing higher standards shall govern. 
B.  It is unlawful to violate the provisions of this ordinance or to fail to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connections with grants of variance, special exceptions or conditional uses). Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $1,000.00 and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof and any architect, builder, contractor, agent or other person who commits, participates in, assists in or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking other such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
C.  If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the Mayor or City Council of Morrow, the building inspector, the zoning enforcement officer, the city engineer or any adjacent or other property owner or anyone else who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such building, structure or land use. 
D.  Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 2004-14, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 2007-05, §§ 1—9, 15, 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2009-06, § 5, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 2014-05 , 6-24-14) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-14, adopted June 8, 2004, repealed the former App. A, § 907A, and enacted a new § 907A as set out herein. The former App. A, § 907A, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 97-10, § 2, adopted Dec. 10, 1997. 

Section 908 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-06, § 11, adopted May 26, 2009, repealed § 908 which pertained to the OI office/institutional district and derived from Ord. No. 2007-09, adopted Aug. 28, 2007. 
Section 909 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-06, § 11, adopted May 26, 2009, repealed § 909 which pertained to the BN neighborhood business district and derived from 2007-09, adopted Aug. 28, 2007. 
Section 910 - BG General business district. 
The general business district is established in order to provide suitable areas for various types and levels of community and regionally-oriented commercial activities, including retail, office uses, wholesale uses, and service activities so as to serve the community and travelling public. 
Accessory Uses: 
Storage meeting the following conditions: 
(1)  Such storage is not visible from the right-of-way. 
(2)  Such storage is limited to no more than 60 calendar days at one time and no more than three times per year. 
(3)  Such storage is approved by the city manager or his or her designee. 
Permitted Uses: 
Alteration shops. 
Bakeries whose entire products are sold at retail on the premises. 
Barber shops, beauty shops and similar personal service establishments. 
Billiards. 
Books, stationery and card shops. 
Business and professional offices. 
Clothes cleaning and laundry pick-up stations. 
Clinics, except veterinary clinics. 
Community shopping centers. 
Confectionary stores. 
Convenience store without gasoline sales. 
Department stores. 
Drug stores and apothecary shops. 
Florist and gift shops. 
Furniture store. 
Gift and card shops. 
Grocery, fruit, vegetable and meat markets, including supermarkets, but no killing, eviscerating, skinning, plucking, smoking of food products or outside storage, display, or selling is permitted except as normally carried on by deli and meat/seafood departments in grocery stores. 
Hardware and appliance stores. 
Libraries. 
Medical and dental clinics and offices. 
News and tobacco store. 
Pharmacies. 
Photographers (including the sale of supplies and equipment). 
Professional and business offices. 
Public and governmental buildings. 
Radio/TV sales and service. 
Regional shopping center. 
Restaurants. 
Shoe repair shops. 
Tailors and clothing shops. 
Telephone and telegraph exchanges and utility structures, including storage and parking facilities for equipment and supplies including power sub-stations, transmission towers and similar uses provide the sites are developed according to all provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
Theater. 
Veterinary clinic for small animals, provided that such clinic and any treatment rooms, cages, pens or kennels be maintained within a completely enclosed, climate controlled, sound insulated building and that such clinic be operated in such a way as to produce no objectionable or noxious odors or noises outside its wall and the provision be made to dispose of all refuse and garbage in a sanitary manner without using any outside storage bins or other such facilities. 
Conditional Uses: 
Ambulance service. 
Amusement centers, and other establishments using amusement devices, other amusement enterprises, including the provision of stage entertainment, bowling alleys, and skating rinks. 
Auction gallery. 
Automobile laundry provided that a paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting entrance to the washing process sufficient to contain a number of vehicles (at 180 square feet per vehicle) equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the washing machines and in addition, that curb breaks be limited to two each not closer than 20 feet to a street intersection and each not to exceed 30 feet in width. 
Automobile service station. Gasoline and service station buildings are designed for the specific purpose of their business. Therefore, the building must be removed from the site whenever the gasoline tanks are removed from the premises. A remodeled building and site plan may be submitted to the mayor and council for their approval prior to the demolition of the building. The city reserves the right to condemn and demolish the building within 120 days of tank removal. The demolition charges will be attached to the property for payment. The owner of the property must sign a consent form prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy. 
Building and lumber supply establishments provided entire area for storage is enclosed within a solid fence at least six feet in height or greater if required to adequately screen the area and that any machine operations be conducted entirely within a building which shall not have any opening other than a stationary window within 100 feet of a residential district. 
Churches, synagogues, chapels, or other places of religious worship and instruction, provided that such place of religious worship and instruction is located more than 100 yards (300 feet) from any establishment that sells or offers to sell any distilled spirits in accordance with the licensure and permitting requirements of the state and the city. 
Day nurseries, pre-schools and kindergartens. 
Flea markets and thrift stores. 
Funeral homes. 
Group homes. 
Hotels, motels, and inns. 
Outdoor amusement enterprises including pony riding ring (without stables), miniature golf course, golf driving range, carnivals and bazaars (need not be enclosed). 
Commercial parking garages or lots provided no entrance or exit is located between the same two intersections and on the same side of the street as a school and the curb breaks be limited to two, each not to exceed 30 feet in width. (Need not be enclosed). 
Mini-warehouses, when located on a minimum site of five acres and conforming to all provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
Laundries, launderette, laundromat, clothes cleaning and dry cleaning plants employing not more than ten employees exclusive of outside route driver(s) and employing only nonflammable solvents in the process. Storage of commercial vehicles must comply with all provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
Mortuary and crematoria provided adequate paved parking area is provided either on the same lot or not more than 150 feet distant sufficient to accommodate the average number of vehicles to be included in a funeral procession. No vehicle used in any phase of the funeral services operation shall be stored on the public right-of-way. 
Garages for repair and maintenance of automobiles provided all such repairs and maintenance are done indoors. 
Sales, service, renting or leasing of automobiles, boats or trucks. The minimum lot width for these types of businesses is 200 feet; the minimum lot depth is 200 feet; and, the minimum lot size is three acres. Additionally, all automobile repairs and servicing of vehicles in these types of businesses must be done inside. 
In addition to the above requirements concerning garages for repair and maintenance of automobiles, and the sales, service, renting or leasing of automobiles, boats, trailers or trucks, those businesses engaged in the repair, maintenance, and service of automobiles or any similar street transportation vehicles such as trucks or vans must conduct business based on the conditional use provisions of this section and must obtain one of the following types of licenses based on the highest level of business activity that is expected to be conducted at their business site (with Class A being the lowest level of activity and Class C being the highest): 
Class A —Car wash, detailing, general cleaning of automobiles. Minor repairs and services including oil changes, radiator flush and fill, and replacement of minor parts including but not limited to air filters, pcv valves, and fuses; and other services of a minor nature that are similar and compatible to those listed. 
Class B —Replacement of mufflers, batteries, brakes and tires; front end alignment; tire rotation and computer wheel balance; maintenance tuneups; and other services of a moderate nature that are similar and compatible to those listed, and allowing all Class A activities to be conducted under a Class B license. 
Class C —Major repairs and service, including paint and body work; transmission service; engine replacement; extensive engine analysis; chassis work; and other major repairs and services that are similar and compatible to those listed, and allowing all Class A and B activities to be conducted under a Class C license. Any landowner or other applicant who seeks to use a parcel of land or building for a business that is expected to significantly be engaged in the repair, maintenance and service of automobiles and similar transportation vehicles shall be prohibited from such use until all of the following have been met: 
(1)  The property at issue is zoned appropriately, or a conditional use permit for such use has been issued by the mayor and council in accordance and in compliance with the requirements of this section, any and all other applicable code provisions, and any additional conditions required by the mayor and council for such approval (including, without limitation, restrictions on overnight customer or other parking at the site); 
(2)  All necessary inspections have occurred and permits obtained; and 
(3)  Class A, B, or C use license has been issued to the applicant or business owner that conforms to the intended and actual use of the property. 
Any person who wishes to change any aspect of their business to include one or more activities of a higher class (such as a Class A licensee who wishes to conduct Class C activities) must apply for such a license change under the same procedures that apply to the zoning of the property. Section 1-1-8 of the City Code of Ordinances and its procedures shall apply to all violations of this section's provisions, specifically including any person who performs one or more business activities that are of a higher level than those permitted by his or her license class. Each licensee hereunder shall have the obligation to make due inquiry to the city about the classification of any contemplated procedure or business activity that is not specifically set forth above to ensure that the procedure or activity is permitted under that licensee's license class. [3] 
Warehouse/wholesale where the majority of square footage is utilized for retail. 
Space Limits: Space limits, except those noted in the paragraph pertaining to sales, service, renting or leasing of automobiles, boats or trucks: 
Minimum lot area: None. Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
Minimum front yard: 50 feet, but service station pumps may be 35 feet from the property line. 
Minimum rear yard: None, but 40 feet when abutting a residential district. 
Minimum side yard: None, but 40 feet when abutting a residential district. 
Maximum building height: None. 
Maximum ground coverage: 50 percent. 
(Ord. No. 94-07, § 1(E), (F), 6-21-94; Ord. No.98-11, § 2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 98-20, §§ 2, 3, 12-22-98; Ord. No. 99-16, § 2, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 2003-11, §§ 1(D)—(F), 9-23-03; Ord. No. 2007-09, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 2009-06, §§ 12, 13, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 2013-48, § 2, 9-24-13; Ord. No. 2015-11 , § 2, 10-27-15; Ord. No. 2017-03 , § 6, 2-28-17; Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 4, 4-11-17) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— It should be noted that § 3 of Ord. No. 99-16 provided in part that amendments made by the ordinance shall not apply to any parcel of land or building(s) thereon that contain one or more businesses which are engaged in the repair, maintenance and service of automobiles and similar transportation vehicles on the date of this ordinance's enactment; however, no new building(s) shall be constructed nor existing building(s) expanded on said parcels for use in any of the aforementioned types of business without complying with the provisions of this ordinance with respect to such new or expanded portions. All businesses located on parcels exempt from this ordinance shall be granted and shall obtain "Class E" licenses from the city to indicate their exempt status. 

Section 911 - LM Light manufacturing district. 
Purpose: This district is to provide for commercial and light industrial uses, all of which shall be nuisance free and not generators of hazardous wastes. It is intended to provide suitable areas for those businesses that may serve as an impetus for the economic decline of the general business district, business distribution/service facilities, transportation terminals, and manufacturing/assembly processes. The district shall be located on either arterial or major collector streets or within industrial parks having access to such thoroughfares. No residential uses shall be permitted within the LM district. 
Definitions: 
Check casher means an individual, partnership, association, or corporation engaged in cashing checks, money orders, or other drafts for a fee. Such fee may be payable in cash, in the form of exchange of value in excess of regular retail value, in the form of mandatory purchase of goods or services by patrons on a regular basis, which shall mean the check casher conducts such services more than ten times in any calendar month, or in the form of the purchase of catalog items or coupons or other items indicating the ability to receive goods, services, or catalog items. 
Payday loans (also known as deferred deposit advances) are small-dollar, short-term, unsecured loans that borrowers promise to repay out of their next paycheck or regular income payment (such as a Social Security check). 
Permitted uses: 
Adult entertainment establishments as defined and regulated by Title 9, Chapter 4, Article G of the Code of Ordinances of Morrow, Georgia, subject to all location restrictions of that article. 
Any commercial or industrial use which involves manufacturing, processing or assembly operations or the storage and sale of heavy materials, products or equipment; but not including uses which may cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard or other objectionable conditions detectable at the property line. 
Apparel manufacturing plants. 
Auto service, sales and repair shops. 
Bakeries and other establishments manufacturing prepared foods and miscellaneous food products. 
Bottling plants. 
Cabinet shops. 
Clinics, cafeterias, employee credit unions and recreational facilities for employees only. 
Cold storage, ice plants and freezer lockers. 
Consumer fireworks retail sales facilities. 
Consumer fireworks retail sales stands. 
Dairy plants and ice cream manufacturing. 
Distribution of products and merchandise. 
Dry cleaning and laundering establishments. 
Education and training facilities. 
Electrical appliances and equipment, sales and repairs, but excluding open storage. 
Electronic manufacturing and assembly plants. 
Fabricating shops such as cabinet, upholstery and sheet metal shops. 
Garages, repair shops and machine shops. 
Lodges and organizational meeting halls, including union halls. 
Mini-warehouses. 
Offices and administrative facilities. 
Plumbing shops, but excluding open storage. 
Printing, publishing and reproducing establishments. 
Residence for the exclusive use of a watchman or caretaker when located on the same tract as the industrial use, and subject to all dimensional and area requirements of the RMA multiple-family residential district. 
Textile manufacturing plants. 
Tire recapping and retreading shops. 
Other uses as may be determined by the planning and zoning board to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
Accessory uses: 
None 
Conditional uses: 
Animal kennels, including the keeping of animals associated with medical research. 
Check cashing facilities, full-service, as defined by the Georgia Department of Banking and Finance. 
Massage therapists and massage establishments (non-chiropractic licensed), in which massage or massage services are the sole services offered on the premises. 
Outdoor advertising signs (billboards) provided compliance with the Morrow Sign Ordinance is assured. 
Outdoor theaters, provided acceleration and deceleration lanes (at least 200 feet in length) are provided for the use of vehicles entering or leaving the theater and the volume or concentration of traffic will not constitute a traffic hazard or unduly impede highway traffic movement, and provided that the screen is not visible from any major or minor arterials located within 2,000 feet of the screen. 
Pawnbrokers or pawn or swap shops. 
Payday lending facilities. 
Public lands and structures, but not including schools offering a curriculum similar in content to that offered in the public schools. 
Tattoo and tattooing establishments. 
Terminal and service garages for inter-city and intra-city vehicles. 
Title pawn shops. 
Wholesaling and warehousing and those businesses which are incidental thereto, excluding the handling or storage of any material of a flammable or explosive nature. 
Performance standards: 
All industrial uses in the LM district shall conform to the standards of performance described below and shall be so constructed, maintained and operated as to not be injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particular matter, toxic or noxious waste materials, odors, fire and explosive hazard or glare. None of the aforementioned shall be detectable at the property line. Any stricter state standard existing, or enacted subsequent to adoption of this ordinance shall take precedence over these standards. 
(1)  Noise: Noise levels in excess of those permitted in the Department of Housing and Urban Development shall be muffled or eliminated if detectable at the property line so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. 
(2)  Vibration: Every use shall be so operated that ground vibration inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible, without instruments at any point on the property line of the property on which the use is located. 
(3)  Smoke: Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the emission of smoke from any source that is in excess of standards promulgated by or prohibited by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(4)  Dust and particulates: Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the emission into the air of dust or other solid matter which may cause damage to property or discomfort to persons or animals at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located. Particulate emissions shall comply with all standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(5)  Industrial sewage and waste: Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the discharge into any stream, lake, sewer system or the ground of any waste which exceeds the standards for effluents as promulgated by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(6)  Odors: Every use shall be so operated as to prevent the emission of odors in a concentration as to be readily perceptible to any point at the lot line of the property on which the use is located. 
(7)  Glare: Every use shall be so operated as to prevent emission of glare of an intensity as to be readily perceptible at any point on the property line. 
(8)  Fire and safety hazard: Each use shall be operated so as to lessen the danger from fire and explosion. 
a.  All uses storing, processing or producing free or active burning material (as determined by the building inspector) shall be located entirely within buildings or structures having exterior incombustible walls and all such buildings shall be set back at least 50 feet from all lot lines. 
b.  All materials or products which produce inflammable or explosive vapors or gases under ordinary weather conditions shall not be permitted within 100 feet of any lot line. 
c.  All buildings and structures containing explosives shall be set back from all property lines a distance to be determined by the building inspector, but in no case less than 100 feet. 
(9)  Hazardous wastes: No use shall be permitted which produces as a waste product any substance identified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency as a toxic substance. 
(10)  Storage: Within 300 feet of a residential district, all processes and storage except of passenger car vehicles shall be in completely enclosed buildings. Processes and storage located at a greater distance shall be effectively screened by a solid wall or fence at least six feet in height, but in no case lower in height than the enclosed process or storage. 
Space limits: 
Minimum lot area: One acre. 
Minimum lot width: 150 feet. 
Minimum front yard: 50 feet. 
Minimum rear yard: 30 feet, but 50 feet if abutting a residential district. 
Minimum side yard: 20 feet, but 50 feet if abutting a residential district. 
Maximum building height: 65 feet. 
Maximum ground coverage: 60 percent. 
For consumer fireworks retail sales stands and consumer fireworks retail sales facilities only: 
Minimum distance from right-of-way: 30 feet from right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 95-04, § 1(C)—(G), 4-11-95; Ord. No. 98-19, § 1, 12-22-98; Ord. 99-12, § 1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 2003-08, § 1F(1)—(3), 7-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-12, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 2017-03 , §§ 7, 8, 2-28-17) 
Section 912 - HM Heavy manufacturing district. 
Purpose: This district provides for the broadest range of commercial and industrial operations permitted in the city. It is the district for location of those businesses that may serve as an impetus for the economic decline of the general business district and for the location of those industries which have not reached a technical stage which renders them free of all nuisance factors. These uses are to be located on either an arterial or major collector street, or when in an industrial park shall have access to such thoroughfares. No residential uses are permitted in the HM district. 
Permitted uses: 
Any use permitted in the LM, light manufacturing district provided there is no generation of hazardous substances. 
Brick, tile or terra cotta manufacture. 
Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris manufacture. 
Central mixing plants for cement, mortar, plaster, or housing material. 
Concrete, cement products or clay products manufacture. 
Foundry or forging plants. 
Grain elevators or commercial feed mills. 
Other uses as may be determined by the planning and zoning board to be similar and compatible with the above-listed permitted uses. 
Accessory uses: 
None 
Conditional uses: 
Those conditional uses permitted in the LM district. 
Automobile wrecking or junk yards, when completely enclosed by a solid fence having a minimum height of six feet, but in no case less than (such) a height as will effectively screen all operations from view, and located not closer than 300 feet to a residential district nor closer than 50 feet to any property line. This fence shall be properly maintained. 
Natural production uses—The excavation and sale of topsoil, gravel, sand, shale or other material of natural mineral deposit, or quarrying of any kind of rock formation, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  In the case of open excavation there shall be a substantial fence with suitable gates, completely enclosing the portion of the property in which the excavation is located; and such fence shall be located at all points 40 feet or more distant from the edge of the excavation. 
(2)  The slope of the material in the sand, gravel or other pit shall not exceed the normal angle of repose of the material, and the plane of that angle of repose shall not come nearer than 40 feet to any property line. 
(3)  In the case of a quarry or other excavation in rock, there shall be a substantial fence, with suitable gates, at all points 40 feet or more distant from the face of any quarry walls. 
(4)  No quarry wall shall be nearer than 40 feet to any property boundary line or street line. 
(5)  The product of the quarry shall be removed in the form in which it is quarried. 
Poultry killing, plucking or processing. 
Taxicab and limousine services. 
Performance standards: 
All uses in the HM district shall conform to the performance standards contained in the LM district. 
Space limits: 
Minimum lot area: Two acres. 
Minimum lot width: 200 feet. 
Minimum front yard: 80 feet. 
Minimum rear yard: 65 feet. 
Minimum side yard: 50 feet. 
Maximum building height: 65 feet. 
Maximum ground coverage: 60 percent. 
(Ord. No. 2000-05, § 1, 3-28-00; Ord. No. 2003-08, § 2A., 7-22-03; Ord. No. 2006-12, 11-28-06) 
Section 913 - PC Planned center district. 
Purpose: It is the intent of this district to encourage development of compatible land uses on a scale larger than that of individual small parcels. This district is designed to be appended to a residential, commercial, or industrial district to provide greater latitude with regard to the internal site planning considerations of a planned center development. All planned center developments shall be consistent with the land use plan. For purposes of zoning compliance, a planned center property shall be treated as one lot. All planned centers shall be located on a street having minimum classification of major collector. A planned center shall not contain a mixture of uses not otherwise permitted in the zoning district to which it is appended. 
Permitted uses: 
Residential planned center. 
Single-family, attached single-family, two-family, multifamily development of a conventional or cluster-type development. 
Public buildings and recreational facilities. 
Private garages and parking lots. 
Office planned center. 
Professional business, medical and dental offices. 
Public and governmental buildings and offices. 
Retail uses normally appurtenant to office uses such as florist shops, cafeterias, snack shops, pharmacies and gift shops when located on the ground floor of a multi-story office or residential structure. 
Shopping center/planned center. 
Any retail, office, or service use permitted in the BG district. 
Department stores. 
Other retail and service uses as determined by the planning and zoning board. 
Industrial park planned center. 
Any permitted use listed in the LM district with the exception of the following: 
1.  Auto service, sales and repair. 
2.  Cold storage, ice plants and frozen lockers. 
3.  Garages and repair shops. 
4.  Service stations. 
Other uses as may be determined by the planning and zoning board to be similar and compatible with permitted uses in the LM district. 
General provisions: 
Land may be rezoned as a planned center if any one of the following conditions are met: 
1.  More than one principal land use is proposed for development on a single parcel under single or multiple ownership. 
2.  Exceptions or variations to the size, dimensional changes in standards required or other requirements of the zoning ordinance are being sought. 
In order to qualify for a planned center zoning classification, a proposed planned center must first meet the following requirements: 
1.  The proposed development must be compatible with land use existing in the district to which the -PC district is to be appended. For example, a residential planned center must be appended to a residential district, a commercial planned center must be appended for a commercial district, etc. 
2.  The area proposed shall be in one ownership, or if in several ownerships, the application for amendment to the zoning ordinance shall be filed jointly by all of the owners of the properties included in the plan. 
3.  A sketch plan of the proposed planned center shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning board. The sketch plan may be a free-hand sketch made on a plat showing topography, having contour intervals of ten feet or less. The sketch plan shall include all of the contiguous property under one ownership and shall contain the following information: 
—  The planned center name; 
—  The owner and designer of the planned center; 
—  Date, scale and north arrow; 
—  Proposed uses and the acreage in each proposed use; 
—  Acreage in total tract; 
—  Any proposed street design and layout; 
—  Vicinity map; 
—  Approximate number of lots, if any, and approximate lot boundaries; 
—  Proposed buffers and/or screening, if required; 
—  Location of proposed buildings. 
4.  Subsequent to sketch plan approval, a formal development plan shall be prepared incorporating comments and modifications suggested by the planning and zoning board. 
This plan shall be reviewed and a recommendation made to the city council by the planning and zoning board. Specifically, such plan shall include the following elements: 
a.  A plot plan drawn to scale by a registered engineer, land surveyor, landscape architect or architect showing the exact dimensions of the parcel or parcels of land under consideration, and including the following: 
—  A site plan drawn to scale (1" = 100' or 1" = 50') and indicating all property dimensions, platting and street systems, proposed building sites, plans for the protection of abutting properties, means of ingress and egress, access and circulation arrangements, off-street parking and loading facilities, proposed reservation or dedications for streets and other public facilities, and, if requested, two-foot vertical contour intervals. The site plan shall include the name of the development and the developers, a north point, the depth of field survey, tract boundary lines, dimensions, bearing, angles and reference points to at least two permanent monuments. 
—  If the proposal includes the subdivision of land for any purpose or the provision of new streets, the information required above and any additional information required with the submittal of preliminary plats under the subdivision regulations of the City of Morrow, the site plan shall be processed simultaneously as a preliminary plat under the subdivision regulations of the City of Morrow, and as a part of the application for a planned center district classification as provided for in this ordinance. 
b.  A written report shall be submitted by the applicant, reviewed and approved by the planning and zoning board and the city council, and such report shall explain the type, nature, intent and characteristics of the proposed development, and shall specifically include, where applicable: 
—  A general description of the proposal; 
—  A detailed legal description of the location of the site; 
—  Proposed standards for development, including restrictions on the use of the property, density standards and yard requirements and restrictive covenants; 
—  Proposed dedications of land for public use, including streets, easements, parks and school sites; 
—  Exceptions or variations from the requirements of the zoning ordinance if any are being requested; 
—  Plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer and drainage facilities; 
—  Plans for protection of abutting properties; 
—  Tables showing the total number of acres in the proposed development and the percentage designated for each proposed type of land use, including public facilities; 
—  Plans for open space, courts, walks, and common areas; and 
—  Tabulations of the overall density for residential uses, if any, and other data that the planning and zoning board and the city council may require. 
c.  The planning and zoning board may also request that the applicant have an environmental impact report prepared by a mutually agreed upon qualified professional. This report shall objectively discuss positive and negative impact of the proposed development on adjacent land uses, traffic patterns and volumes, vegetation and wildlife habitat and area aesthetics. An environmental impact report shall be mandatory if a proposed project generates 2,000 vehicle trips per day or adds at least 30,000 gallons per day to sewage treatment plant capacity. 
Administrative procedures: 
Any request to establish a -PC district shall be considered an amendment to the zoning ordinance and shall be processed in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
The proponents of the planned center shall begin construction exactly as proposed within two years of the recording of the amendments. If such construction is not commenced and pursued in an orderly manner toward completion, the city council may initiate action to abolish the zoning or reduce the size of the tract to fit the scope of the actual development. It is intended that a planned center be designed to carry out the objectives of the planning practices established by this ordinance and to be so developed within a reasonable time. 
It is recognized that changes in the detail of an originally proposed plan could occur. The planning and zoning board is therefore authorized to act on proposed changes from the original plan provided said changes do not materially affect the basic design or negate any special features which were designed to facilitate traffic or preserve neighborhood character. Written approval of the planning and zoning board shall be required for all changes made. 
Space limits: 
Minimum lot area: Three acres. 
Minimum lot width: 200 feet. 
Minimum front yard: 60 feet. 
Minimum rear yard: None, but 50 feet if commercial uses abut a residential district and 100 feet if industrial uses abut a residential district. 
Minimum side yard: None, but 50 feet if commercial uses abut a residential district and 100 feet if industrial uses abut a residential district. 
Maximum building height: Same as for similar uses in the primary district to which the -PC district is appended. 
Maximum ground coverage (exclusive of accessory uses): 
Residential planned development: 40 percent. 
Office planned development: 50 percent. 
Shopping center planned development: 40 percent. 
Industrial planned development: 60 percent. 
Maximum permissible density: 
Residential planned development: For single-family, two dwelling units per acre; for attached single-family and two-family four dwelling units per acre; for multiple-family ten dwelling units per acre. 
Office planned development: 85,000 square feet per net acre. 
Shopping center planned development: 17,500 square feet per net acre. 
Industrial planned development: 26,000 square feet per net acre. 
Miscellaneous provisions: 
Buffer requirements of this ordinance will be met by planned center developments. The size of required buffers shall be determined by the classification of planned center. 
Design requirements: 
For all planned center developments the following design parameters shall be adhered to and reflected on the site plan submittal as part of the rezoning application. 
•  All buildings that are to occupy the site shall adhere to a single, consistent architectural theme. This theme shall become a part of any restrictive covenants or deed restrictions relating to the development. 
•  The exterior appearance of a building shall be compatible with the general character of the surrounding locale. 
•  Design of structures shall be planned in such a manner to utilize the natural features of the site, i.e. topography, landforms, scenic views, and open space. 
•  Any exterior portions of a building, attached or detached shall be compatible to the main structure. 
•  All utilities shall be located underground. 
•  Residential, office or shopping center planned centers shall include sidewalks for pedestrian use. 
•  All new landscaping shall be identified by type and location on the design plan and new landscaping to be provided on the site shall be compatible with existing vegetation. 
•  Existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall be preserved whenever possible, or replaced with similar vegetation. 
•  Landscaping shall be installed to screen objectionable views such as parking areas, drainage ways, refuse containers and exterior mechanical equipment. 
•  Grass areas shall either be sodded or, if grass seed is to be utilized, it shall be of a variety suitable to the locale, and produce complete coverage. 
•  No artificial plants, trees or other vegetation shall be installed. 
•  Existing, healthy deciduous and hardwood trees shall be retained when feasible, or shall be replaced with the same or similar type of tree. 
•  A landscaped strip and/or masonry wall or decorative wood fence shall be required along all public rights-of-way except where driveways are required. A landscaped strip and/or masonry wall or decorative wood fence shall be required along any side lot abutting adjoining public right-of-way, except where driveways are retained. 
•  Interior landscaping for parking areas shall be required in those parking areas providing at least 15 spaces. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 14, 5-26-09) 
Section 914 - AG Agricultural district. 
Purpose: This district is composed of certain lands and structures in the city presently having a predominately rural character and which will likely retain this rural character for an indeterminate period of time. Regulations in this district impose only minimum restrictions on the use of land for agricultural purposes, and these minimum regulations are intended primarily to protect nearby residential uses from possible objectionable effects of certain agricultural operations such as livestock raising, storage of fertilizer, or sawmill operations. Regulations relating to the operation of quarries are intended to ensure that these operations will not constitute a hazard to public safety and to encourage the quarrying of the property in such a manner that when quarry operations are completed, the land will be usable for other purposes such as private or public recreation areas, water storage or industry. 
As the need and demand for additional open land suitable for urban development is determined by the planning commission [planning and zoning board], selected portions of this agricultural district may be rezoned for more intensive forms of development. 
Permitted uses: 
Single-family dwellings, including additional single-family units located on the same lot or parcel as the principal building on the basis of one single-family unit for each ten acres in addition to the lot area required for the principal residence. The additional units shall be subject to all of the yard requirements of this district. 
Accessory uses: 
Home occupations 
Conditional uses: 
Churches and other places of worship with attendant educational-recreational buildings. No church, synagogue, chapel, or other place of religious worship and instruction shall be located within 100 yards (300 feet) of any establishment that sells or offers to sell any distilled spirits in accordance with the licensure and permitting requirements of the state and the city. 
Cemeteries, provided that the location of these uses shall be limited to any locations where they may best serve as a transitional open use between less compatible uses and to locations abutting state or federal highways. 
Clubs, private and public, including golf and country clubs, fishing clubs, gun clubs and other similar enterprises. 
Privately owned and operated recreational facility having an area of not less than 50 acres and containing recreational facilities open to the paying public. A comprehensive development plan for the entire area shall be submitted to the planning commission [planning and zoning board] in addition to specific plans for each of the commercial facilities to be developed. 
Athletic fields or stadiums, racetracks and speedways, and recreation areas for public uses including golf driving ranges, swimming pools, fishing lakes and similar recreational uses when located on a tract of land not less than five acres. 
Airplane landing fields and helicopter ports and accessory facilities for private or public use including flight strips. 
Schools and publicly owned and operated community structures and lands. 
Public utility structures and lands. 
All conditional nonresidential uses in the agricultural district shall conform to the standards of performance described in the LM district and shall be so constructed, maintained and operated as to not be injurious or offensive to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particular matter, electrical disturbance, toxic or noxious waste material, odor, fire and explosive hazard or glare. 
Space limits: 
Minimum lot area: One acre. 
Minimum lot width: 100 feet at the building line. 
Minimum front yard: 50 feet. 
Minimum rear yard: 40 feet. 
Minimum side yard: 15 feet. 
Maximum building height: 
Single-family residences 35 feet. 
Farm structures 50 feet. 
Other structures 75 feet. 
Maximum ground coverage: 25 percent including accessory buildings and structures. 
Minimum floor area: 1,600 sq. feet for residences. 
(Ord. No. 2013-48, § 3, 9-24-13) 
Section 915 - Mixed use district (MU).[4] 
Purpose and intent: The purpose and intent of this article is to establish a uniform procedure for review and approval of projects; to protect, enhance, preserve or reuse places, sites, buildings, structures, objects, streets, street furniture, sidewalks, neighborhoods, and landscape features; provide for aesthetic, economic, and functional value of properties, neighborhoods, and structures; and to promote aesthetics of the built environment, business viability, neighborhood preservation and public safety in the City of Morrow. 
The added purposes of this mixed use district allows developers the opportunity to maximize the building floor area on each lot, locate parking off the street frontage so that businesses can move close to the sidewalk and more readily attract pedestrians, place buildings at a minimal front setback line close behind a sidewalk of adequate width, encourage construction of at least three-story buildings, locate retail uses on the ground-floor street frontage preferably adjacent to other retail uses, locate on second and higher floors office, service, or residential uses that generate pedestrian traffic from the general public to utilize the continuity along the street frontage of retail uses, provide better access to the land areas remaining undeveloped or underdeveloped, develop sidewalks and building features (e.g., entrances, weather protection) so as to maximize safety, comfort, ease of movement, and convenience for pedestrians. 
The scope of this zoning also includes standards for sidewalks; pedestrian and site lighting; street trees; site development; design, materials, location and orientation of buildings and accessory structures; landscaping; screening and material. These standards are necessary to implement the goals contained in the City of Morrow Livable Community Initiative Study. Such goals include, but are not limited to, implementing an integrated transportation and land use plan; creating a town center, applying design guidelines; improving traffic and the pedestrian environment, aesthetics of the built environment, and business viability; preserving neighborhoods and promoting public safety. The mixed use district (MU) standards apply to all properties within the district for which initial development or redevelopment is taking place; provided that nothing in this article shall prohibit homeowners of existing single-family homes from improving their homes in accordance with traditional standards of the RS-80 District and city adopted codes of technical regulations. This proviso shall exempt from compliance, improvements to homes that would otherwise be affected by the 40 percent trigger of the review process below and further provided that any single-family home may be rebuilt following damage or destruction by fire or other natural causes without regard to the 50 percent limitation on demolition. 
Review process. Applications for improvements to developed sites and/or existing structures shall meet the standards contained in this article for installation of sidewalks, pedestrian lighting, and street trees, when the proposed interior and/or exterior renovation of a building and/or site re-development improvements have a declared value equal to or greater than 40 percent of the property's most recent tax assessment, building or expansion of floor space of an existing building. 
Estimated costs of, including but not limited to, demolition, construction, installation, and fabrication, including labor and materials, for both interior and exterior improvements, shall be submitted at the time a building and/or land disturbance permit application is filed. 
The declared value of improvements under multiple permits shall be cumulative and shall include the value of improvements under permits issued for the previous seven years, from the date the most recent application is filed. 
All land disturbance permit applications for new construction shall meet the standards contained in the MU zoning classification. 
All building permit applications for new buildings shall meet the standards contained in the MU zoning classification. 
Where two or more properties, lots or parcels are located within the same block or have frontage on the same side of the street between two intersecting streets, and are under common ownership and are being developed or re-developed as a single development operation or a series of coordinated development operations, these properties shall be considered as a single property for purposes of this article. 
When a portion of any parcel, lot, property, or development, falls within the boundary of the MU district, the entire development shall meet these standards. 
Streetscape Standards: 
Street trees shall be: 
1.  Centered two feet from the sidewalk between the sidewalk and back of curb on streets. Street trees may be placed adjacent to the sidewalk away from the street, if in conflict with utilities. 
2.  A minimum four inch caliper. 
4.  Planted at approximately 40 feet on center. 
5.  Selected from the species listed in attachment. 
6.  Of a single species on any single property, although other required trees on property need not be of a single species. 
7.  Shall contribute towards the requirements of the Tree Preservation Ordinance. 
Sidewalks: 
1.  Sidewalk widths may be tapered between streetscape types. 
2.  Sidewalk paths shall be continued across the entire length of all concrete aprons and shall be textured to match the appearance of sidewalk materials, in color, texture and design. 
3.  Where rights-of-way are insufficient to accommodate the required sidewalk and planted strip, the streetscape may be located outside the right-of-way. 
4.  Where the front setback for a new building is not an exception, a sidewalk 15 feet in depth shall extend from the eight foot grass strip to the building face. Street trees may be planted in the portion of the sidewalk area nearer the street curb. This sidewalk requirement also shall apply to an addition to an existing building except for alteration of existing front parking or where the space between the existing front building face and a line 15 feet behind the curb is landscaped or improved for pedestrian use. 
Weather protection. Awnings or canopies are not required, but any awnings and canopies approved by the city council may extend over sidewalks (public or private), to protect patrons and to facilitate movement of pedestrians from building to building in inclement weather. Supporting structure for such awnings or canopies shall not block any portion of a public sidewalk. Awnings and canopies and any signs suspended from them shall clear the sidewalk by at least eight feet. 
Pedestrian circulation requirements. Substitute or alternative pedestrian routes through or between buildings for part or all of the requirements in this chapter may be authorized by special administrative permit, upon a finding by the city council that: (i) such pedestrian ways are not inconsistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter; and (ii) such pedestrian ways provide equal or improved pedestrian circulation. That portion of the pedestrian circulation requirement of this chapter which lies within the net lot area shall constitute a corresponding portion of the open space requirements. 
Development pattern and land access. As development and redevelopment occur, a pattern of a sidewalk (15 feet) on each side, with any utilities so located that tree-planting wells may be placed in that portion of the sidewalk nearer the curb, and marked pedestrian crossings, including curb "bump-outs" at all intersections and midblock pedestrian crossings. This pattern shall be designed to permit safe, low-speed circulation of cars and pedestrians throughout the area, provide for the creation of small lots and buildings, and facilitate placement of additional buildings at the sidewalks of such additional streets. Other street configurations may be considered, subject to a determination that the purposes and provisions of this overlay district are satisfied to a reasonable degree. 
Pedestrian lighting: 
1.  Pedestrian lighting shall be installed when new or upgraded sidewalks are constructed. 
2.  Pedestrian lighting shall be spaced 60 feet apart and shall be equal distance from required street trees, in accordance with the Georgia Power Area-wide Pedestrian Lighting Plan. 
3.  Fixtures design shall be approved by the Morrow Public Works Director. 
4.  On intra-parcel sidewalks, fixtures shall be installed to maintain a minimum lighting level on the pathway of six foot-candles. 
Site Development Standards: 
Intra-parcel walkways. A continuous, on-site intra-parcel walkway of at least five feet in width is required to connect the public sidewalk to the main entrance(s) of that property's building(s), and shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), in all respects. Intra-parcel walkways crossing parking lots shall be distinguished from parking lots by the use of colors, texture (use of different materials), difference in rise above the parking lot or a combination of these means, to minimize auto-pedestrian conflict. 
Landscape strips and planting materials: 
1.  There shall be a ten foot wide landscape strip adjacent to the edge of the sidewalk. 
a.  Strip between street and sidewalk—Material and width. Two-foot wide brick paver, eight-foot wide planted strip (groundcovers, grass). 
b.  Sidewalks—Required in all districts. Width of sidewalk—Fifteen feet. 
2.  Ground covers and mulch or similar materials, shall be utilized in parking lot landscape islands. Turf grass is permitted with an expectable landscape and irrigation plan. 
Buffers. A 40-foot natural or enhanced buffer with an eight-foot City of Morrow approved masonary wall shall remain between all MU zoning classification developments and any remaining RS-80 single family residential zoned property as defined by the Future land Use Map designed in April 2004. A MU development that abuts an RS-80 community, but is divided by a road, shall use the public right-of-way for their side of the roadway as the starting point and move back 40 feet to meet the buffer requirement. The city council may require additional plantings, enhancements, walkways, paths, lighting, or other community functional needs to incorporate the MU development into the adjacent residential community. 
Accessory structures and screening: 
1.  Accessory structures shall not be located in any yard adjacent to a public street or viewable to the general public. 
2.  Loading docks, refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, exterior work areas, mechanical equipment or other utilities if visible from a public street shall be screened from public view by one or a combination of the following elements: continuous evergreen plantings, opaque approved fences or other material related to the primary landscape or architectural elements on the site. 
3.  When plantings are used as screens, such plantings shall be evergreen. Such plantings shall count toward required minimum landscape areas rather than being in addition thereto. 
4.  Where walls or approved fences are used in lieu of planted screens, landscape materials shall be incorporated into the screening scheme whenever feasible. 
5.  Where a parking lot, parking structure or gas fueling bays front directly on a public street, a continuous screen of evergreen (to be equally effective all year) planting shall be provided. Said screen shall be a minimum height of two feet, a maximum height of three feet, and minimum width of five feet. Such planting shall contribute to the minimum landscape areas. 
Fences and walls. The following standards apply to common fences and walls around businesses, residential developments, and detached and attached residential subdivisions along public street frontages. The following standards are in addition to the standards set forth in the regulations, fences and walls. 
1.  Allowable materials include: natural and man-made stone, brick, ornamental decorative or wrought iron or aluminum, or architectural concrete. 
2.  Fencing made of barbed wire, razor wire, plastic, cloth, wood, or chain-link is prohibited, 
3.  When the building fronts and sides are visible to a public street, any wall or fence over two feet in height from finished grade shall not be opaque and shall have a minimum opening ratio of 50 percent. 
4.  When the back of the building is visible to a public street, fences or walls shall be opaque. 
5.  Application for fence and wall permits shall be approved by the city manager. 
Parking. The City of Morrow strongly encourages structured parking in the MU zoning classification. Existing surface parking exceeds the needs of the community and reduces our ability to create a pedestrian friendly environment for our guests, corporations, and residents. 
Front parking. No parking, driveway, or other area for vehicles shall be placed between the building and the street. 
Existing parking in front of buildings. Upon adding floor space to a lot with an existing building, where parking requirements are otherwise met, existing parking in front of buildings shall be replaced by uses such as 
1.  Expansion of the existing building, including a one-story expansion such as a porch, 
2.  Outdoor seating for serving food or beverages, or 
3.  A pedestrian courtyard. 
Bicycle parking: A minimum of one bicycle parking space shall be provided for every 20 auto spaces. 
Off-site parking. Where alternative off-site parking (either public parking or private parking obtained by lease or easement) is provided within 200 feet of the property, the on-site parking requirement may be reduced to as little as zero, provided that the total of on-site and alternative off-site parking together shall meet the requirement for the proposed use and 
a.  The building meets the requirements regarding number of stories or 
b.  The use of existing floor space is proposed to be altered in a manner that requires more parking spaces (e.g., an existing space is being changed from office to retail use, or a restaurant is expanding the number of seats). 
The availability of alternative off-site parking for a particular development shall be determined based on 
1.  The total number of off-site parking spaces that will be available by the time of occupancy of the new floor space, 
2.  The cumulative amount of new floor space for which the off-site parking spaces are counted in meeting the parking requirement, and 
3.  The maximum number of such off-site parking spaces likely to be utilized at any one time by the cumulative new floor space. 
Parking ratios. The number of parking spaces provided for a site shall meet but shall not exceed the number calculated from the parking ratios required by the Zoning Ordinance, unless such higher number is justified to and approved by the city council. For a building of three or more stories, floor area lost to stairwells and elevator shafts shall not be included in total floor area for parking calculations. 
Minimum number, maximum number. The following are the minimum and maximum number of off-street parking spaces and loading stalls required by type of permitted uses in the Mixed Use Classification (MU). Twenty percent of the total required parking spaces may be set aside for compact and sub-compact cars. For any use not listed the city council shall determine the proper requirements by classifying the proposed use among the uses specified herein so as to assure equal treatment follows the principles set forth. In making any such determination, the city council shall follow the principles set forth at the beginning of this article. 

 
The minimum standards are available to properties which comply with the streetscape standards and have pedestrian access to the street. 
1.  All parking, except residential, shall be shared. 
2.  Parking spaces are permitted off-site. 
3.  Parking areas are not permitted between the sidewalk and the front of the building. 
Shared parking. Where a parking area will serve two or more uses for which peak parking demand occurs at different times, the city council may permit an appropriate number of such spaces to count toward the parking requirement for more than one of those uses. 
Parallel parking. Where parallel parking is allowed on a street section abutting the property and on the same side of the street as the property, such parallel parking shall count toward meeting the parking requirement for the property. 
Surface parking. All new non structured parking spaces or lots built after June 1, 2004, shall be limited to 30 percent of a development's property. All additional parking must be structured parking. 
1.  Parking lots shall be broken up within the development and no single surface area shall designed to hold all the parking spaces for the development. 
2.  Shared parking is encouraged to meet the development's needs and to utilize existing surface parking within the city. 
3.  Stand alone, non-structured, parking lots (whose primary use is to meet the parking needs of adjacent property) are prohibited. 
Parking lot islands. For all surface parking areas allowed under the Mixed Use classification a landscape island having a minimum dimension of ten feet by 38 feet shall be installed and at each end of the parking aisle, a landscape island having a minimum dimension of 20 feet by 38 feet shall be installed in order to separate the last space from any adjacent travel ways. Every parking row must be divided by a minimum ten foot wide landscape strip. (For landscape purposes) 
Alleys. As development or redevelopment of the area permits, alleys shall be created for access to parking on the rear of properties. 
Sight distance. No building, sign, structure or object, tree or other landscape feature shall be installed, built, or allowed to grow which will impede visibility at street corners, driveways and/or intersections, pursuant to AASHTO standards for sight triangles. 
Yards adjacent to a street (as measured from the back of curb). 
a.  Minimum yard: Twenty-five feet. 
b.  Maximum yard: Forty-foot setback above the fourth floor. 
Minimum side yards. Zero (if there are no windows along the side wall). 
Lot width. Minimum lot width may be reduced to 40 feet, provided: 
1.  The width is uniform, 
2.  A building of three or more stories is constructed on the lot, and 
3.  Any building less than 40 feet in width shall be attached to another building such that the total width of the attached buildings along the street frontage is at least 40 feet. 
Building width. A new building or addition to an existing building shall occupy the full width of the lot, except in the following circumstances: 
a.  A pedestrian passageway to parking or other businesses to the rear of the building is provided. 
b.  A side yard is used as an outside seating area for a restaurant or a public courtyard. 
c.  A driveway to parking spaces in the rear is allowed alongside the building because there is no reasonable alternative access to the parking spaces. 
d.  A utility easement precludes use of the full width, in which case one of the above uses shall be placed over the easement. Where a new building will occupy an undivided portion of a shopping center parking lot, a "development area" for that building shall be identified and treated the same as if it were a separate lot. 
Street Furniture and Amenity Zone: 
Clear zone: Outside the two foot paver band and required landscape strip, there shall be a clear zone of six feet where there shall be no permanent structures, including but not limited to, utility poles, mail boxes, newspaper vending boxes, sign structures, and benches. 
Furniture zone: The remaining portion of the sidewalk, outside the clear zone, shall be used for the following purposes, including, but not limited to street trees, garbage receptacles, bicycle racks, benches and other seating elements which do not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
Recreation and hardscape improvements: A minimum of 20 percent of the developable area shall be set aside for recreational facilities, plazas, or other gathering areas. Such public space shall include planted areas, fountains, plazas, hardscape elements related to sidewalks and plazas, and similar features which are located on private property. The proposed hardscape improvements or recreational areas shall be illustrated as part of the development process. Final approval shall rest with the city council. 
1.  Workout areas and wellness centers shall count as recreational space and do not have to be open to the public. However, at least 15 percent of the developable area recreation and hardscape requirement shall be located on the street level and open to the general public. 
Front setback. A new building or addition to an existing building shall be constructed no closer than 25 feet and not further than 35 feet, at the street right-of-way line or at the back of a required 15-foot sidewalk or at a distance behind the curb specified in plans adopted by the city council for a specific area, whichever is the greatest distance behind the street curb. In no case shall the front setback specified for the underlying zoning district take precedence. Exceptions to the aforesaid front setback are where a pedestrian courtyard (including outdoor seating for a business serving food or beverages) is created behind the sidewalk, in which case a building that abuts the courtyard may be set immediately behind it, where a building must be set back from the street to a location where the property is wider, because the street frontage is too narrow for the building, or where an addition to an existing building is at such a substantial distance from the aforesaid setback line or so located that it is determined that it can not reasonably be extended to that line (e.g., an addition to an existing building set well back on a shopping center property). 
Building setbacks. Building setbacks in yards adjacent to public streets may be increased to a maximum of 35 feet to accommodate outdoor space needed for plazas, dining, art, fountains, bicycle parking, gathering and seating places, gazebos or similar uses. Such improvements shall be documented on the final site plan. 
Orientation to street: 
1.  Newly constructed buildings: At least one public (e.g. open to the public during normal business hours) pedestrian oriented entrance shall be located on the street side of the building. There shall be pedestrian access directly from the sidewalk to the principal building entrance. 
2.  Drive through windows shall be located in the rear yard. 
3.  Gasoline fuel dispenser structures shall be located along a side yard and shall not be located between the building and the street. 
Relationship of building to street: Ground floor uses with street frontage shall only be retail, office, or institutional, and entrances shall be directly accessible, visible and adjacent to the sidewalk. Said uses shall be provided for a minimum depth of 25 feet from any building facade along the sidewalk, unless existing topographical considerations render this requirement unreasonable. 
Building heights: 
1.  The minimum height of all buildings is three floors or 45 feet, whichever is less. 
2.  No maximum building height is set. 
Building design guidelines. New, remodeled and rehabilitated buildings, parking decks, and other structures shall employ street level design elements that relate to a pedestrian scale through the following means: 
1.  Building floors shall be delineated from the sidewalk level to the third floor through windows, belt courses, cornice lines or similar architectural details. 
2.  Building entrances shall be articulated and create additional visual interest and / or opportunities for human activity and interaction by using one or more of the following methods: 
a.  Building materials, architectural details and patterns shall be varied per tenant or every 75 feet, whichever is less. 
b.  Roof line and building offsets shall be varied by a minimum of two feet for every three tenant spaces or 75 feet of building face, whichever is less. 
c.  Awnings, canopies, or other type of covered-projected entry, or 
d.  Places for human activity, including, but not limited to plazas, courtyards, porches, decks, outdoor seating, landscaping, gazebos, pavilions or fountains. 
e.  The maximum length of a building parallel to a public street shall not exceed 200 feet. 
3.  Every street face shall have a public entrance that is open during business hours into the ground-floor space. (On a corner lot, a corner entrance may serve both street faces.) 
Windows: 
a.  A minimum of 60 percent of ground level facades of a new building or additions to an existing building shall be composed of windows opening into the interior, display windows (which need not be open into the interior), or entrances, which openings are determined by the city council to be well-distributed along the face of the building or addition so as to minimize the lengths of blank wall areas. 
b.  All ground floor windows shall be transparent. Reflective and/or opaque glass is not permitted on ground level floors. 
c.  For building faces oriented toward a street, windows shall be placed at distances no greater than ten feet apart. 
Color. Primary or fluorescent colors shall not be employed except on awnings or canopies. 
Parking structures and decks. When adjacent to a public street, above street level parking structures and decks shall create visual interest through the articulation of openings, cornice lines, and belt courses or similar architectural details. 
Street address. A street address number shall follow these requirements: 
1.  It shall be located above the building entrance. 
2.  It shall be clearly visible from the sidewalk and street. It shall be a minimum of six inches in height. 
Building materials: 
Architectural treatment prohibited: 
1.  Prohibited exterior building components, if visible from any public street, include: Steel gates, burglar bars, steel roll down curtains. If not visible from any public area, such treatments are allowed. Interior security measures shall not be regulated. 
2.  The following materials shall be prohibited as primary roofing materials: Composite shingle and wood roof shingle 
Allowed architectural material: 
a.  A decorative parapet or cornice shall be constructed along all flat roof lines. 
b.  Roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from view by a decorative parapet or cornice (point of view shall be across any public street, from the edge of right-of-way furthest from the building). 
Architectural features required: The principal entry area of a building shall be articulated and express greater architectural detail than other portions of the building. Individual tenant space entries shall also be articulated and express greater architectural detail than the building wall. 
a.  Encouraged architectural elements include: columns, arcades and covered entry walkway, arches, facade offsets, windows, balconies, undulating walls, clock towers, cupolas and courtyards. 
b.  Building harmony: Out-parcel buildings or spin sites, which are identified on a site plan approved pursuant to a single zoning case, shall have architectural features consistent with the principal buildings. 
Residential Requirements: 
Homeowners associations and maintenance agreements: All residential or mixed use dwellings, townhouses, condominiums or other living spaces created after January 1, 2000, are required to have a homeowners' association and current maintenance agreements. All initial homeowners' association rules and bylaws and maintenance agreements must be reviewed and approved by the city council to ensure continued compliance over time with the standards and purposes of this article. Additionally, all future changes to such documents shall be submitted to the city for review and approval in accordance with the same standards. 
Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted as a matter of right in any mixed use zoning: mixed use dwellings, town house dwellings, condominiums, or detached dwellings. However, in each development, at least 70 percent of the residential dwellings shall be fee simple owned and occupied. Ground floor retail, office, or commercial use is required unless a development plan for the project has been approved by the city council. 
Physical requirements. Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, residential uses permitted in any mixed use district shall conform to the following standards: 
A.  The development shall not adversely affect the developed or undeveloped neighboring properties; 
B.  Water, sewage, and recreational facilities shall be adequate for the proposed development; 
C.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 
1.  1,400 to 1,499 square feet, no more than 25 percent of the total dwelling units built; 
2.  1,500 to 1,699 square feet, no more than 65 percent of the total dwelling units built; 
3.  1,700 square feet or more, no less than 35 percent of the total dwelling units built; 
4.  Each dwelling unit shall have an attached two car garage (400 square feet minimum) that is located behind the building. If existing buildings or topography make the location behind the building impractical, then the garage doors must be single car garage doors if located in the front of the dwelling. The recreational space and hardscape requirement shall double for construction of front entry garages, unless the city council has approved otherwise in a development plan for the project. 
5.  Two dedicated spaces in a parking deck can be substituted for the dwelling unit garage requirement if the deck is attached to the structure that contains the dwelling unit. Offsite spaces shall not count for residential uses. 
D.  Minimum building height: Three floors. Garages located on the bottom floor shall count as the first floor as long as the dwelling unit for those spaces is located above that garage and retail or office space is located on the ground floor side facing the street and other public areas. 
Development controls: 
(1)  Bulk limitations: For mixed use, floor area shall not exceed an amount equal to 25 times net lot area. 
(2)  Maximum building coverage: 80 percent of the net lot area. 
(3)  Public space requirements: A minimum of 20 percent of net lot area shall be provided on the site. 
(a)  Shall be visible and accessible from any point along 90 percent of any adjacent sidewalk. 
(b)  Shall permit and encourage pedestrians to walk on a minimum of 80 percent of the surface of the public space, excluding fountains, pedestrian furniture, pedestrian walkways, public art and similar elements, and 
Showering facilities. All office buildings containing over 50,000 square feet of gross office space shall provide showering facilities, which shall include showers and lockers, in a ratio of at least two showering facilities for every 50,000 square feet of gross office space, which facilities shall be available to all building tenants and their employees, provided that no office building shall be required to exceed a maximum of four showering facilities. 
Commercial, Office, and Retail Permitted Uses: 
Specific regulations for commercial subareas. Buildings or premise may be used for the following permitted mixed-uses and structures: 
Permitted uses: 
Commercial recreational activities, including theaters. 
Museums, galleries, auditoriums, libraries, and similar cultural facilities. 
Community shopping centers. 
Offices, studios, laboratories and similar uses, but not blood donor stations. 
Business schools. 
Professional or personal service establishments. 
Department stores. 
Banks and financial institutions. 
Furniture stores. 
Hardware and appliance stores. 
Pharmacy. 
Radio/TV sales and service. 
Restaurants. 
Residential. 
Tailoring, custom dressmaking, and millinery. 
Other uses as may be determined by the city council to be similar and compatible with the above listed permitted uses. 
Accessory uses: 
None. 
Conditional uses: 
Auction gallery, excluding auto auction. 
Day nurseries, pre-schools and kindergartens. 
Funeral homes. 
Hotels and inns. 
Commercial parking garages provided no entrance or exit is located between the same two intersections and on the same side of the street as a school and the curb breaks shall be limited to two, each not to exceed 30 feet in width. (Must be enclosed). 
Laundries, launderette, laundromat, clothes cleaning and dry cleaning. 
Auto service—Car wash, detailing, general cleaning of automobiles. Minor repairs and services including oil changes, radiator flush and fill, and replacement of minor parts including but not limited to air filters, pcv valves, and fuses; and other services of a minor nature that are similar and compatible to those listed. 
Any landowner or other applicant who seeks to use a parcel of land or building for a business that is expected to be engaged in the repair, maintenance and service of automobiles and similar transportation vehicles shall be prohibited from such use until all of the following have been met: 
(1)  A conditional use permit for such use has been issued by the city council in accordance with and in compliance with the requirements of this section, any and all other applicable code provisions, and any additional conditions required by the city council for such approval as are deemed necessary by the city council for the protection of the character of the surrounding mixed use properties or adjacent residential districts (including, without limitation, restrictions on overnight customer or other parking at the site); 
(2)  All necessary inspections have occurred and permits obtained; and 
(3)  A Class (A) license has been issued to the applicant or business owner that conforms to the intended and actual use of the property 
(4)  Section 1-1-8 of the City Code of Ordinances and its procedures shall apply to all violations of this section's provisions, specifically including any person who performs one or more business activities that are of a higher level than those permitted by his or her license class. Each licensee hereunder shall have the obligation to make due inquiry to the city about the classification of any contemplated procedure or business activity that is not specifically set forth above to ensure that the procedure or activity is permitted under that licensee's license class.* 
Prohibited uses. Prohibited retail, business and office uses include, but are not limited to, the following: 
•  Adult entertainment establishments. 
•  Coin operated laundry facilities. 
•  Free standing retail. 
•  Pawn shops. 
•  Repair shops. 
•  Automobile service or repair shops. 
•  Automobile sales or lease. 
•  Extended stay hotels and all motels. 
•  Service stations. 
•  Storage, train yards and warehousing switching for MARTA or similar public utility. 
•  All commercial sales and service shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings; there shall be no unenclosed displays of merchandise; outdoor sales or displays are permissible only by special permit. 
•  No storefront establishment shall be used for storage of merchandise. 
•  No outside storage is permitted. 
•  Any use or form of operation which is offensive by means of odor, smoke, noise, glare, fumes, gas vibration, unusual danger of fire or explosion, emission of particulate matter, or interferes with radio or television communication, or is by any other means considered incompatible with the quality of MU, is prohibited. 
•  Anything not permitted or allowed by special exception is prohibited. 
Additional Requirements of Mixed Use (MU) Buildings and Facilities: 
Exteriors: The exterior finish of all dwellings, buildings, or other structures shall be either brick, stone or Portland cement based stucco, installed over wire lathe, and backed with ten-pound felt. All or a combination of these finishes may be considered as long as a visually appealing result is achieved. Architectural variations in depth are required on all building fronts (two feet minimum) and roof lines (one foot minimum) for each dwelling. 
Utilities: All utilities including gas, electric, telephone, cable TV, water, and sewer shall be located under ground. All utility easements shall be reflected on the subdivision plat or development plan. 
Street lighting: The developer shall provide a street lighting standard at each street intersection and at an interval not exceeding 200 feet. Costs of such installation shall be borne by the developer and shown on all plats for approval by the planning and zoning board. Upon notification that the street light systems are approved as to adequacy by the Georgia Power Company, the city will furnish to the developer and the Georgia Power Company the city's intent to pay future energy bills on the public street lighting of said approved system. Contact the public works department for light specification for designated area's. 
Pedestrian lighting: The developer shall provide lighting standard as approved by the city based on new and existing conditions. Costs of such installation shall be borne by the developer and shown on all plats reviewed by the planning and zoning board. Upon notification that the light systems are approved, the city will furnish to the developer and the Georgia Power Company the city's intent to pay future energy bills on the public street lighting of said approved system. Contact the public works department for light specification for designated area's. 
Mailboxes, stop sign poles, and street sign poles: Mailboxes, stop sign poles, and street sign poles shall be installed at the expense of the developer; quality, number, architectural design, and location shall be approved by the public works director or his designee. When the final plat is submitted, the director or his representative will inform the developer of the location and type of signage required. The developer must then install the signage and post to city specification before the streets can be accepted by the city. Refer to the city's redevelopment guidelines, appendix C, for more details on sign materials and construction. 
Driveways: No driveway shall connect to an arterial or collector street. On-street parking is prohibited unless it is part of a development plan and that the development plan has been approved by the city council. 
Solid waste: Refuse containers and related refuse storage areas shall be screened from view and shall not reduce the outdoor enjoyment of surrounding areas. The location, type, and number of garbage containers must be approved by the public works director. 
Interior sprinkler system: All residential dwellings must have interior sprinkler systems installed upon construction. Sprinkler design plans must be submitted and approved by the City of Morrow Fire Marshal. 
Landscape plans: Land clearing and landscaping shall be done in conformance with the city's tree preservation and replacement policy and approved by the public works director. 
A.  All rooftop and ground mounted equipment must screened from view. Ground mounted and side wall mounted equipment (condensers, transformers, meter boxes, etc.) must be screened using landscape material. 
B.  Dumpsters or any type solid waste containers must be located in the rear or side yard area and screened from view. The screening must be made from the same material as the buildings, and protected by bollards located inside the screening. Where possible landscape material must be used as a secondary screening. 
C.  All guard rails must be primed and painted a neutral color or screened from view by additional landscape material. 
Minimum requirements for trees: The landscaping plan shall provide a minimum of one specimen tree with a minimum diameter of four inches and an one understory tree with a diameter of three inches for every 2,000 square feet of impervious surface for which a development permit is sought. All trees must be planted in areas large enough to accommodate a full-grown tree of the species planted. All calculations must be shown on plans 
Minimum requirements for shrubbery: The landscaping plan shall provide for one three-gallon minimum bush per 250 square feet of impervious surface of an industrial, commercial, office and institutional, business park and multi-family site. All calculations must be shown on plans. 
Minimum requirements for ground cover: Areas on the site which are not covered by trees and/or shrubbery shall be planted with sodded grass or other ground cover. No site shall seed and straw or hydroseed as permanent cover. Where appropriate, other permeable ground cover, such as mulch and stones, may be used; however, alternative forms of ground cover must be specifically approved by the Mayor and Council of the City of Morrow. 
Irrigation system: The landscaping plan must include an irrigation plan to sustain plant life. Any and all plant material that fails to survive must be replaced by the property owner. 
Specimen trees. Four-inch minimum caliper measured six inches from ground level: 
Florida Maple, Red Maple and Sugar Maple. 
Understory trees. Three-inch minimum caliper, total multi-trunk trees, measured six inches from ground level: 
Crape Myrtle, Cherry (Yoshino, Kwanson), American Holly (Nellie Stevens, Burford, Savannah, Fosteri, Emily Burner) and Dogwood. 
Shrubs. Three gallon minimum: 
Junipers, Nandina, Privet, Holly, Lingstrum, Azalea, Barberry, Indian Hawthorn, Otto Luken Laurel and Laurapedlum. 
Ground cover: 
Ivy, Liriope, Ferns, Cottoneaster, Pachysandra, Vince, Ajuga, Euongmus, Juniper, Thrift, and Sod Grass (no seed or straw). 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 2006-12, 11-28-06; Ord. No. 2007-05, §§ 10—15, 7-10-07; Ord. No. 2009-06, §§ 5, 15, 5-26-09) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— MU Mixed use district replaces the previously zoned designations of:  RMA: Multiple-Family Residence District (Apartments);  RMC: Multiple-Family Residence District (Condominiums). 

Section 916 - RS-30 Fee simple town houses district. 
Intent. It shall be the intent of this zoning district to encourage the best possible site plans and building arrangements under a plan of development rather than under lot-by-lot regulation. The developer benefits from better land utilization, economy in the provision of roads and utilities are flexible in design. The city gains the advantage of variety in building types, compatibility of use and optimum community development. The fee simple town house zoning is intended to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning and to assure the provision of parks and recreation land and facilities for the use of the occupants of the development. Review of the development plan by the planning and zoning board and approval by the city council is required to assure that the development will be in harmony with the character of the neighborhood in which the development is located. 
Ownership control. All of the land in a fee simple town house development shall be owned initially by an individual, by a corporation or some other legal entity. Individual properties may be sold after a final plat has been recorded with the properties subject to private deed covenants that assure the continuance of the fee simple town house development as originally approved and developed. 
General deed covenants. The entire fee simple town house development shall be included within private deed covenants running with the land to assure the continuance of the planned residential development in accordance with approved plans and development. 
Homeowners associations and maintenance agreements: All residential developments created after January 1, 2000, are required to have a homeowners association and current maintenance agreements. All initial homeowner's association rules and bylaws and maintenance agreements must be approved by the mayor and council. Additionally, all changes to the maintenance agreements must be approved by the mayor and council. 
Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted as a matter of right in any fee simple town house district: 
Town house dwellings or single-family detached dwellings. 
Physical requirements. Unless otherwise specified in this ordinance, uses permitted in any fee simple town house district shall conform to the following standards: 
A.  The development shall be compatible with the topography of the land and shall preserve any unusual topographic or natural features. 
B.  The development shall not adversely affect the developed or undeveloped neighboring properties. 
C.  Water, sewage, and recreational facilities shall be adequate for the proposed development. 
D.  Minimum development size: One acre. 
E.  Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet. 
F.  Maximum density per buildable acre: Eight units per acre, 12 units if garages and supporting alley ways are located behind the dwellings. 
G.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 
1.  1,400 to 1,499 square feet, no more than 25 percent of the total town houses built. 
2.  1,500 to 1,699 square feet, no more than 65 percent of the total town houses built. 
3.  1,700 square feet or more, no less than 35 percent of the total town houses built. 
4.  A conservation/green space bonus may be applied under the RS-30 zoning for the total development project. 
5.  A single family detached residential (RS-80) Bonus may be applied under the RS-30 zoning for the total development project. 
6.  A conservation/green space bonus and a single family detached residential (RS-80) bonus shall be considered separately and it is possible for a development project to use all, a portion, or a combined total of both bonus opportunities in a single development project. 
7.  Density bonus for single-family, detached residential dwellings. For every single-family, detached residential dwelling over 1,800 square feet built in a development project that includes RS-30 fee simple townhouses, a 200-foot reduction in floor area for a single townhouse dwelling may be applied to the development project. No more than 40 percent of the dwellings in a development project shall be issued permits with this bonus. 
8.  Density bonus for conservation/green space: For every half-acre of property left in a natural state beyond that required under the open space requirements of this section, a 200-foot reduction in floor area for a single townhouse dwelling may be applied to the development project or for every half-acre of property left in a natural state beyond that required in the general open space requirements, a single additional townhouse dwelling may be applied to the development project's total allowable number of dwelling units. A combination of the above can be used by the developer; however, an identifiable half-acre can be used only for one or the other, not both. No more than 40 percent of the townhouse dwellings in a development project shall be issued permits with this bonus. 
H.  Garages: 
1.  Each dwelling shall have an attached two car garage, 400 square feet minimum. Garage doors must be single car garage doors if located in the front of the dwelling. 
2.  Development projects that have town house dwellings built with a conservation/green space bonus or a single family detached residential (RS-80) bonus may substitute a single car garage for a double car garage for each town house dwelling that has been approved for a bonus. 
3.  At least 50 percent of the total development project dwellings must have a double car garage and no less than 35 percent of the fee simple town house must have a two car garage. All town house dwellings built with a bonus shall have at least a one car garage. 
4.  One off street parking space must be provided for every single car garage built in the development project. This space shall be within a reasonable distance from the single car garages it serves. 
5.  No driveway additions or extensions will be issued on RS-30 zoned property. 
I.  Minimum lot frontage: 25 feet, 20 feet for rear garages. 
J.  Minimum rear yard: 30 feet, 20 feet for alleys and garages behind the dwellings. 
K.  Minimum individual unit width: 25 feet. 
L.  Maximum building height: Three floors. 
M.  Maximum lot coverage: 65 percent. 
N.  Exteriors: The exterior finish of all dwellings shall be either brick, stone or Portland cement based stucco, installed over wire lathe, and backed with ten-pound felt. All or a combination of these finishes may be considered as long as a visually appealing result is achieved. Architectural variations in depth are required on all building fronts (two feet minimum). Roof lines (two-foot minimum) shall vary in height for each building (multiple attached dwellings), with no continuous stretch of non-varying roof line exceeding 105 feet in length. 
O.  Entrances: No more than one development entrance per street, with a maximum of three entrances permitted. Said entrance shall have a formalized entrance constructed of brick or stone, noting the name of the development, less any form of advertising. 
P.  Utilities: All utilities including gas, electric, telephone, cable TV, water, and sewer shall be located under ground. All utility easements shall be reflected on the subdivision plat. 
Q.  Sidewalks: Sidewalks, four feet in width, shall be installed continuously along both sides of the street; a three-foot grassed strip shall be placed between the back of the curb and the sidewalk. All sidewalks shall have handicap accessible ramps. 
R.  Streetlights: Streetlights shall be installed at the expense of the developer; quality, number, architectural design, and location shall be approved by the public works director or his designee. 
S.  Mailboxes, stop sign poles, and street sign poles: Mailboxes, stop sign poles, and street sign poles shall be installed at the expense of the developer; quality, number, architectural design, and location shall be approved by the public works director or his designee. 
T.  Landscaping: Landscaping for the project and the typical landscaping layout for the individual lots must be submitted for approval by the city manager. All lots shall have sodded front and side yards to the rear drip line, and underground irrigation systems installed for all sodded areas.. Land clearing and landscaping shall be done in conformance with the city's tree preservation and replacement policy. 
U.  Screening: The outer boundary of such development shall be screened. If the topography of the land allows, landscaped berms shall be placed along the boundary of such development to provide an effective screen between this development and the adjoining land use. Otherwise, privacy fencing and plantings shall be used in combination to provide an effective screen. Final approval of all screening shall rest with the city manager. 
V.  Driveways: All lots developed shall be provided with a paved driveway. No driveway shall connect to an arterial or collector street. On-street parking is prohibited. 
W.  Solid waste: Refuse containers and related refuse storage areas shall be screened from view and located where they will not reduce the outdoor enjoyment of surrounding dwellings. 
X.  Recreation: A minimum of 15 percent of the developable area shall be set aside for recreation facilities. The proposed recreation improvements shall be illustrated as part of the preliminary plat process. Final approval shall rest with the mayor and council. 
Y.  Interior sprinkler system: All residential dwellings must have interior sprinkler systems installed upon construction. Sprinkler design plans must be submitted and approved by the City of Morrow Fire Marshal. 
Z.  Oversight authority: The intent of ordinance shall be fluid with the building process and allow for a practical method of compliance. The oversight for the intent of the ordinance shall rest with the city manager. 
Open space requirements. At least 500 square feet per dwelling unit in a fee simple town house district shall be reserved for open space or other similar public uses; provided the following criteria are met: 
A.  Not more than 50 percent of the land so reserved may lie in a flood plain. 
B.  The required yards and parking areas shall not be credited toward the minimum open space requirements. 
C.  The amount of required common open space shall vary in relation to the density of development, with a minimum of 500 square feet of open space per dwelling unit being required for any approved development. Developers are encouraged to increase open space as density increases, taking into consideration the recreational needs of the intended community of users. 
D.  The required open space shall be developed and landscaped by the developer in accordance with an approved plan. 
E.  If requested by the city, the owner of the fee simple town house development shall deed to the city the land set aside as required open space. 
F.  If the city does not request that the land be deeded to it, then, the open space shall be deeded to a property owners' association comprised of owners of individual properties within the fee simple town house development for the benefit of the residents. The organization of a property owners' association and its adequate financing for the discharge of its responsibilities shall be assured through acceptable private deed covenants running with the land. 
G.  In the event the property owners' association fails to maintain the common open space properly, the city may serve written notice upon the property owners' association and upon the residents and owners of the fee simple town house development setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the common open space in reasonable condition. Said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within 30 days thereof, and shall state the date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held within 15 days of the notice. 
H.  If the deficiencies are not corrected within the said 30 days, the city in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the fee simple town house development and to prevent the common open space from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon said common open space and maintain the same for one year and thereafter until the property owners' association is prepared to provide proper maintenance. 
I.  The cost of such maintenance by the city shall be assessed ratably against the properties within the fee simple town house development that have a right of enjoyment and of the common open space and shall become a tax lien upon said properties. The city, at the time of entering upon said common open space for the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of such lien in the office of the clerk of superior court upon the properties affected by such lien within the fee simple town house development. 
Drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation. A grading plan, prepared by a professional engineer familiar with surface water management, drawn in accordance with the city drainage soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance, shall be required before any land disturbance permit is granted for the project. 
Development in stages. The entire fee simple town house development may be divided into logical geographical sections, subject to the approval of the city council. In such cases, reasonable periods within which the development of each section must be commenced and finished shall be specified by the city council 
Performance bonds required. The landowner shall furnish such bond or bonds as may be determined by the city council to be reasonably required to assure performance with the fee simple town house development plan and to protect the public interest in the event of abandonment of said plan before completion. 
Site plan review. The purpose of the site plan review is to encourage logic, imagination, innovation, and variety in the design process and ensure the congruity of the proposed development and its compatibility with the surrounding area. The planning and zoning board shall review plans for compliance with the provisions of this ordinance and for compliance with the site plan review criteria. The recommendations of the planning and zoning board shall be transmitted to the city council for their approval. 
Required exhibits. The following exhibits shall be prepared by design professionals, such as engineers, architects, and landscape architects, and submitted to the zoning administrator: 
A.  A location map indicating existing zoning on the site and adjacent areas. 
B.  Site plan at no less than one inch equals 100 feet, including the following information. 
C.  Lot lines and setback. 
D.  Location, shape, size and height of existing and proposed buildings, decorative walls and elements, and entrance features. 
E.  Existing and proposed landscaping. 
F.  Recreation facilities (if applicable). 
G.  Stages of development, if any. 
H.  Location of off-street parking. 
I.  Floor plans and elevations of all typical units and any other structures such as recreation buildings. The total amount of lineal exterior wall area and that portion which has visual and physical access to outside patio/court areas shall be indicated for each typical unit. 
J.  Information indicating the following: 
1.  Gross and net acreage; 
2.  Lot sizes (dimensions and square footage); 
3.  Building heights and stories; 
4.  Building coverage for each lot; 
5.  Amount of common open space in square feet (if applicable); 
6.  Trees provided; 
7.  Parking required and provided; and 
8.  Such other architectural and engineering data as may be required to evaluate the project. 
Plan review standards. The following criteria shall be utilized in the plan review process: 
A.  Visual monotony. Visual monotony created by excessive block lengths shall be avoided. 
B.  Landscape. Landscape shall be preserved in its natural state insofar as is practicable by minimizing removal of existing vegetation. Landscape shall be used to shade and cool, direct wind movements, enhance architectural features, relate structure design to the site; visually screen non-compatible uses and ameliorate the impact of noise. 
C.  Buffers. Architectural and/or landscape elements that provide a logical transition to adjoining, existing, or permitted uses shall be provided. 
D.  Architectural characteristics. Architecture and site development should incorporate the characteristics of the area. 
E.  Visual access. Visual access shall be provided for the driver of an automobile backing out of the individual lot into the adjacent roadway. Dwelling units on corner lots shall be so situated and set back as to provide unobstructed visual clearance at a roadway intersection. 
F.  Private open space. Open space intended for the private use of each individual dwelling unit should be so located and designed as to maximize its utility to the dwelling unit it serves and maximize its privacy, especially in relation to adjacent dwelling units. 
Commencement of development. If development is not commenced within 12 months from the date of approval of a site development plan, the approval hereof shall become null and void and the same may not be developed in accordance with said plan; provided, if development is permitted in stages, subsequent stages may be commenced within 12 months after the completion of the previous stage; otherwise, such subsequent stage may not be developed in accordance with the previously approved plan and such approval shall be null and void. Commencement of construction shall include, where necessary, substantial site improvement, which shall include, but not be limited to, active and continuous road improvement, excavation, grading and leveling, installation of utilities and the like. 
(Ord. No. 2004-13, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 2009-06, §§ 5, 16, 5-26-09) 
Section 917 - Public/institutional district. 
[Purpose and intent.] The public/institutional district is intended to encourage development of certain state, federal or local government uses and institutional land uses. Facilities that are publicly owned, but would be classified more accurately in another land-use category, should not be included in this category. For example, publicly owned parks and/or recreational facilities should be placed in the parks/recreation/conservation category; general office buildings containing governmental offices should be placed in the commercial category. 
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted as of right in the public/institutional district: 
Cemeteries. 
Churches, synagogues and other places of religious worship. No church, synagogue, or other place of religious worship shall be located within 100 yards (300 feet) of any establishment that sells or offers to sell any distilled spirits in accordance with the licensure and permitting requirements of the state and the city. 
Government buildings and complexes. 
Hospitals. 
Libraries. 
Military installations. 
Post offices. 
Schools. 
Accessory uses. Accessory uses shall be permitted which are incidental to, and used only in conjunction with, the principal building on the lot. 
Space limits. 
Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet. 
Minimum lot width: 75 feet. 
Minimum front yard: 50 feet. 
Minimum rear yard: 25 feet when abutting a commercial or industrial district and 40 feet when abutting a residential district. 
Minimum side yard: 20 feet when abutting a commercial or industrial district and 40 feet when abutting a residential district. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 18, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 2013-48, § 4, 9-24-13) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-06, § 11, adopted May 26, 2009, repealed the former § 917 which pertained to the MUO mixed use overlay district and derived from Ord. No. 2004-20, adopted Sept. 28, 2004. 
Section 918 - PRC parks/recreation/conservation district. 
[Purpose and intent.] The parks/recreation/conservation district is intended for land dedicated to active or passive recreational uses. These areas may be either publicly or privately owned. 
Permitted uses: 
Golf courses. 
Nature preserves. 
Public parks. 
Publicly or privately owned playgrounds. 
Recreation centers. 
Wildlife management areas. 
Accessory uses: Only those uses which are incidental to and used only in conjunction with development or maintenance of permitted uses. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 18, 5-26-09) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-06, § 11, adopted May 26, 2009, repealed the former § 918 which pertained to the community university planned district overlay (C.U.P.D.O.L.) and derived from Ord. No. 2004-23, adopted Nov. 9, 2004. 
Section 919 - Places of assembly. 
(a)  Certain uses permitted in commercial districts. Subject to all conditions of the underlying zoning district and the conditions below, the following specific type(s) of place of assembly are permitted by right in the CUPD, BG, PC and MU zoning districts of the city: 
(1)  Movie theaters; 
(2)  Concert halls; 
(3)  Private commercial/vocational schools (including martial arts or dance studios, and technical or vocational training); and 
(4)  Clubs. 
(b)  All uses in section 919(a) above shall meet the requirements of article XII, parking and loading. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11 , § 4, 10-27-15) 
ARTICLE X. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 

Section 1001 - Flood hazard district. 
Within the City of Morrow there exists land which is subject to periodic flooding and inundation. Development of these lands is regulated by provisions contained in the flood damage prevention ordinance which is made a part of the zoning ordinance of the City of Morrow by reference. 
The flood hazard boundary maps (FHBM) and the flood insurance rate maps (FIRM) are also made part of the zoning ordinance of Morrow by reference and shall be used to determine the location and extent of flood prone areas. These maps are located at City Hall. 
ARTICLE XI. - BUFFER AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS 

Section 1101 - Buffer required. 
It is recognized that the location of commercial or industrial land uses directly adjacent to single-family, two-family or multiple-family residential uses can create an incompatible situation. Additionally, the location of two-family or multiple-family residential land uses or mobile homes directly adjacent to single-family residential land uses can be an incompatible situation. Accordingly, in commercial and industrial districts, when a principal structure is expanded or modified, a planted screening buffer shall be provided along all side and rear property lines contiguous with a residential district. In two-family or multiple-family residential districts, when a new principal structure is built, or an existing principal structure is expanded or modified, a planted screening buffer shall be provided along all side and rear property lines contiguous with a single-family residential district. The city council may require a similar buffer strip between other districts and land uses deemed to be incompatible. 
It is also recognized that the location of (OI) office institutional land uses directly adjacent to single-family, two-family or multiple-family residential uses can create an incompatible situation. Accordingly, the provisions of this article shall apply when (OI) office institutional land uses abut single-family, two-family or multiple-family residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 94-13, § 2(A), 11-8-94) 
Section 1102 - Purpose and general requirements. 
A landscaped buffer strip is required to protect residential land uses from excessive heat, dust, wind, light spill, unsightly views, odors, and other characteristics commonly associated with commercial and industrial land uses and related vehicular and pedestrian traffic, which can adversely impact the quality of residential life. The required buffer shall provide necessary visual and acoustical privacy for the conduct of residential lifestyles in an undisturbed environment, and shall provide for the protection and preservation of property values in residential districts. 
Required buffers shall be established and maintained by the owner of the incompatible land use. The required buffer must: 
1.  Be depicted in detail (the type and location of natural and planted vegetation are to be illustrated) on each site plan or plat prior to approval, and shall be designated as a permanent easement. 
2.  Not be disturbed by grading, property improvements or construction activities except where necessary to prevent a nuisance, or to thin such natural growth, where too dense to permit normal growth, or to remove diseased, misshapen, or dangerous and decayed timbers. Any contemplated disturbance shall first be brought to the attention of the planning and zoning board and formal approval secured prior to initiating activity within required buffer areas. 
3.  Utilize existing vegetation where it has been determined that existing vegetation is appropriate for inclusion within the buffer strip, or when required be supplemented with approved, additional plantings. 
4.  Retain the natural topography of the land, except when a portion must be cleared and graded as required by the local law to prevent soil erosion or sedimentation. 
5.  Be completely installed in accordance with the approved plan prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
6.  Not be used for temporary or permanent parking or loading, other than for provision of drainage improvements as mandated by the local law or for a structure other than a fence. 
7.  Attain a height of not less than six feet within three years of the planting date. 
Section 1103 - Minimum buffer specifications. 
As different types of land uses generate varying degrees of incompatibility, it follows that rigid width for a buffer strip could, in some instances create undue hardship on the property owner. Therefore, the amount and type of planting required to accomplish adequate screening and insulation shall be variable, and in each instance shall be determined by the intensity and extent of the use judged incompatible. The following specifications for buffer strip widths will be used by the planning and zoning board and city council to determine buffer strip requirements: 
1.  Where a commercial district is contiguous with a residential district, the width of the required buffer strip shall not be less than 40 feet, plus an additional five feet for each story in excess of one, with a maximum buffer of 60 feet. 
In some cases, natural buffers exist that do not provide an adequate visual or sound barrier for the adjacent residential area. Normally, these buffers would be left undisturbed; however, the city council may require that additional screening and/or planting be added in these buffer areas for the protection and privacy of the residential area. 
A brick wall at least eight feet in height may be required by the city council in addition to the vegetative buffer; the brick must be similar and compatible with neighborhood houses. Depending upon the topography of the areas involved, the city council may require that the wall be higher than eight feet. 
2.  Where an industrial district is contiguous with a residential district, the width of the required buffer strip shall be 75 feet. 
In some cases, natural buffers exist that do not provide an adequate visual or sound barrier for the adjacent residential area. Normally, these buffers would be left undisturbed; however, the city council may require that additional screening and/or planting be added in these buffer areas for the protection and privacy of the residential area. 
A brick wall at least eight feet in height may be required by the city council in addition to the vegetative buffer; the brick must be similar and compatible with that of the residential district. Depending upon the topography of the areas involved, the city council may require that the wall be higher than eight feet. 
3.  Where a two-family or multiple-family district is contiguous with a single-family residential district, the width of the required buffer strip shall not be less than 25 feet, plus an additional five feet for each story in excess of one, with a maximum buffer of 60 feet. 
In some cases, natural buffers exist that do not provide an adequate visual or sound barrier for the adjacent residential area. Normally, these buffers would be left undisturbed; however, the city council may require that additional screening and/or planting be added in these buffer areas for the protection and privacy of the single-family residential area. 
A brick wall at least eight feet in height may be required by the city council in addition to the vegetative buffer; the brick must be similar and compatible with neighborhood houses. Depending upon the topography of the areas involved, the city council may require that the wall be higher than eight feet. 
4.  Where an (OI) office/institutional district is contiguous with a residential district, the width of the required buffer strip shall not be less than 40 feet, plus an additional five feet for each story in excess of one, with a maximum buffer of 60 feet. 
In some cases, natural buffers exist that do not provide an adequate visual or sound barrier for the adjacent residential area. Normally, these buffers would be left undisturbed; however, the city council may require that additional screening and/or planting be added in these buffer areas for the protection and privacy of the residential area. 
A brick wall at least eight feet in height may be required by the city council in addition to the vegetative buffer; the brick must be similar and compatible with neighborhood houses. Depending upon the topography of the areas involved, the city council may require that the wall be higher than eight feet. 
5.  Buffers from wetlands. A 50-foot buffer shall be maintained from the upland boundary of all jurisdictional wetlands, as determined by federal law, which are contiguous to intermittent or perennial streams. 
6.  In other instances where an incompatible situation is determined, the width of the buffer strip shall be determined by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 94-13, § 2(B), 11-8-94; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 3A., 7-22-03; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 2.a., b., 4-12-16) 
Section 1104 - Composition of buffer. 
In those instances where the natural vegetation and topography are insufficient to achieve the desired level of screening as determined by the planning and zoning board, a planted buffer shall be provided and shall consist of plant material of such growth characteristics as will provide an acoustical and visual screen of planting date. The following plants are approved for use as part of the screening buffer: 

 
Other evergreen plant materials having the same growth characteristics as the aforementioned may be substituted, subject to approval by the planning and zoning board prior to installation. 
Section 1105 - Maintenance. 
The screening buffer planting and any required landscaped open space planting shall be guaranteed for the life of the commercial, industrial or residential development. Necessary trimming and maintenance shall be performed by the property owner to maintain the health of the plant materials, to provide aesthetically pleasing appearance, and to assure that the buffer actually serves the purpose for which it is intended. 
Section 1106 - Other screening requirements. 
Certain uses such as junk or salvage yard operations and other commercial and industrial operations requiring the storage of inoperative equipment or vehicles for prolonged periods of time could present unsightly views or health hazards. To preclude this from occurring, the planning and zoning board shall require owners of such properties to completely enclose such operations by a fence which completely obscures views of the property from adjacent sidewalks and streets, built to a height greater than that of the height of the highest piece of equipment or vehicle stored on the property; however the minimum height of any fence shall be eight feet. Such fences shall be constructed of solid materials. Construction of cyclone fencing which utilizes metal inserts as screening shall be prohibited. 
ARTICLE XII. - PARKING AND LOADING 

Section 1201 - Off-street parking and loading spaces required. 
It is the intent of this ordinance that all buildings, structures and uses of land shall provide off-street parking and loading space in an amount sufficient to meet the needs caused by the building or use of land and that such parking and loading spaces be so oriented that they are in fact readily usable for such purposes. 
Each use of land and each building or structure hereafter constructed or established, and each addition to a structure in excess of 200 square feet shall provide off-street parking and loading according to the standards set forth herein. When an addition is made to a building containing less than the required parking or loading requirements, a conforming amount of parking or loading shall be supplied based upon the size of the addition. No addition to an existing building shall be constructed which reduces the number of spaces, area or usability of existing parking or loading space unless such building and its addition conform with the regulations for parking and loading contained herein. 
Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be required. Existing uses providing off-street parking shall have 12 months from date of adoption of this ordinance to comply with handicapped parking requirements. New uses providing off-street parking shall incorporate handicapped spaces into the design of parking facilities. 
In any single-family dwelling, duplex or apartment district, the parking of trucks (over one-half ton) or buses shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 19, 5-26-09) 
Section 1202 - Design standards. 
The following are the design requirements for off-street parking spaces and driveways: 
1.  Required dimensions for each parking space. Each full-size automobile parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide and 18 feet in length. Parking spaces for compact and sub-compact cars shall not be less than eight feet wide and 16 feet in length. Adequate interior driveways shall connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
2.  Interior driveways. Where 90-degree parking is utilized, all interior driveways shall be a minimum of 23 feet in width. If 45 degree or 60 degree angle parking is used then interior driveways shall be at least 12 feet in width for one-way traffic and 20 feet in width for two-way traffic. In the instance where parallel parking is utilized or there is no parking, interior driveways shall be a minimum of ten feet in width for one-way traffic and 20 feet in width for two-way traffic. 
3.  Surfacing, drainage and lighting. All off-street parking spaces, access and interior driveways shall be provided with a paved, dust free surface. If the off-street parking facilities are used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles and for security. The lighting shall be designed so as not to reflect onto or cause glare in any adjacent residential district. 
4.  Sharing of required off-street parking spaces. One-half of the off-street parking spaces required by a use whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be shared with a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. Parking requirements for two or more uses of the same or different types may be satisfied by the allocation of a common or collective parking facility. This facility shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the individual uses computed separately in accordance with the requirements of the zoning district. The combined parking requirements for two or more uses participating in a cooperative parking arrangement may be partially reduced by the city manager or their representative, provided that the uses will not conflict in time of operation or need for the parking spaces and provided that the parking needs of each use at a given time of day may be adequately met through the parking arrangements. 
5.  Handicapped spaces. Parking spaces for the handicapped must be provided in accordance with the guidelines of the Americans With Disabilities Act and federal and state laws. 
6.  Compact and sub-compact car spaces. These spaces shall be identified by pavement markings and by appropriate signage. 
7.  [Bus stop spaces.] Where a use is located within 300 feet of a bus stop on an existing city bus stop within the specified area, the number of parking spaces required for such use shall be reduced by four spaces for uses located within the Southlake Mall Ring road corridor. 
The following are the design requirements for off-street loading stalls: 
1.  Required dimensions for each loading stall. Each loading shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 30 feet in length except that for wholesale and industrial use loading stalls shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide and 60 feet in length. 
2.  Access. All off-street loading stalls shall have access from an alley, or if there is no alley, from a public street. 
3.  Surfacing, drainage and lighting. All off-street loading stalls and access shall be provided with a paved, dust free surface. If loading stalls are to be used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles and for security. Lighting shall be designed to preclude light spill onto adjacent properties. 
Design requirements for residential developments, whether single-family residences or multifamily residences, with the exception of property located in an AG agricultural zoning district, shall be as required by Section 902A. 
(Ord. No. 94-07, § 1(G), 6-21-94; Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 2005-05, § VI, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 2009-06, § 20, 5-26-09; Ord. No. 2016-03 , §§ 3.a—c., 4-12-16) 
Section 1203 - Minimum offstreet parking and loading requirements. 
The following are the minimum number of off-street parking spaces and loading stalls required by type of permitted uses. Twenty percent of the total required parking spaces may be set aside for compact and sub-compact cars. In places of assembly, 20 percent of the total required parking spaces must be set aside for compact and sub-compact cars. For any use not listed, the planning and zoning board shall determine the proper requirements by classifying the proposed use among the uses specified herein so as to assure equal treatment follows the principles set forth. In making any such determination, the planning and zoning board shall follow the principles set forth at the beginning of this article. 

 
(Ord. No. 97-10, § 3, 12-10-97; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 3B., 7-22-03; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 4, 4-12-16) 
Section 1204 - Handicapped parking requirements. 
Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in close proximity to major building entrances, but in no event shall such spaces be located more than 100 feet from a major building entrance. Handicapped parking shall be provided in accord with the following requirements: 

 
(Ord. No. 94-07, § 1(H), 6-21-94) 
ARTICLE XIII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 1301 - Administration and enforcement. 
A zoning enforcement officer designated by the city council shall administer and enforce this ordinance and carry out the duties required. The zoning enforcement officer may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the city council may direct. 
If the zoning enforcement officer shall find that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, notification shall be given in writing to the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Such written notice shall not be a necessary condition precedent to enforcement of this ordinance. The zoning enforcement officer shall order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
Section 1302 - Building inspector. 
The mayor and city council shall appoint a building inspector or may contract for such services. 
Section 1303 - Building permits required. 
No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a building permit being issued by the building inspector. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has complied with the provisions of this ordinance. However, a homeowner is exempted from obtaining a building permit for remodeling and/or improving his or her dwelling or property as long as the cost of the construction materials does not exceed $1,000.00, and the work is begun and completed solely by the homeowner. This exemption applies only to nonstructural changes (refer to the definition of "Structure" in the City Zoning Ordinance [Section 402]) and does not apply to any activity which changes the square footage of a structure. 
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot, of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use, and the location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. 
One copy of the layout plan or site plan shall be returned when approved by the building inspector, together with any permit to the applicant upon payment of any fee or fees as shall be determined by the mayor and city council. 
If no substantial construction progress has been made within six months of the date of the issuance of the building permit, the permit becomes void. Building permits shall not be transferable. 
The building inspector shall maintain a record of all building permits issued. 
No building permit shall be issued by any officer, department or employee of the City of Morrow unless the application for such permit has been examined by the zoning enforcement officer, certifying that the proposed building, structure or alteration complies with all provisions of this ordinance. Any building permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance shall be null and void. 
(Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 10-10-00) 
Section 1304 - Certificate of zoning compliance. 
The certificate of zoning compliance shall be in addition to all other permits, including use permits for conditional uses required by this ordinance. 
An application for certificate of zoning compliance shall be submitted upon such form and accompanied by such additional information, including a plat of the property, as the zoning enforcement officer shall prescribe. 
All certificates of zoning compliance shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit. Said certificate shall be issued within ten days after the erection or alteration shall have been approved as complying with the provisions of this ordinance. It shall be unlawful to occupy or use any dwelling, building, or other structure, within the purview of this ordinance until a certificate of zoning compliance has been properly issued. 
A record of all certificates of zoning compliance shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning enforcement officer and a copy shall be furnished, on request, to any person having an interest in the building or land involved. 
Section 1305 - Construction and use to be as provided in applications, permits, and certificates of zoning compliance. 
Building permits or certificates of zoning compliance issued on the basis of plans and applications approved by the building inspector and zoning enforcement officer authorize only the use, arrangement, and construction set forth in such approved plans and applications, and no other use, arrangement or construction. Use, arrangement, or construction at variance with that authorized shall be deemed violation of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XIV. - APPEALS 

Section 1401. - Hearings, appeals, notice. 
Appeal concerning interpretation or administration of this ordinance may be taken by any person aggrieved or by an officer or bureau of the governing body of the city affected by any decision of the zoning enforcement officer. The planning and zoning board shall hear all appeals, consider the appeals and make recommendations to the mayor and city council for final action. 
Notice of appeal shall be made by a disappointed applicant no later than 30 calendar days from the date of decision of the zoning enforcement officer. Such appeal shall be filed with the zoning enforcement officer, who shall forthwith transmit to the planning and zoning board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
Publication of notice and procedure for hearing appeals shall be as provided in Section 1403 for notice and hearing on variance applications. 
At the conclusion of the hearing before the planning and zoning board, the planning and zoning board shall make a formal recommendation supported by any reports or documentation as deemed appropriate by the planning and zoning board and such recommendation shall be transmitted to the mayor and city council for final decision on their next available agenda occurring not less than five days from the date upon which recommendation is made. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 21, 5-26-09) 
Section 1402 - Stay of proceedings. 
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the zoning enforcement officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the planning and zoning board after the notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the planning and zoning board or by a court of record on application, on notice to the zoning enforcement officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
Section 1403 - Powers and duties. 
In addition to their regular duties of reviewing subdivision plats and hearing rezoning amendments the planning and zoning board shall have the following powers and duties: 
1.  Administrative review: To hear appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the zoning enforcement officer in the enforcement of this ordinance and to make recommendations as to final determination to the mayor and city council. 
2.  Variances; conditions governing applications; procedures: To recommend upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance would result in unnecessary hardship. Variances are authorized only for height, area and size of a structure or size of yards and open spaces. Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of non-conformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district. A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be recommended by the planning and zoning board unless and until: 
a.  A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating conclusively: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other land, structures, or buildings in the same district; 
(2)  That literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this ordinance; 
(3)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
(4)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district. 
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or buildings in the same district and no permitted or nonconforming use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. 
b.  Applications for variance shall be filed with the office of city manager. In addition to demonstrating the need for variance as set out under subsection 2.a. of this section, each application shall be accompanied by an accurately drawn plat containing the following information: 
(1)  All property lines with dimensions; 
(2)  Location of buildings and other structures, creeks, easements referenced to the property line of the tract; variance required; and 
(3)  North arrow, land district, land lot, etc. 
c.  Upon receipt of a complete application for variance, accompanied by the applicable fee, the city manager shall schedule a public hearing by the planning and zoning board, notify the applicant of such date and give notice thereof by publication of written notice no less than 15 nor more than 45 days prior to the date of hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city. The notice shall state the time and place of hearing as well as the purpose of the hearing, provide an address of the property and a summary of the relief sought. In addition to publication of the above notice, the city shall post a sign, or several signs, if required, in the most conspicuous place or places, on the property affected. Each sign shall be no less than 12 square feet in area and shall contain information as to the relief requested and the date and time of hearing before the planning and zoning board. 
d.  The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person, or by agent or by attorney. 
e.  The planning and zoning board shall make findings that the requirements of Section 1403 2.a. have been met by the applicant for a variance; 
f.  The planning and zoning board shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure; 
g.  The planning and zoning board shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this ordinance, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
h.  The planning and zoning board shall make recommendation to the mayor and city council to approve or disapprove the variance request. 
In granting any variance, the mayor and city council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this ordinance. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance. 
Under no circumstances shall the mayor and city council grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this ordinance in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this ordinance in said district. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, §§ 22—24, 5-26-09) 
Section 1404 - Mayor and city council has powers of zoning enforcement officer on appeals; reversing decision of zoning enforcement officer. 
In exercising the above mentioned powers, the mayor and city council may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have the powers of the zoning enforcement officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
The concurring majority vote of the city council shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the zoning enforcement officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance or to effect any variation in the application of this ordinance. 
If an application for an appeal, or variance is denied by the mayor and city council, a reapplication may not be made earlier than six months from the date of the original application. 
(Ord. No. 94-07, § 1(I), 6-21-94; Ord. No. 99-13, § 1, 6-8-99) 
Section 1405 - Duties of zoning enforcement officer, planning and zoning board, city council and courts on matters of appeal. 
It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall first be presented to the zoning enforcement officer, and that such questions shall be presented to the planning and zoning board only on appeal from the decision of the zoning enforcement officer, and that recourse from the decisions of the mayor and city council shall be to the courts as provided by law. 
Section 1406 - Administrative variances. 
The zoning enforcement officer shall have the power to grant administrative variances from the development standards of this ordinance, where, in his opinion, the intent of the ordinance can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a variance. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variance from the following requirements: 
1.  Front yard or yard adjacent to public street—Variance not to exceed five feet. 
2.  Side yard—Variance not to exceed two feet. 
3.  Rear yard—Variance not to exceed four feet. 
4.  Height of building—Variance not to exceed five feet. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 25, 5-26-09) 
Section 1407 - Schedule of fees, change and expenses. 
The city council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of occupancy, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the zoning enforcement officer, and may be altered or amended only by the city council. 
Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
ARTICLE XV. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Section 1501 - Conditional use procedure. 
The planning and zoning board shall accept applications for conditional uses and a report and detailed site plan of the proposed use shall be submitted by the applicant documenting specifically how the provisions of the zoning district will be complied with. The report shall also document impacts of the proposed use upon community facility and/or adjacent properties. 
The planning and zoning board shall consider all of the following in rendering a decision on conditional uses: 
1.  The report submitted by the applicant; 
2.  That all specific provisions of this ordinance relative to the conditional use have been met; 
3.  Whether any specific limitations are necessary to protect the public interest and insure the continued beneficial use and enjoyment of nearby properties; 
4.  That the conditional use with or without specific limitations and design features as might have been required will further the aims of the land use plan and will not be unduly detrimental to nearby properties. 
The planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing on all applications for conditional uses which shall be noticed and heard in accordance with the requirements of Section 1701 concerning zoning amendments. 
Hearing on applications for conditional use permits shall be accomplished as expeditiously as possible while meeting the requirements of at least 15 days published notice of the hearing. Should the planning and zoning board fail to make a recommendation within 90 days of application for conditional use permit, the application shall be considered to be recommended for approval and all materials related to the conditional use shall be transmitted to the mayor and city council for determination. If no hearing has been held within such time limit by the planning and zoning board, then the mayor and city council shall notice the matter for public hearing prior to making its final decision in accordance with the notice and hearing requirements of Section 1701. Final determination on approval of conditional uses rests with the mayor and city council. 
Should property for which conditional use approval is sought not be used following receipt of conditional use approval for the purpose intended by the application, then the mayor and city council may at the conclusion of 12 months from the grant of that conditional use approval bring an action following notice and hearing to vacate the conditional use approval and revert the property to its original zoning classification without conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 27, 5-26-09) 
Section 1502 - Churches, synagogues and other places of worship. 
(a)  Because of their special demands upon public services and facilities, and their potential for imposing significant financial burdens upon the city if established within certain time frames and at particular locations, churches, synagogues and other places of worship shall be conditional uses within any zoning district except the public institutional zoning district, but only after completion of the process prescribed in section 1501 and meeting the requirements herein. Within the public institutional zoning district, churches, synagogues, and other places of worship are permitted uses and shall not require the approval of mayor and council. Churches, synagogues and other places of worship shall be entitled to all of the accessory uses provided for such places in the public institutional zoning district. 
(b)  Further, in making a determination as to whether or not an application for a church, synagogue or other place of worship shall be approved at a particular time and location, the mayor and council shall consider the potential financial burdens to the city that would be generated, the potential impacts on existing or anticipated surrounding developments, noise and peak traffic impacts, and the potential special demands upon public services and facilities. Upon a finding that such place conforms to the intent and requirements of this article, the use may be approved by the mayor and council. If approval for such use is granted, the mayor and council may attach special conditions to the approval, which have the purpose of minimizing potential negative impacts and burdens on public finances, facilities and/or services as well as surrounding properties and travelers on the city's streets and sidewalks. 
(c)  For churches, synagogues or other places of worship located outside the public institutional district, the locations shall: 
(1)  Be stand-alone buildings; 
(2)  Meet the requirements of article XII — parking and loading; 
(3)  Meet applicable requirements promulgated by the city's fire marshal; and 
(4)  Meet the applicable buffer requirements in article XI — buffer and screening requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11 , § 1, 10-27-15) 
Section 1503 - Other conditional use requirements. 
Any conditional use that includes places of assembly shall also meet the requirements of section 1502(c) above in addition to other relevant conditional use requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2015-11 , § 1, 10-27-15) 
ARTICLE XVI. - LIMITED USE PROVISIONS 

Section 1601 - Limited use procedure. 
Within the City of Morrow there exist areas that are transitional in nature with respect to land use. Within these areas specific uses not otherwise permitted in an existing zoning district, but which are consistent with the pattern of development occurring, may be permitted for a limited period of time by the mayor and city council. 
The planning and zoning board shall receive applications for limited use permits. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan and explanation of the purpose of the proposed use. The planning and zoning board shall consider the application and make recommendations to the mayor and city council. If approved by the mayor and city council, any one, but only one of the uses allowed either as a permitted or conditional use in the following districts shall be permitted in the zoning district in which the limited use is requested: 
•  BG General Business District 
•  LM Light Manufacturing District 
•  HM Heavy Manufacturing District 
Limited uses of an industrial nature will not be permitted in any residential district. 
The planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing on all applications for limited use under this article, which hearing shall be noticed and held in accordance with the provisions of Section 1701 for zoning amendments. At the conclusion of public hearing, the planning and zoning board shall make its recommendation to the city council which shall take up the matter at its next regular meeting and make a final determination. 
Should the limited use approved by the city council not be instituted within 12 months of the date of council decision authorizing such use, then the mayor and city council may notice and hold a public hearing on reversion of the limited use provision to the immediately preceding zoning classification without allowance for that limited use. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, §§ 28, 29, 5-26-09) 
ARTICLE XVII. - AMENDMENTS 

Section 1701 - Zoning ordinance and official zoning map amendment procedure. 
The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this ordinance may from time to time be amended, supplemented, changed, or repealed, provided however, that no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto, at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
This ordinance, including the official zoning map of Morrow, may be amended from time to time by the city council of Morrow. The city council may also refer administrative changes to the planning and zoning board for review and to make a recommendation. 
The following procedure shall be followed by an applicant requesting a zoning change: 
1.  Any person or persons desiring to submit an application requesting a change in zoning shall file such application, with a plat of the affected property attached thereto, together with a payment of the amount determined by the city council as an appropriate fee for same to cover administrative costs, with the city clerk. 
2.  A correct legal description of the property in question shall accompany the application. 
3.  A legible site plan depicting the proposed use of the property shall accompany the application and include: 
a.  A correct scale and north arrow, 
b.  The proposed land use as it would appear should the rezoning application be approved, 
c.  The present zoning classification of all adjacent parcels, 
d.  The proposed as-built location and configuration (building outline) of all buildings to be located on the site and the gross square footage of buildings. 
e.  The location of all driveways and entry/exit points for vehicular traffic, using arrows to depict direction of movement, 
f.  The location of required off-street parking and loading spaces to include number of spaces and space and driveway dimensions, 
g.  Required yard setbacks appropriately dimensioned, and 
h.  The location and extent of required buffer areas, depicting extent of natural vegetation and type and location of additional vegetation if required. 
4.  The complete rezoning application shall be filed, including all required fees, prior to advertisement for hearing. 
5.  The planning and zoning board shall hold a public hearing on all rezoning applications. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city no less than 15 and no more than 45 days prior to the date of hearing. The notice shall include the time, place and date of hearing along with the purpose of the hearing. 
If a rezoning is initiated by a party other than the city council, the public notice of hearing shall also include the location of the property to be rezoned, the present zoning classification, and the proposed zoning classification. 
For rezonings initiated by a party other than the city council, there shall also be posted on the property in a prominent location, a sign containing all of the information required in the public notice not less than 15 days prior to the date of hearing. 
6.  On the date of hearing, the planning and zoning board shall meet to consider the rezoning application. At the time the hearing is initiated, the applicant or his representative shall be afforded an opportunity to speak on behalf of the applicant and to provide any desired information to the city. Supporters of the application may likewise address the planning and zoning board with their comments. No application shall be entertained for approval where the applicant fails to appear either personally or by representative. 
The public hearing is open to all members of the public and any member of the public is entitled to speak and present his or her views and supporting information. Each side, those supporting and those against an application, shall be afforded an equal amount of time to make their views known, which time shall be no less than ten minutes per side. The city may require proponents and opponents of an application to designate a speaker who can present their consolidated comments in an expeditious manner. 
At the conclusion of hearing, the planning and zoning board shall formulate a recommendation to the city council which may be a recommendation for approval, denial, approval with conditions, or tabling the matter to allow an applicant to amend its application in accordance with the information developed at hearing or sought to be supplemented. In the event a matter is tabled for production of additional information, a second hearing following notice as provided in paragraph 5 shall be held. 
A report of the planning and zoning board shall then be transmitted to the city council for the placement on the council's next available agenda. 
The city council may hold an additional public hearing if it determines that it would be helpful in making its final determination. The mayor and city council shall make the final determination on all zoning amendments and may approve the amendment, deny the amendment, or approve the amendment with conditions. 
(Ord. No. 96-12, § 2, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 98-11, § 3, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 2009-06, §§ 30, 31, 5-26-09) 
Section 1702 - Lapse of time requirement for reapplication. 
If an application for an amendment to the zoning ordinance or to the official zoning map is denied by the city council, a reapplication for the same amendment may not be made earlier than six months from the date of the original application. 
(Ord. No. 94-07, § 1(J), 6-21-94; Ord. No. 99-13, § 1, 6-8-99) 
Section 1703 - Reversion to prior zoning status. 
Upon favorable action approving a zoning amendment or approving a zoning amendment with conditions, the owner or applicant shall make substantial progress to utilize the new classification for the property within a period of 12 months from the date of such action. Substantial progress shall mean the attaining of a building permit or approval of a site plan. Should a property owner fail to make substantial progress on use of the zoning classification within a period of 12 months from the date of decision, the city council may notice the matter for public hearing and, following notice and public hearing, may revert the zoning of the property to its former classification. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 32, 5-26-09) 
Section 1704 - Evaluation of zoning amendments. 
In considering applications for amendments to the zoning ordinance or official zoning map, or in making other zoning decisions, the following factors may be considered: 
1.  The impact upon the appearance of the city; 
2.  The impact upon thoroughfare congestion and traffic safety; 
3.  The impact upon population density and the potential for overcrowding and urban sprawl; 
4.  The impact upon the provision of water, sewerage, transportation and other urban services; 
5.  The protection of property against blight and depreciation; 
6.  Consistency with the adopted land use plan; 
7.  The impact upon adjacent property owners if the amendment is approved; 
8.  The impact on the owner of retaining the property in its existing zoning. 
9.  Any other factor effecting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, or the general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the City of Morrow. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 33, 5-26-09) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Section 1801 - Provisions declared to be minimum requirements. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this ordinance are at variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinance, deed restrictions, or covenants, the most restrictive or that imposing higher standards shall govern. 
Section 1802 - Penalties for violation. 
It is unlawful to violate the provisions of this ordinance or to fail to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variances, special exceptions or conditional uses). Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $1,000 and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
Section 1803 - Remedies. 
If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the mayor or city council of Morrow, the building inspector, the zoning enforcement officer, the city engineer or any adjacent or other property owner or anyone else who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of such building, structure or land use. 
Section 1804 - Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Section 1805 - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this zoning ordinance, or inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance, including the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Morrow (Ordinance No. 73-17), as amended are hereby repealed to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force and effect. 
This ordinance shall take effect and shall be in force from and after the 25th day of March, 1986. 
Ordained, adopted and approved by the mayor and city council of the City of Morrow after a public hearing on the 25th day of March, 1986. 
Approved as to Legal Sufficiency: 
_____ City Attorney, City of Morrow 
_____ Mayor, City of Morrow 
/s/ ;hg; _____ City Manager, City of Morrow 
ARTICLE XIX. - SIGNS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted April 10, 2018, amended Art. XIX in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XIX, §§ 1901—1926, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1(Exh. A), adopted May 24, 2016. 

Section 1901 - Findings of fact and purpose. 
(a)  The City of Morrow finds that signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, signs are entitled to protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of signs tends to proliferate, with property owners desiring ever increasing numbers and sizes of signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. In addition, the competition among competing sign owners for visibility of their signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the sign owner's original purpose of presenting a clear message of its idea or identification of its premises. 
(b)  Regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the city, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the city's residents and business community 
(c)  As a result of the city's regulation of signs beginning in 1974, commercial areas of the city present an aesthetically pleasing environment which supports and promotes robust business activity within the city as well as providing a zone for traffic substantially free of unsafe diversions. 
(d)  The city's intention in enacting sign legislation has never been directed at nor enforced against the content of the signs, but has rather focused on the physical characteristics of the sign structures. 
(e)  The purposes of this article are to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication within the city; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this article. In considering the appropriate level of sign regulation for the city, the mayor and council have considered planning studies, reports, news articles and related information from a variety of sources. 
(f)  Signs provide an important medium through which individuals, organizations, institutions, and businesses may exercise their right to freedom of speech and expression and convey a variety of constitutionally protected messages. 
(g)  The provisions in this article which regulate signs on the basis of size, height, shape, design, spacing, placement, and distance, but not on the content of any constitutionally protected message conveyed therein, provide an appropriate balance between the right of freedom of speech and expression via the sign medium and the protection of the substantial governmental purposes stated above. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1902 - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Abandoned sign: Any sign for which the sign permit has lapsed. 
(2)  Awning: A roof-like cover extending over or before a place as a shelter and supported entirely by and from the building. 
(3)  Banner: A temporary sign made of a piece or strip of cloth, paper, canvas, plastic, or similar material, and upon which a message, slogan, or emblem is painted, drawn, or otherwise projected, colored or shaped. "Banner" includes, but is not limited to such things as trash receptacle covers, tire covers, rack covers, changeable and/or removable paper, cardboard, cloth, canvas, or plastic displays. Flags are specifically excluded from the definition of "banner." 
(4)  Billboard: A freestanding sign larger than 200 square feet in sign area. 
(5)  Chain Business: Businesses that share a brand and central management, have one parent company, standardized business methods and practices with more than six locations 
(6)  Changeable copy sign: A sign that is capable of changing the position or format of word messages or other displays on the sign face or change the visible display of words, numbers, symbols and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods, provided these changes are actuated by either a control mechanism or manually on the face of the sign. Spectacular signs are not included within the definition of "changeable copy sign." 
(7)  Cloud Sign: A custom shaped sign including embossed copy with the exterior edges of the sign contoured to the outer edge of the copy. 
(8)  Dilapidated sign: Any sign that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, holes on or in the sign structure, broken, missing, loose or bent parts, faded or flaking paint, non-operative or partially non-operative illumination or mechanical devices or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly or unkempt. 
(9)  Feather sign: A temporary sign consisting of a pole driven into the ground or mounted upon a base with an attached vertically elongated material typically constructed of cloth, paper, flexible plastic or fabric and resembling a feather, flag, sail or rectangle. 
(10)  Flag: A sign consisting of fabric or similar material attached at one end to a pole placed in the ground or attached at one end to a building and hanging freely such that it may flutter or move in the wind. 
(11)  Franchise Business: Businesses that share a brand and central management, have one parent company, standardized business methods and practices with more than six locations 
(12)  Freestanding sign: A sign securely affixed to an independent support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, such as monument or stanchion signs. 
(13)  Illuminated sign: A sign designed to give forth artificial light directly or through translucent material from a source of light within such sign or a sign illuminated by an external light directed primarily toward such sign and so shielded that no direct rays from the light are visible elsewhere than on the lot where said illumination occurs. 
(14)  Instructional sign: A sign used to give direction to the public. 
(15)  Interstate sign: A stanchion sign not exceeding 100 feet in height or 200 square feet in sign area located adjacent to the right-of-way of any interstate highway. 
(16)  LED sign: Any electronically controlled sign utilizing light emitting diode technology to form some or all of the sign message, whether that message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED technology of any kind, whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light emitting diodes (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL), or any other similar technology. For purposes of this article, a LED sign meeting the standards of this article is permitted as a changeable copy sign. 
(17)  Lot: A designated parcel, tract or area of land legally established by plat, subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon and meeting all standards of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(18)  Mobile sign: A sign which is attached to, mounted on, pasted on, painted or drawn on any vehicle, whether motorized or drawn, which is placed, parked or maintained at one particular location for the express purpose and intent of promotion, or conveying an advertising message. 
(19)  Monument sign: A freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground and not attached to or a part of or supported by a building and designed in such a manner that the base of the sign face is flush with the supporting solid base which is flush with the ground. The base shall be at least as wide as the sign. 
(20)  Nonconforming sign: Any sign which was legal at the time of erection, but which does not conform to the requirements of this article. 
(21)  Person: Any individual, association, corporation, firm, organization, partnership, trust, or any other entity. 
(22)  Portable sign: A sign that is constructed of any material that may be moved from one location to another, whether or not it is fastened to an object, building or staked to the ground in any manner at any given time. 
(23)  Regional mall: A group of commercial establishments which draws customers from a multi-county market area and which is planned, constructed and managed as a unified development containing a shopping mall structure with enclosed common areas along with predominantly retail businesses and which may include one or more free-standing retail buildings served by on-site parking and loading. This definition does not include a "shopping center." 
(24)  Roof sign: A sign: 
a.  Erected upon or above a roof structure; 
b.  Wholly supported by the roof structure; 
c.  A structure placed upon the roof; or 
d.  Any signage placed upon sloped building fascia intended to appear or actually be roof elements of a building. 
(25)  Shopping center: A group of retail/service commercial establishments that is planned and developed for the site upon which they are built, that is owned as a unit with on-site parking provided, and that does not contain enclosed common areas. This definition does not include a "regional mall." 
(26)  Sign: A sign is a device, fixture, placard, structure or representation that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol or writing for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others and which is placed out of doors in view of the general public or, when near the inside surface of a window, placed in such a manner as to be in the view of the general public outside the building. 
(27)  Sign holder: A person holding or wearing a sign of some sort; also known as a human directional, sign walker, sign waver, sign twirler or sign spinner. Frequently, they will spin or dance or wear costumes while holding the sign in order to attract attention. 
(28)  Spectacular sign: A sign that is animated, flashing, scrolling or otherwise suggesting movement of sign message, constructed of metal or other material, wired for lights or luminous tubing, or both, or utilizing copy controlled action. 
(29)  Stanchion sign: A freestanding sign mounted on one or more steel poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the message portion of such structure which rests upon or is supported by such poles. 
(30)  Standard informational sign: A sign with an area not greater than 480 square inches, with a placard made for short-term use, containing no reflective elements, flags or projections, and which, when erected, stands at a height not greater than 30 inches and is mounted on a stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than one and one-half inches. 
(31)  String lights: Signs consisting in whole or in part of a series, line or row of lights, whether supported by cables or other physical means, that are visible from a public right-of-way. 
(32)  Temporary signs: Any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, vinyl, paper, plywood, fabric, or other lightweight material not well suited to provide a durable substrate or, if made of some other material, is neither permanently installed in the ground nor permanently affixed to a building or any structure which is permanently installed in the ground. Examples of a temporary sign include, but are not limited to, balloons, banners, pennants, rigid portable signs, feather flags, and searchlights. 
(33)  Tri-vision sign: A sign designed with a series of triangular slats that mechanically rotate in sequence with one another to show three different sign messages in rotation. 
(34)  Wall sign: Any sign attached parallel to and flush with a wall, painted on the wall surface or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building and which displays only one sign surface. 
(35)  Window sign: A sign that is placed on or behind a windowpane and intended to be viewed from outside the building. 
(b)  Any term not specifically defined by this section shall be defined as provided in the city zoning ordinance or in lieu of such definition, shall be defined as provided in the general rules of construction in the City Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1903 - Non-commercial messages protected. 
Any sign within the city limits of Morrow which is allowable under the dimensional requirements of this article may include, wholly or partially, any non-commercial message, at the discretion of the sign owner, provided such message is not obscene. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1904 - Prohibited signs. 
Except as otherwise provided by this article in limited instances, the following types of signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Roof signs are prohibited. Exception: roof signs may be permitted on the mansard facing or mansard style roofs as an exception to this prohibition where no other space is available for mounting of wall signs. 
(2)  Mobile sign 
(3)  Portable signs, except as provided in Section 1917. 
(4)  Banners, except as provided in Section 1917. 
(5)  Rotating or moving signs. 
(6)  Signs that emit sound. 
(7)  Abandoned signs. 
(8)  Any sign that due to its color, shape, size, height, lighting, location, position and/or design appears to be in imitation of, or may be confused by motorists and pedestrians, to be an official traffic control sign or signal. 
(9)  Any sign that obstructs the view of an official traffic control sign or signal or obstructs the sight of motorists and pedestrians so as to create a traffic safety hazard. 
(10)  Any sign that is erected or maintained in such a manner as to interfere with safe and free ingress or egress of any door, any window, any emergency exit, or any fire escape. 
(11)  Any sign not in compliance with all applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1905 - Computation of sign area. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the area of a sign face shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof, that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, color, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets other regulations of the city and is clearly incidental to the display itself. 
(b)  The sign area of signs with more than one sign face shall be computed by adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces are parallel, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of the larger of the two faces. 
(c)  The computation of the sign area of a monument sign shall include the entire monument structure, as measured from the top to ground and side to side, upon which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors or other design elements occur. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1906 - Permits. 
(a)  Unless exempt from obtaining a permit by the express terms of this article, no person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, or convert any sign or sign structure in the city without first obtaining a permit for such sign or sign structure from the city manager or his representative. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A fee as established from time to time by ordinance of the mayor and council. 
(2)  A design and stress diagram or plan containing the necessary information to enable the building official to determine that such sign complies with all regulations of the building and electrical codes of the city. 
(3)  A sketch or drawing, to scale, of the proposed sign, showing size, dimensions, type, height and other information as required by the city to establish compliance with this article. 
(4)  A sketch or drawing, to scale, of the proposed location showing proposed height of installation and distances from all other signs and structures on the lot and public rights-of-way. 
(c)  The city manager or his or her representative shall review all applications for a permit and accompanying documents within 30 days of receipt of a completed application. Time for review shall not begin to run until a fully complete application with all required documentation has been submitted to the city, along with payment of the permit fee. 
(1)  At or before the conclusion of this 30-day review period, the city manager or his representative shall either grant or deny the permit. 
(2)  Should a decision not be made on a fully complete application prior the expiration of this 30-day review period, the applicant shall be permitted to erect and maintain the sign that is the subject of the application under this provision unless and until such time as the city manager or his representative notifies the applicant of denial of the application and states the reason(s) for such denial. No person erecting a sign under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued maintenance of such sign, and should the city manager or his representative subsequently deny the application, the sign must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(d)  Where an application and accompanying documents show that the desired sign will conform to all requirements of this article and other pertinent laws and ordinances regulating signage, the permit shall be issued. 
(e)  Where an application and accompanying documents describe work which does not conform to the requirements of this article or other applicable laws and ordinances regulating signage, the permit shall be denied. The reasons for denial shall be set out in writing and emailed to the applicant on or before the 30th business day after the city is in receipt of a completed application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined. "Due cause" is the violation of the provisions of this article, any other law or ordinance regulating signage, the submission of an incomplete application, or submission of an application containing false material statements. 
(f)  A permit issued shall be construed as a license to proceed with the work, but shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of this article, nor shall such issuance prevent the city manager or his representative from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans or in construction or of other violation of this article. 
(g)  Every sign erected, constructed or maintained, for which a permit is required shall be plainly marked with the name of the person erecting and maintaining such sign and shall have affixed on the front thereof the permit number issued for said sign by the city. In case of window displays, the permit number will suffice where the display is maintained by the store licensee. 
(h)  Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by the permit is commenced within six months after the time the permit is issued; provided that, for cause, extensions of time may be allowed, and such extensions shall be in writing and emailed by the city manager or his or her representative. 
(i)  In the event the city determines that an existing sign has been erected or exists in violation of the standards of this article or other laws and ordinances regulating signage, or has been issued on the basis of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements, the city manager or his representative shall provide notice of revocation to the permit holder via certified mail. The notice shall provide a time, not sooner than ten business days nor later than 30 business days of the notice, for the applicant to appear before the city manager or his representative and provide evidence as to why the permit should not be denied. A decision by the city manager or his representative upholding the revocation or withdrawing that action shall be reduced to writing and served on the permit holder no later than ten days from the date of hearing. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1907 - Appeals. 
Notwithstanding the provisions regarding appeals in Article XIV of this ordinance, in the event that the city manager or his representative denies an application submitted under Section 1906(a), revokes a permit under Section 1906(i), or denies a request to erect a temporary sign under Section 1917(b), the applicant or the permittee may appeal such decision by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk no later than ten business days after such denial. The mayor and council shall hear the appeal at their next regularly scheduled meeting that is at least six days after the notice of appeal is received. A final decision on an appeal shall be rendered by the mayor and council no more than 30 days from the date such appeal was heard. 
(1)  Should the mayor and council fail to render a decision on a properly and timely filed appeal from the denial of a permit application submitted under Section 1906(a) or Section 1917(b)(1) prior to the expiration of the 30-day period, the applicant shall be allowed to erect and maintain the sign that is the subject of the application under this provision unless and until such time as the mayor and council makes a decision on such appeal. No person erecting a sign under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued maintenance of such sign, and should the mayor and council affirm the denial of the application, the sign must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(2)  Any appeal of the decision of the mayor and council rendered under this section shall be taken to the superior court by a petition for a writ of certiorari as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1908 - Exemptions from permit requirements. 
The following signs are exempt from the permitting requirements of this article but, notwithstanding, are subject to all other provisions of this article: 
(1)  Standard information signs, subject to the number limitations provided by this article; provided the stake is not closer than ten feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing and no part of the placard is closer than ten feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. 
(2)  One flag not exceeding 24 square feet in single-family residential districts or 60 square feet in non-residential districts, mounted on either a mast arm or vertically mounted flagpole not exceeding 25 feet in height in single-family residential districts or 50 feet in height in non-residential districts. Such flags do not count toward allowable sign limitations. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1909 - Wall and awning signs. 
(a)  Wall and awning signs shall be securely fastened to the building surface. Such signs may not project above the parapet wall. 
(b)  Wall signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than two feet. Awning signs may not project beyond the building face by more than four feet. 
(c)  Sign area for wall signs: 
(1)  For a premise with a wall face of 2,000 square feet or less: a maximum area of 90 square feet and a minimum area of 20 square feet.. 
(2)  Except as provided in (c)(3), for a premise with a wall face over 2,000 square feet: 10 percent of the wall face or 200 square feet, whichever is less. 
(3)  For a shopping center having a gross floor area of 1,000,000 square feet or more: five percent of the wall face or 200 square feet, whichever is less, on each street facing wall, provided further that individual tenants in such shopping centers must have a gross floor area exceeding 100,000 square feet in order to post a wall sign for that tenancy. 
(4)  A regional mall that maintains a minimum of 75 percent of its total square footage as operating retail space shall be exempt from the size limitations of this subsection. 
(d)  Sign area height on wall signs: 
(1)  For a premise with a wall face of 2,000 square feet or less: a maximum area height of three feet and minimum area height of 15 inches. 
(2)  Except as provided in (d)(3) or (d)(4), for a premise with a wall face over 2,000 square feet: the three-foot area height may be increased by three inches per additional 100 square feet of wall face but, in no event, shall the wall sign exceed five feet in sign area height. 
(3)  For a shopping center having 1,000,000 square feet or more, a maximum sign area height of six feet; the six-foot limitation also pertains to any tenant with a gross floor area exceeding 100,000 square feet. 
(4)  A regional mall that maintains a minimum of 75 percent total square footage as operating retail space shall be exempt from the size limitations of this subsection. 
(e)  On all wall signs larger than 90 square feet placed above an entrance to a building, there must be a minimum of 24 inches of clear vertical space between the top of the building entrance and the bottom of the wall sign, and there must be a minimum of 24 inches of clear vertical space between the top of the wall sign and the top of the building. 
(f)  Projecting signs shall be mounted a minimum of eight feet from grade level above pedestrian areas and 14 feet above vehicular areas. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1910 - Window signs. 
(a)  Window signs are limited to being part of the allowance for wall signs, or, as window displays, shall not exceed 25 percent of the window area or building face in commercial and industrial zones. The color, shape, and/or design of a window display shall coordinate with existing signage on the premises, shall be in compliance with the standards of this article and are included in allowable size limitations. Window signs shall be professionally made for the purpose of window display and maintained in a "like new" condition. Paper cut-outs and hand-made signs are prohibited. 
(b)  Where the wall of a building located in a commercial or industrial zoning district is such that the installation of a wall sign is impracticable due to lack of space to which such sign may be attached, window signs may be designed as a permanent sign to serve the premises. In such case, all other standards concerning size limitations shall be applicable to the window sign. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1911 - Freestanding signs. 
(a)  Freestanding signs may be either monument signs or stanchion signs. Such signs shall be securely affixed to a substantial support structure which is permanently attached to the ground, and wholly independent of any building for support. In the case of monument signs, the primary structural material shall compliment the primary building material of the structure served by the sign so as to achieve similarities and consistency of building materials on the site. 
(b)  Freestanding signs shall be mounted perpendicular to the fronting street, except that one sign, upon submission and approval of installation, may be used in place of two separate signs on corner lots. Stanchion signs and monument signs shall be centered 15 feet behind the property line and shall be fully contained within the property lines with the edge of the sign being at least five feet off the right-of-way. Monument signs shall be centered within the landscape buffer area perpendicular to the fronting street and shall be fully contained within the property lines. No freestanding sign shall be located within 30 feet of an existing freestanding sign, provided this restriction shall not apply to properly installed instructional signs. 
(c)  Freestanding signs utilized by multi-tenant occupancies shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  Each such sign, whether a monument or stanchion sign, shall have a decorative base sufficient to house all sign supports within a single structure. Such base shall utilize construction materials that match the construction materials of the multi-tenant development. 
(2)  Stanchion signs utilized by multi-tenant occupancies shall include decorative pole covers covering the upright supports which shall be comprised of square casings of no less than 18 inches in any one horizontal direction. 
(3)  The exterior color of the sign cabinet (i.e., structural or architectural supports, framing and sign face) shall be compatible with the colors of the multi-tenant development. 
(4)  Landscaping shall be required at the base of all such signs in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Plantings shall be at a height of at least 12 inches but no more than 18 inches measured from the adjoining grade. Use of a berm with low plantings may be utilized to meet the height requirements for landscaping. 
b.  Plantings shall be designed to provide a decorative foundation for the sign and shall utilize a mixture of greenery and/or flowering plants to create a solid landscaped appearance. 
c.  All plantings shall be maintained free of weeds, with sufficient water and fertilizer. Plantings shall be maintained in a healthy state. 
d.  A landscape plan meeting the requirements of this section shall be submitted for approval to the director of public works or his designee. 
(5)  Address numbers eight inches in height shall be applied to the base of the sign in a contrasting color for emergency identification. No structural supporting members shall be visible for such address numbers. 
(d)  Interstate signs. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (d)(2), an interstate sign shall only be allowed on a commercially zoned lot that (1) is at least one acre in area; and (2) contains no less than a 50-foot frontage adjacent to an interstate highway right-of-way. 
(2)  Where the commercially zoned lot has been designated as a DCI property, an interstate sign shall be allowed on said lot if it contains no less than a 50-foot frontage adjacent to an interstate right-of-way. 
(3)  No interstate sign shall be closer than ten feet from the property line or right-of-way. 
(4)  Interstate signs may have up to two sign faces per each direction of travel on the nearby interstate; allowing for a maximum of four sign faces per each interstate sign. 
(e)  Height limits. 
(1)  Stanchion signs erected along major thoroughfares, except those signs classified as interstate signs, shall be erected to a height of 22 feet. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (3), an interstate signs shall not exceed 100 feet in height 
(3)  An interstate sign erected upon a commercially zoned lot that has been designated as a DCI shall not exceed 130 feet in height. 
(4)  Monument signs shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(5)  The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
(f)  Size requirements. 
(1)  Interstate signs. An interstate sign shall not exceed 200 square feet of sign area. An interstate sign on a lot that has been designated as a DCI property shall not exceed 250 square feet of sign area. 
(2)  Stanchion signs. 
a.  Stanchion signs for multiple business parcels exceeding three acres shall not exceed 150 square feet. 
b.  Stanchion signs for single business parcels exceeding three acres shall not exceed 120 square feet of sign area. 
c.  Stanchion signs for parcels less than three acres shall not exceed 90 square feet in size. 
d.  Stanchion signs for parcels less than 30,000 square feet in size shall not exceed 70 square feet. 
(3)  Monument signs. Monument signs shall not exceed 60 square feet of total area of the monument sign which shall include signage and structure. 
(g)  No freestanding sign may be located within 30 feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended or at a location that would cause an obstruction to vision to vehicular traffic. 
(h)  Billboards. Billboards are allowed only along the frontage of I-75 in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Billboard sign faces shall not exceed 14 feet in height or 48 feet in length for a limitation of 672 square feet in sign area. 
(2)  No billboard may be erected to a height in excess of 75 feet. 
(3)  Tri-vision technology may be utilized on billboards along I-75 provided it meets or exceeds standards of state law. 
(4)  No billboard shall be erected within 500 feet of an existing billboard. 
(5)  No billboard shall be erected within 500 feet of any public park, public playground, public green space, public recreation area or residentially zoned property. 
(6)  LED technology shall be permitted on billboards only in accordance with the lighting standards of Section 1913. 
(7)  Only one sign face shall face the lane of travel in each direction. No stacking of sign faces or side by side placement of such faces shall be allowed. 
(8)  Billboards shall be oriented only toward travelers on I-75. 
(9)  All other standards of this article, including, but not limited to, lighting, maintenance, landscaping, and permitting, shall apply to billboards. 
(i)  Regional malls that maintain a minimum of 75 percent total square footage as operating retail space shall be exempt from the size limitations of this section 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1912 - Location restrictions generally. 
(a)  No sign shall interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic or pedestrians. 
(b)  No sign shall be located on any building, fence or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  No sign or sign structure shall be located on utility poles or within the right-of-way of any street or public right-of-way. 
(d)  No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner as to interfere with safe and free ingress or egress of any door, any window, any emergency exit, or any fire escape. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1913 - Lighting. 
(a)  No sign shall give off light which glares, blinds, or has any other such adverse effect on traffic. The light from all illuminated signs shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected by direct light that is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(b)  Signs with flashing, intermittent or animated illumination or effect, as well as signs simulating motion through the arrangement and/or timing of lighting, or lighting that fades in and out are prohibited. LED signs and warning or official regulatory signs meeting standards of the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices are exempt from this restriction. 
(c)  One neon or other type of illuminated sign may be used in the interior window of a store front. Such signs shall not exceed an overall area of two square feet. No series, lines or rows of electric lights shall be allowed as window displays or signage. 
(d)  Sign lighting not meeting the standards of this article is prohibited. 
(e)  All components of an illuminated sign shall be U.L. listed, or the equivalent thereof, with an identification label that shows the manufacturer of such sign. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1914 - Special requirements. 
(a)  No sign shall be erected which simulates an official traffic control or warning sign or hides from view any traffic or street sign, signal or public service sign. 
(b)  No sign shall contain statements, words or pictures of an obscene nature. 
(c)  No sign shall advertise any activity, service, or product prohibited by the laws or regulations of the United States or the State of Georgia or by the ordinances or resolutions of the city. 
(d)  No sign shall emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any travelled road or highway by a person with normal hearing. 
(e)  No sign shall be erected on the inside of a curve or in any other manner that may prevent persons using the roadway from obtaining an unobstructed view of approaching vehicles. 
(f)  For businesses located in buildings for which attachment of a building-mounted sign is not possible due to design of the structure, a sign may be permanently painted on a window surface; provided the sign does not exceed the size and height requirements of this article and is subject to all permit application and issuance requirements of this article. 
(g)  No sign shall be erected in such a manner so as to prevent ingress or egress through any door or window of any such building, or in such a manner as to obstruct or be attached to a fire escape. 
(h)  No sign shall be painted on, mounted on, or otherwise attached to a vehicle, board or object which, if left stationary, tends to circumvent the intent of this code and the limitations of the sign regulations prescribed herein. 
(i)  Banners and flags exceeding the standards exempted from permit requirements and promotional tents are permitted only with permission of the city manager or his or her designee in accordance with the standards and regulations of Section 1917(b). Inflatable devises are prohibited. 
(j)  No sign shall be erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, post, curve or utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1915 - Construction and maintenance. 
(a)  No sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is structurally safe, clean and in good repair. New sign panels, letters, cabinets and similar changes to existing signs shall match the original elements of the permitted sign and structure. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, all signs for which a permit is required shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the city building and electrical codes. Such signs, together with their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in good repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or noncorroding metal, shall be given a protective coating as necessary to maintain a clean appearance and safe condition. 
(c)  Freestanding signs, excluding monument signs, shall be internally lighted or include an LED component. Freestanding signs with translucent sign faces shall be composed of pan molded background with embossed copy. In the case of a sign with copy less than six inches, or a sign face smaller than two feet by four feet, a pan face with flat copy may be used. In the case of a sign face larger than 100 square feet, and exceeding 40 feet in height, a flex face may be used. Existing wall or fascia signs utilizing an integrated translucent sign face shall meet the standards of this subsection. At such time as sign face panels are replaced, new wall and fascia signs erected after the effective date of this section shall not be erected with a new translucent face but shall rather meet the standards of subsection (d). 
(d)  As of the effective date of this section, all wall signs erected on commercial properties within the city shall consist of individualized channelized letters or characters powered by electric strips or cloud signs. The channelized letters must be a height of at least twice that of the raceway and be centered horizontally on the raceway. Cloud sign designs will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis to ensure an acceptable level of copy contour is created. Cloud signs shall be internally lighted and shall have panned faces with a minimum depth of two inches. Where a sign applicant desires to incorporate into the sign design a logo or other figure for which an individually fabricated character is not possible, such logo or other representation may be made as a cloud sign or an individual component fitting into a channelized letter scheme utilizing a pan face with flat copy, provided that such pan face with flat copy may not exceed 25 percent of the overall allowable signage allowance for said sign. Industrial locations may use cut metal stand-out letters with a matte finish of neutral color. The letters must have a minimum thickness of two inches and be installed no less than four inches from the wall 
(e)  All signs of plastic material, including copy, facing or display surface, must be in accordance with ASTM D 65 (American Society for Testing and Materials). 
(f)  All edges and backs of signs shall be fully encased in metal or other noncombustible material. LED sign faces shall be incased within a frame. The frame shall be a minimum width of four inches, made of metal or other noncombustible material and be of a neutral color. 
(g)  Every sign may be inspected by the building inspector from time to time, as the city manager or his representative may require so as determining the continuing compliance with this code. 
(h)  Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the city manager or his representative, the owner thereof, or the person maintaining the same, shall upon written notice from the city manager or his representative, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within ten days, secure the same in a manner to be approved by the city manager or his representative, in conformity with the provisions of this code, or remove such sign. If such notice is not complied with within ten days, a formal citation will be issued for the violation. 
(i)  A chain or franchise business whose recognizable signage does not strictly adhere to the construction requirements, herein, may be provided an administrative variance by the city manager. The administrative variance is limited to the construction components of the sign and shall not include consideration of sign content. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1916 - Regulations and restrictions applicable to specific business categories. 
In addition to general regulations and restrictions applying to all signs, signs for specific categories of commercial uses shall comply as follows: 
(1)  Shopping centers and office parks. 
a.  Areas designated as shopping centers or office parks shall be permitted one freestanding sign for each major access drive to the property from a public street or highway. 
b.  In developments of 1,000,000 or more square feet, including planned out-parcels of such developments, or in developments classified as a planned center, all lots or parcels shall maintain sign structures to a height and square footage in accordance with the criteria of the original development. 
c.  Areas designated as office parks shall be allowed one sign per building as shared tenant signage and on which all tenants shall have equal space and access. Such signs shall be monument signs which must conform to and be in consonance with the surrounding area stylistically and shall not exceed six feet in height nor 60 square feet of total area. 
d.  Individual signs qualifying as wall signs may be permitted for individual tenants in shopping centers and single-story office parks. 
e.  In addition to the freestanding sign allowance for multi-story buildings, multi-story buildings shall be allowed one wall sign for shared use by its tenants. Individual signs mounted on the wall by individual tenants in a multi-story building shall not be permitted. 
(2)  Commercial lots. 
a.  Each business located within one parcel of property and fronting on only one roadway, other than a designated shopping center or office park, shall be allowed one freestanding sign and one building-mounted sign and instructional signs, except where two or more businesses are located under one roof, then only one sign of the freestanding type specified shall be allowed for all. 
b.  Where such parcels are located with frontage along two roadways, a business will be allowed one freestanding sign and one wall sign per wall in compliance with current code plus instructional signs as required. 
c.  Those parcels qualifying for interstate signs will be allowed one interstate sign provided that no increase is made in the total allowable number of signs per business or parcel. 
(3)  Apartments, churches, condominiums and schools. Any lot upon which an apartment building, church, condominium building or school is located is allowed (a) one monument sign that shall not exceed six feet in height and 60 square feet in area; and (b) one wall sign. LED signs are not allowed on any lot upon which an apartment building, condominium building or other type of multi-family development is located. 
(4)  Standard information signs. In addition to any other sign authorized on commercial and industrial zoned property, such property may contain not more than one standard informational sign located so that the stake is not closer than ten feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, and no part of the placard is closer than ten feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, provided, however, that an unlimited number of standard informational signs are allowed during a political election between the date of close of filing for qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. No fee and no permit are required for such standard information signs. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1917 - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Temporary sign permit required. Except as otherwise provided herein, a temporary sign permit shall be obtained from the City of Morrow prior to the display of any temporary sign. 
(b)  The following signs are exempt from the temporary sign permit requirement: 
(1)  Flags. 
(2)  For each lot during the period that it (a) is being developed under an active building permit for new construction issued by the city or (b) is undergoing interior renovation of an existing building located on such lot under an active building permit issued by the city, one sign for each street frontage of said lot. Any sign erected under this subsection shall not exceed 40 square feet in sign area. Any sign erected under this subsection shall be removed within ten days after the construction or renovation occurring under the building permit is completed or upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. 
(3)  Information signs. 
(4)  String lights. 
(5)  Indoor signage. 
(6)  One sign for each residentially zoned lot during the period in which such lot is listed for sale or lease. Any sign erected under this subsection shall be removed within ten days after the lot has been sold, has been leased, or is no longer listed for sale or lease. 
(7)  Two signs for each commercially zoned lot during the period in which such lot is listed for sale or lease. Any sign erected under this subsection shall be removed within ten days after the lot has been sold, has been leased, or is no longer listed for sale or lease. 
(8)  Signs located on a lot where a City permitted special event is occurring. 
(9)  A single rigid design sidewalk sign not to exceed 24 inches by 36 inches in size; sign must be displayed immediately adjacent to the primary customer entrance and displayed only during business hours; includes but is not limited to A-frame signs; no spinning signs are allowed. 
(c)  Restrictions: 
(1)  No temporary sign shall be displayed in such a way as to create a visual obstruction or interfere with vehicle traffic in any manner. 
(2)  No temporary sign installation shall cause damage to landscaping, buildings, fixtures or permanent signs. 
(3)  Sign holders and automated sign spinners are prohibited. 
(4)  No temporary sign shall impede the free flow of pedestrian traffic on sidewalks or other areas. 
(5)  No temporary sign shall be placed in the public right of way. 
(6)  No temporary signs shall emit any sound or light that is disruptive to surrounding properties or businesses 
(7)  Balloons and other inflatables are prohibited unless specifically approved by the City in conjunction with a Special Promotional Event permit. 
(d)  Building Mounted Temporary Signs. Building mounted temporary signs may be constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, wall board, sheet metal or other light weight material. Materials shall be weather resistant. Building mounted temporary signs shall be professionally produced. Mounting of signs shall be secure. Building mounted temporary signs may not cover more than ten percent of an entire wall face. Doors and windows shall be included in the calculated square footage of the wall face. 
(e)  Freestanding Temporary Signs. Freestanding temporary signs may be constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, wood, wall board, sheet metal or other material. Sign supports may be made of wood, metal or other rigid material. All materials used in the construction shall be weather resistant. Supports shall be securely installed showing no freedom of movement. Freestanding temporary signs may have a maximum height of eight feet and a maximum width of eight feet. The calculated square footage shall include the sign supports. 
(f)  Frequency and Duration. Temporary signs may exist within the following time limits: 
(1)  Any sign erected pursuant to Section 1917(b)(2) shall be removed within ten days after the construction or renovation occurring under the building permit is completed or upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Any sign erected pursuant to Section 1917(b)(6) or Section 1917(b)(7) shall be removed within ten days after the lot upon which it was erected has been sold, has been leased, or is no longer listed for sale or lease. 
(3)  Businesses without permanent signage; a single per year display for up to 60 concurrent days. A minimum of 60 days shall separate each yearly display. 
(4)  Temporary and seasonal businesses may have no more than a single wall mounted banner for up to 60 days; the banner shall have a maximum size of 60 square feet. 
(g)  String lights and decorations. 
(1)  During the months of October, November, December and January, string lights and decorations may be displayed within the following periods: (i) within 45 days before and 30 days after Halloween; or (ii) within 45 days before and 30 days after the date of a public and legal holiday recognized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1. 
(2)  During the months of February through September, string lights and decorations may be displayed within the following periods: Within ten days before the date of a public and legal holiday recognized pursuant to O.C.G.A. §1-4-1 and ten days after the date of such holiday. 
(3)  At no time may string lights be used to outline any building element (including, but not limited to, a roof, window, archway or door) located on a residentially zoned lot. 
(h)  Temporary sign maintenance. All temporary signage must be professionally made. Handmade signage is prohibited. Temporary signage must be maintained in good repair and free of discoloration. All signage must be free of faded copy, chipping paint, cracked vinyl, and other conditions that exhibit deterioration. Banners and other wall or pole mounted temporary signage must be securely and neatly mounted. Any temporary signage that may become unsightly, unsafe, or fails to maintain its original appearance and position must be removed from display. Sidewalk must have a minimum 36-inch clearance at all times for pedestrian and wheelchair passage. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1918 - Non-conforming signs. 
(a)  Signs which on the effective date of this article were approved and erected under previous sign restrictions or which became non-conforming with respect to the requirements of this article, may continue in existence so long as the sign has not deteriorated or been damaged to an extent to make it a hazard or unsightly, and no structural change in the size, shape, or design of the sign structure is made. No non-conforming sign shall be moved in whole or in part to another portion of the lot or parcel or shall be redesigned or expanded unless such changes result in the sign meeting the standards of this article and becoming conforming. If use of the premises served by the non-conforming sign ceases for any reason for a period of more than 90 days, then any such sign shall lose its non-conforming status and any subsequent sign erected for the premises shall conform with the regulations of this article; provided that this provision shall not preclude the substitution of sign panels on a sign structure which shall be allowable. 
(b)  Any temporary sign erected in violation of this article may be removed by duly authorized employees of the city from any public property or right-of-way, and a responsible party may be cited for such violation. 
(c)  A conforming sign shall not be erected on the same lot with an existing non-conforming sign until the non-conforming sign has been removed. 
(d)  Where a non-conforming sign would otherwise be entitled to continuation under subsection (a) but is damaged by act of God, such sign may be repaired and restored to its preexisting condition prior to the damage having occurred, provided the natural life of the sign prior to such damage occurring shall not be extended. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1919 - Erection on rights-of-way. 
No sign of any kind shall be permitted to extend into or above or to be anchored or placed in any portion of the right-of-way of a state or county highway, or city street, or public sidewalk and in no case, closer than five feet to a curb line. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1920 - Restrictions on signs in residential zoning districts. 
(a)  Multi-family developments shall not be regulated by this section. 
(b)  Any residential developed property which is zoned other than multi-family residential may post only such signs as are authorized by this section and shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  Standard information signs. In addition to any other sign authorized by this section, such property may contain no more than one standard informational sign located that the stake is no closer than ten feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing and no part of the placard is closer than ten feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. Provided, however, that an unlimited number of standard informational signs are allowed during a political election, between the date of close of filing for qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. No fee and no permit are required for such standard informational signs. 
(2)  Permanent subdivision signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, if such property is located at the entrance to any residential subdivision, then such property may not contain more than one permanent subdivision sign. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1921 - Variances. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the administrative variance provisions of Article XIV of this ordinance, a variance from the literal applications of the terms of this article shall be granted by the mayor and council only upon a properly filed application for a variance and only where the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Exceptional conditions pertain to the property where the sign is to be located as a result of a property size, shape or topography which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the general vicinity. 
(2)  The applicant will be deprived of rights for signage that are commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(3)  Granting the variance would not confer on the applicant any significant privileges which are denied to others similarly situated. 
(4)  The exceptional circumstances are not the result of action by the applicant. 
(5)  The request constitutes the minimum variance necessary to allow the applicant to enjoy the rights commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated. 
(6)  Granting of the variance would not violate more than one standard of this article. 
(7)  Granting the variance would not result in allowing a sign that interferes with road or highway visibility or obstructs or otherwise interferes with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the administrative variance provisions of Article XIV of this ordinance, an application for variance from the provisions of this article shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall be referred to the zoning administrator for investigation and recommendation. The application for variance shall be placed on a council agenda no less than 30 nor more than 60 days from the date of application. Notice of all variance applications shall be made in the same manner as notice of zoning variances. The city council shall render a final decision on all variance applications within 30 days of hearing the matter. Any applicant for whom variance is denied may petition for writ of certiorari from that decision to the superior court. 
(c)  In the event of any conflict between the application of any other provision of Appendix A and this section as to the requirements for a variance for any sign, this section shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1922 - Removal of defective signs. 
(a)  Any sign which has become damaged or dilapidated to the extent that it is unsightly or a hazard to the public shall be removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which the sign may be found. 
(b)  In the event a sign or sign face is required to be removed under the provisions of this section and the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the building or structure fails to do so upon his own initiative, the city manager may provide notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery to the responsible person directing that the sign be removed or otherwise brought up to standard. The notice shall provide a reasonable time within which to accomplish such removal, but generally no more than 30 days. Failure of the owner or other responsible person to remove or repair the sign in accordance with the notice shall result in issuing of a citation to the owner and placing the case on the municipal court docket for hearing as a nuisance, provided that where a sign is dilapidated to such an extent that the safety of the public is endangered thereby, the city manager is authorized to secure or remove the sign so as to alleviate the hazard to the public. In making such an emergency repair or removal, the city manager shall attempt to contact the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the building or structure and shall document all such attempts as part of the public record. 
(c)  Appeals from an adverse decision under this section in the municipal court shall be taken by filing for petition for a writ of certiorari as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1923 - Lapse of sign permit. 
(a)  A sign permit shall be deemed to lapse automatically where any of the following circumstances occur for the premises upon which the sign that is the subject of the permit is located: 
(1)  The occupation tax certificate for the premises lapses, is revoked, or is not renewed; or 
(2)  The business activity on the premises at the time the permit was issued is discontinued for a period of 180 days or more and is not renewed within 30 days after notice to the last permittee, sent to the premises, that the sign permit will lapse if the activity is not renewed. 
(b)  Any sign that is the subject of a sign permit that has lapsed under this section shall be taken down or removed by the owner, agent or person having the beneficial use of the premises upon which the sign is located. Where the structure of the sign is otherwise safe and in good repair, removal of the sign face and replacement with a blank panel will be sufficient to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  In the event a sign or sign face is required to be removed under the provisions of this section and the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the building or structure fails to do so upon his own initiative, the city manager may provide notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by hand delivery to the responsible person directing that the sign be removed or otherwise brought up to standard. The notice shall provide a reasonable time within which to accomplish such removal, but generally no more than 30 days. Failure of the owner or other responsible person to remove or repair the sign in accordance with the notice shall result in issuing of a citation to the owner and placing the case on the municipal court docket for hearing as a nuisance, provided that where a sign is dilapidated to such an extent that the safety of the public is endangered thereby, the city manager is authorized to secure or remove the sign so as to alleviate the hazard to the public. In making such an emergency repair or removal, the city manager shall attempt to contact the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the building or structure and shall document all such attempts as part of the public record. 
(d)  Appeals from an adverse decision under this section in the municipal court shall be taken by filing for petition for a writ of certiorari as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1924 - Penalties. 
Any person determined to have violated the sign ordinance shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00, imprisonment or labor on the public works for not more than 90 days, or by any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1925 - Substitution. 
The owner or the permittee of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this article may substitute non-commercial speech in lieu of any other commercial or non-commercial speech. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial speech over any other non-commercial speech. This provision prevails over any more specific provision in this article to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
Section 1926 - Severability. 
It is hereby declared the intention of mayor and council that all parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases, terms and words of this article are or were, upon their enactment, believed by mayor and council to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. 
It is hereby declared the intention of mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term and word of this article is severable from every other part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term and word of this article. It is hereby further declared the intention of mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, no part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term, or word of this article is mutually dependent on any other part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, term or word of this article. 
In the event that any word, term, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, subsection, section or part of this article shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of mayor and council that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining words, terms, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, subsections, sections or parts of the article and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining words, terms, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, subsections, sections and parts of the article shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-10-18) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE (References are to section numbers) 
R = Repealed  S = Superseded by et seq. - And the sections which follow  NC = Not codified 

 
ORDINANCE DISPOSITION TABLE 
R—Repealed  S—Superseded by  NC—Not codified 

 