THE CODE OF MORGAN COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Adopted: May 1, 2007  Effective: May 1, 2007 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of 
MORGAN COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Mack B. Bohlen, Sr. 
Chairman 
____________ 
H. Chester Thomas 
Vice-Chairman 
____________ 
Andrew A. Ainslie, Jr. 
Walter Curtis Butler, Jr. 
Mary Ellen Warren 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Michael W. Lamar 
County Manager 
____________ 
Christian G. Henry 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Jane S. Laseter 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Morgan County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2000 Code, as supplemented through ordinances adopted as of September 12, 2006, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2000 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Christian G. Henry, County Attorney, Mr. Michael Lamar, County Manager, and Ms. Jane S. Laseter, County Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Morgan County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Morgan County, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Morgan County, Georgia. 2007. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE  ORDINANCE OF MAY 1, 2007 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF MORGAN COUNTY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CLERK OF THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE COUNTY ATTORNEY'S OFFICE OF THE CITY OF MORGAN COUNTY, GEORGIA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Morgan County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 74, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 12, 2006, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and costs, or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or to both such fine and imprisonment, any or all of such penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the Judge of the Magistrate Court. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after September 12, 2006, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This resolution and the new Code of Morgan County shall become effective upon approval of the second reading of the new Code of Morgan County by the board of commissioners. 
Passed and adopted by the board of commissioners this 1st day of May, 2007. 
MORGAN COUNTY GEORGIA, 
Acting by and through its Board of Commissioners, 



First Reading: April 2, 2007 
Second Reading: May 1, 2007 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this County Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
  

 
PART I - SPECIAL ACTS AND LOCAL LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part I of this volume is a compilation of local laws involving the county adopted by the Georgia General Assembly or adopted under home rule by the county along with state constitutional amendments and general laws of local application (population acts) to the county only. No state laws of general application are reprinted here but references to those laws are occasionally included in appropriate places. 
 The material included in this part has been arranged according to subject matter. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Any material in brackets has been added to clarify the meaning of the text. At the end of each section appears a reference to the basic act and amendatory acts, if any. The editor has added section numbers and catchlines to facilitate use of this compilation and indexing; however, formal citations should be to the original act, and not to this compilation. There is a comparative table listing chronologically the laws in this part and their location in this part. 
 A uniform system of citations to state statutes has been used. 

CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - County created and original boundaries; name. 
That from and immediately after the passage of this act, Baldwin and Wilkinson counties shall be divided as hereinafter pointed out viz: Beginning on the Oconee river where the line dividing the third and fourth districts of Baldwin county leaves said river, running fourth seventy-seven degrees thirty minutes west to Little River; thence up said river to the Indian boundary line, thence with the said Indian boundary line to the Appalachee river, thence down the same to its junction with the Oconee, thence down the same to the beginning; which tract or parcel of land so bounded and described shall form a new County, to be called and known by the name of Morgan. 
(1807 Ga. Laws, page 3, § 1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Boundary changes of 1815. 
That all [Illegible Text] part of Jasper county north of a line beginning at the corners of Jasper, Morgan and Putnam counties, and running a direct course through the 15th and 19th districts, and intersecting the Indian boundary line at the corner of lots No. 154 and [No.] 181 in said 19th district, be added to, and become a part of Morgan county, and that the County Surveyor of Morgan county be directed to run said line by the Inferior court of said county, after the 10th day of January next, and that the said court be authorized to pay said Surveyor for running said line, as to them may appear just - Provided, nevertheless, that nothing in this law shall be so construed as to prevent the Collector of taxes for the county of Jasper, to collect the arrears of taxes due from any of the citizens of that part of Jasper county now added to the county of Morgan. 
(1815 Ga. Laws, page 71, § 1) 
Editor's note— The bracketed terms designating "[Illegible Text]" were printed here, as they appeared in the version of the Charter provision obtained from the Georgia Legislative Documents. 
Sec. 1-3. - Boundary changes of 1823. 
That from and after the passing of this Act, all that part of Morgan county lying West of a line commencing at the point where the Jasper and Newton lines corner upon Morgan, running thence a straight course towards the eighteen [Illegible Text] post, on the dry line near Joseph Lain's, until it strikes the West prong of Little River, thence running up the South prong of said river until it strikes the Newton line, be added to and become a part of the county of Newton. 
(1823 Ga. Laws, page 61) 
Editor's note— The bracketed terms designating "[Illegible Text]" were printed here, as they appeared in the version of the Charter provision obtained from the Georgia Legislative Documents. 
Sec. 1-4. - Boundary changes of 1872. 
The line between the counties of Greene and Morgan, be so changed as to include in Greene county all that portion of James B. Park's land, and also the mills of James B. Park, Greene Moore and James N. Armour, now situated in Morgan county. 
(1871 Ga. Laws, page 306, § I) 
CHAPTER 2. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— General powers of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 2-31. - Board of commissioners created. 
That from and after the passage and approval of this Act, the county affairs of the County of Morgan shall be administered by a Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenue, which shall consist of five members. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 1) 
Editor's note— The words "Roads and Revenue" were stricken from the official names of all governing authorities of the counties of the State of Georgia, and changed to "Board of Commissioners" by 1968 Ga. Laws, page 1141, as amended by 1982 Ga. Laws, page 3, and ultimately codified at O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20. 
Sec. 2-32. - Composition; districts. 
(a)  The Board of Commissioners of Morgan County shall consist of five members. For purposes of electing members of the board of commissioners, Morgan County is divided into five commissioner districts. The five commissioner districts shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan Name: morganwk8 Plan Type: Local User: Gina Administrator: Morgan Co . 
(b)  When used in such attachment, the terms 'Tract' and 'BG' (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a 'BG' heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Morgan County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of Morgan County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any commissioner district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 2; 1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 19), p. 3659, § 1; 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 429), p. 3748, § 1) 
Editor's note— The attachment referred to in this Act was not included in the text of this codification at the discretion of the editor. The attachment is entitled the "Redistricting Plan Components Report," and describes the composition of the commission districts for Morgan County. It may be found at 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 429), pages 3749—3752, § 4. 
Sec. 2-33. - Terms of office; election. 
The term of office of the members of said Board shall be four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. They shall be elected by the qualified voters of Morgan County. The member elected from each district shall have been a resident of said district at least 12 months before his election. In any primary for the nomination of candidates of a political party for members of said Board of Commissioners, candidates shall be residents of and nominated from their respective districts, but such candidates for nomination shall be voted upon by the voters of the entire County. At the General Election, such nominees shall be voted upon by the voters of the entire County. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 3; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 241), p. 2638, § 1) 
Sec. 2-34. - Successors. 
The members of the Board of Commissioners of Morgan County in office on June 1, 2002, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Each such member shall be deemed to represent the district described in Section [2-32] of this [article] and the attachment referred to in said section which has the same number as such members district had under previous law. A successor to each such member shall be elected from the district described in [2-32] of this [article] in the manner described in [2-33] of this [article]. Elections shall be conducted under the general election laws of Georgia, and members shall be commissioned by the Governor as other county officers are commissioned. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 4; 1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 19), p. 3659, § 2; 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 429), p. 3748, § 2) 
Sec. 2-35. - Qualifications. 
No person shall be eligible to hold office as a member of said board unless he shall have attained the age of thirty years and have resided in Morgan County for five years next preceding the beginning of the term for which he is elected, nor unless he is a person of good moral character, nor unless he shall have resided at least twelve months prior to the election in the district from which he is elected. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 5) 
Sec. 2-36. - Chairman; bond; powers. 
The chairman of said board shall be elected by the members and shall give bond in the sum of $2,500.00 payable to the [Judge of the Probate Court] of said county and his successors in office, and conditioned for the faithful performance of all of his duties under this Act. For any breach of said bond, suit may be brought in the name of the [Judge of the Probate Court], either upon his own motion, or by direction of the grand jury. The premium on the bond shall be paid by the county. J. Frank Stovall, the present chairman, shall be chairman of said board until the end of his present term. The chairman shall have charge of all the business matters of the county, and shall have supervision of the work of the county in the building and repairing of roads, bridges, or any other works of the county under the general supervision of the board, subject to this Act. He shall, with the advice and consent of the board, appoint, and fix the salary and wages of the county warden, and all other officers and laborers of the county, engaged in the construction and repair on roads, bridges, buildings, or other work of the county, over which the board has jurisdiction, and shall have supervision over all such officers and laborers, and shall have power to discharge such officers or laborers at any time, with or without cause. He shall be the official purchasing and selling agent of the county for all animals, machinery, implements, materials and supplies of all kinds used in the construction or repair of buildings, roads, and bridges, and for all supplies for the use of the convicts; but all purchases and sales shall be subject to the ratification of the board. He shall do every act or thing necessary or proper in the discharge of his duties as county manager, subject to the general supervision of the board. The board shall check up all accounts, acts and doings of the county, at least once every month. The chairman shall be superintendent of roads, provided said chairman gives all of his time to the duties pertaining to the office of chairman of the Board of County Commissioners. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 6) 
Sec. 2-37. - Oath. 
Before entering upon the discharge of their duties each member of said board of Commissioners shall make and subscribe before the [Judge of the Probate Court] of said county an oath to faithfully perform their duties according to the provisions of this Act, to the best of their knowledge and ability and to the best interest of the entire County of Morgan. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 7) 
Sec. 2-38. - Vacancy. 
Any vacancy in the membership of said Board shall be filled by a special election to be called by the [Judge of the Probate Court] of Morgan County and conducted under the provisions of general law. The person elected shall be elected for the unexpired term resulting from the vacancy. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 8; 1943 Ga. Laws (Act No. 74), p. 1088, § 1; 1971 Ga. Laws (Act No. 241), p. 2638, § 2) 
Sec. 2-39. - Compensation. 
At the first meeting of the board of commissioners in May 1995, and at the first meeting of the board of commissioners in January of each year, following the election of the chairman of said board, the remaining members of the board shall fix the compensation of the chairman for such calendar year. Such compensation shall be fixed in an amount of not less than $500.00 per month and not more than $2,000.00 per month. If no action is taken at such meeting to fix such compensation, the compensation of the chairman shall be $500.00 per month for the ensuing calendar year. The vice chairman of said board shall receive a salary of $450.00 per month. Each of the other members of the board shall receive a salary of $400.00 per month. In addition thereto, all members shall receive mileage at the rate of $0.25 per mile for expenses in attending board meetings or otherwise attending to the duties of their office. All expense bills shall be approved by the board before payment." 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 9; 1946 Ga. Laws (Act No. 513), p. 244, § 1; 1952 Ga. Laws (Act No. 562), p. 2173, § 1; 1958 Ga. Laws (Act No. 272), p. 2913, § 1; 1960 Ga. Laws (Act No. 801), p. 2942, § 1; 1968 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1191), p. 3585, § 1; 1981 Ga. Laws (Act No. 315), p. 3883, § 1; 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 843), p. 4117, § 1; 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), p. 3612, § 1) 
Sec. 2-40. - Clerk of board; compensation. 
The board may elect a clerk who must be an experienced bookkeeper and familiar with the duties to be performed by the clerk and shall be subject to removal at any time with or without cause, by the chairman, subject to approval of the board. The clerk shall receive as compensation a salary to be fixed by the board which shall not be less than $50.00 per month nor more than $250.00 per month. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 10; 1945 Ga. Laws (Act No. 34), p. 547, § 1; 1952 Ga. Laws (Act No. 562), p. 2173, § 2; 1960 Ga. Laws (Act No. 801), p. 2942, § 2) 
Sec. 2-41. - Jurisdiction. 
That said board shall be and it is hereby vested with exclusive jurisdiction and the control over the following matters, to wit: In directing, controlling, and the caring for all property of the county, according to law, in levying taxes for county purposes, according to law, in establishing abolishing, or changing election precincts and militia districts, according to law; in supervising the tax officers' books and the allowing of insolvent lists of said county, according to law; in examining, settling, and allowing all claims against the county according to law; in examining and auditing all claims and accounts of officers having the care, management, keeping, collecting or disbursing of money belonging to the county or appropriated for its use and benefit, and bringing them to a settlement; and especially is it charged with frequently examining and auditing the books of the county treasurer or the depository, the tax-collector, tax-receiver, or tax-commissioner as the case may be, the sheriff, the superintendent of public schools and other officers of said county through whose hands county funds pass; and this to be done by the commissioners as often as they may deem wise. Though said board, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this act as the same relates to the other officers of the county and over which it is herein given jurisdiction, shall also have at its command an audit to be made of the books of the various offices of the county as hereinafter provided for. Said board may require from all such officers subject to examination, such reports as may be necessary to keep said commissioners fully informed at all times of the financial condition of the county. In controlling, caring for, and the managing of convicts of the county, according to laws; in promoting and preserving the public health of the county, with the authority to quarantine against contagious disease and epidemics, according to law; in regulating and fixing license fees as authorized by law; and generally to have and exercise all power heretofore vested in the commissioners or [Judge of the Probate Court] of said county when sitting for county purposes; and to exercise such other powers as are granted by law; or as may be necessary to the jurisdiction over county matters or county finances; in selecting and appointing all minor officers or employees of the county whose election or appointment is not otherwise provided for by law, such as warden, superintendents and guards of convicts of the chain-gang, county physician, health officer, tax-assessor, county policeman, and all other officers and guards as needed and authorized by law. All appointments of said board shall be subject to suspension or dismissal at any time; and no appointee as suspended or dismissed shall be entitled to a salary or compensation during suspension or after dismissal, no matter whether the time for which he was appointed has expired or not. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 11) 
Sec. 2-42. - County attorney. 
That said board shall have authority to employ a competent attorney at law to advise them and to represent the county in any litigation which may arise in which said county is a party. Whenever it is deemed necessary, said board may employ additional counsel to assist the county attorney, and also to allow the county attorney additional compensation in litigating matters of the county. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 12) 
Sec. 2-43. - Employing convicts. 
That said board shall have entire control and the management of the convicts of said county sentenced to work upon the roads or work of said county, and all convicts of this State assigned to the County of Morgan by the proper authorities of the State, and shall so employ them according to law and under such plans for working, building, repairing, and the maintaining of the public roads, bridges, and the work of said State as may now or hereafter be adopted or enforced by law in said county. Said board in the working of the roads in said county shall work the same in the various districts of said county in proportion to that the public road mileage of said districts bears to the whole county, less State-aid roads, except in emergency caused, at which time said board may disregard this section. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 13) 
Sec. 2-44. - Office; hours. 
That said board shall have and maintain an office at the courthouse of said county for the transacting of business and the said office shall be kept open each day during the usual office hours (Sundays and holidays excepted) and during such office hours the books of said board and other public records in their office, custody or control shall be subject to inspection by any citizen of said county; provided such investigations shall be so conducted as to not seriously interrupt or impede the necessary business of said office. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 14) 
Sec. 2-45. - Minutes. 
That said board shall keep a proper and accurate book of said minutes, wherein shall appear all orders and the proceedings had and passed in reference to county matters. Said board shall keep a full and accurate book of county vouchers, wherein shall appear in detail all orders and warrants drawn by it on the county treasury or depository, for what purpose, and on what fund. Said board shall also keep a book in which shall be recorded in itemized form, all articles or things of whatever kind purchased by it for the use and consumption of and by any department of the county government, giving the name of the article, date when purchased, from whom purchased, the price paid therefor, and for which department purchased and used. Said board shall also keep a cashbook in which shall be daily entered any cash item received by said board, from whom received, and for what purpose received. It shall keep a record, separate from other financial affairs of the county, of all expenditures on account of the chain-gang of the county, including supplies, equipment, and expense therefor, the pay of wardens, guards, etc. It shall keep a book of inventory of all county property, including road machinery, livestock, chain-gang outfit, road working tools, and of every other kind and class of property belonging to said county, together with a fair valuation of the same, where located and in whose custody in what condition, and of which inventory shall be carefully revised each year; and it shall keep such other books, and the records as may be necessary. Said books and records shall be kept so as to show at all times the financial condition of the county, and shall be kept open to the inspection of any and all citizens of Morgan County who may be interested in the same. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 15) 
Sec. 2-46. - Financial statements. 
That said board, at the beginning of the second quarter of this Act, to wit, the first week in July, shall make up an itemized statement showing all amounts collected and expended on behalf of the county during the preceding quarter, and each quarter thereafter such statements to be made up and published of the preceding quarter as herein directed. Said statement shall show the balance of cash on hand at the beginning of the preceding quarter and at the end of the preceding quarter; also such outstanding obligations as said board or their predecessors shall have made. The chairman shall verify said statement by affidavit as follows: 
I, _______, Chairman of the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenue of Morgan County, Georgia, do solemnly swear that the above is a full and true statement of the monetary transactions of said board for the quarter ending _______; and that said board has not received any rebate, directly or indirectly whatsoever, nor have I personally profited or known of any illegal profit to any one whomsoever through any transaction of my office; so help me God. 
Said statement shall be published in the official gazette of said county, provided the said board can arrange for its publication at a price not to exceed $2.00 per 100 words. If the board cannot obtain the publication of said account or statement at said price by the official paper of the county, then it shall erect a bulletin board in the rotunda of the courthouse in view of the general public, and post such statement thereon. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 16) 
Sec. 2-47. - Conflict of interest, bids. 
That it shall be unlawful for said board to employ any person related to any member in the third degree either by blood or marriage, or to contract with such person or persons for any equipment, material, or supplies, or for any work to be done on the public roads, bridges, or other work of the county, except when bids are received for equipment, material or supplies, or for work to be done on public roads, bridges, or other work of the county, upon full specification and due advertisement thereto, and a person related to the commissioner submit a bid and is the lowest bid therefor. Posting of notice at the courthouse for ten days or publication of the same in one issue of the official newspaper of said county, shall be considered due advertisement. The board shall have the right, however, to reject any and all bids; and it shall likewise be unlawful to have any financial interest in the sale or purchase of any article to or from the county, or to receive any rebate expenses out of transportation, or other valuable causes, in connection with or through the purchase of any equipment or supplies for the county, or the awarding of any contract of said county; and if any commissioner shall violate any provisions of this section he shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be punished as prescribed in section 1065 of the Penal Code of Georgia of 1910, and shall forfeit his office; and such conviction shall create a vacancy in said office and shall be filled as hereinbefore provided for in this Act. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 17) 
Sec. 2-48. - Purchases. 
That no material for public bridges, roads, public buildings, or property under the control of said board shall be purchased except upon written specifications as to quality, and all such materials or supplies must be suitable for the purpose intended, of good quality and standards generally recognized for such purposes as to be used. All laws of this State as to competitive bidding for all such materials shall be strictly observed. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 18) 
Sec. 2-49. - Contributions for roads. 
That said board may receive contributions for the improvement of public roads, bridges or other public works of the county from any person who owns property adjacent thereto or from any other person who may be interested in the improvement of the same or from the State Government or from the United States Government, and such contributions, when received, shall be used for the improvement of the same as designated by the contributor; and the said commissioners shall keep a book of accounts which shall correctly show all such contributions, from whom received, and the distribution of same, and the chairman shall take and file receipts for all of such disbursements and shall be jointly and severally liable with the surety on his official bond to the [Judge of the Probate Court] of said county for any misappropriation of any such funds. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 19) 
Sec. 2-50. - Policy. 
That it shall be the duty of said board in all road and bridge work done in said county, to always keep in view what will be to the greater good of the greater number; and this policy shall be uniformly observed by said commissioners. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 20) 
Sec. 2-51. - Sessions. 
That said board shall hold one session of court for county purposes at the county courthouse on the first Tuesday in each month, and the session may be adjourned from day to day until all pending business may be disposed of. Said board may hold called sessions as often as in their judgment the powers and duties herein conferred may require. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 21) 
Sec. 2-52. - Physician. 
That said board shall employ a competent physician to administer medical treatment to the convicts of said county, and such other duties as may be prescribed by said commissioners, for which said physician shall be paid a reasonable salary. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 22) 
Sec. 2-53. - Audit. 
That the grand jury sitting at the first regular term of court in each year shall appoint a certified public accountant or a firm of certified public accountants, who shall be [a] nonresident of Morgan County, to audit all the books and accounts of the county, including the tax-receiver, tax-collector, tax-commissioners, treasurer or depository, sheriff, superintendent of schools, and especially of the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenue, and any of the officers or persons receiving or disbursing county funds. Said accountant so appointed shall have the power to examine upon oath any county officer or any citizen relative to any account, item, warrant, or transaction in connection with any of the affairs of said county, and particularly in connection with the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenue. Said accountants shall audit all books, accounts, vouchers, warrants, and other records of the entire county up to the first day of January of the year following his or their appointment, and shall prepare an inventory of all property and material of said county on hand at that date and make a report of their findings to the judge of the superior court of that county, who shall submit the same, together with his comments, criticism, and recommendation, to the grand jury at the first regular term of the superior court thereafter, which grand jury, in its discretion, may provide for the publication of said report in the official organ of the county or in pamphlet form. No accountant or firm of accountants shall be so employed who shall be in any way related to or for any business connection with any such officer or officers of books to be so audited. The grand jury appointing such accountant or accountants shall prescribe the amount to be paid them for their services; and after such services have been performed and the judge of the superior court has submitted said report to the grand jury, it shall be the duty of the Board of Commissioners of Roads and Revenue to provide for the paying of said accountant or accountants for their services, upon the written approval of the foreman of the grand jury making the appointment, together with the judge of the superior court. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 23) 
Sec. 2-54. - Sales. 
That whenever said board deems it advisable, or necessary that any property belonging to said county be sold the same shall be sold after due advertisement in the official newspaper of the county, at public outcry, to the highest bidder for cash before the courthouse door. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 24) 
Sec. 2-55. - Cooperation with state. 
That said board shall keep in constant touch with the office of the State Highway Department of Georgia and the office of the Director of Public Roads of the United States Department of Agriculture, and shall secure and keep in office and familiarize themselves with all bulletins and pamphlets bearing upon the subject of road building; and it shall be their duty at all times to entertain, and discuss with such officers and officials, theories and methods of road building. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 25) 
Sec. 2-56. - Road repairing. 
That it shall be the duty of said board to have the main streets and thoroughfares of the incorporated cities and towns of said county, which are continuous or extensions of public roads leading into or from said cities or towns, worked and kept in repair in the same manner as the public roads of said county are now worked and maintained outside of said cities or towns of said county. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 26) 
Sec. 2-57. - Cooperation with cities and towns. 
That it shall be the duty of said board to cooperate with the officials of the incorporated cities or towns within said county, in securing for said cities or towns appropriations from the State Highway Department of Georgia, or the Federal Government of the United States, funds or materials for the improvement of such streets or thoroughfares, as may be designated by said city or town officials, said board, highway engineer, or official of Georgia, or engineer or director of the Federal Bureau of Public Roads of the United States. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 27) 
Sec. 2-58. - Street work. 
That the working of streets and thoroughfares in and through the several cities or towns of said county, as herein provided for, shall at all times be under the direction, supervision and control of said board, just as the public road work of the county is now performed, provided, that in event of a disagreement between the said municipal authorities and the said board as to any matter pertaining to the said work herein provided for, the judgment or decision of the said board shall be final and prevail in the premises. 
(1935 Ga. Laws (Act No. 265), p. 738, § 28) 
CHAPTER 3. - AVIATION AND AIRPORTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 3-1—3-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MADISON-MORGAN COUNTY AIRPORT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 3-31. - Creation. 
There is created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Madison-Morgan County Airport Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation. Said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of its officers, agents, and employees. The authority shall consist of seven members. Such members shall be appointed by the governing authority of Morgan County and by the governing authority of the City of Madison as follows: The governing authority of Morgan County shall appoint one member whose term expires December 31, 1998, one member whose term expires December 31, 2000. The governing authority of the City of Madison shall appoint one member whose term expires December 31, 1998, one member whose term expires December 31, 1999, and one member whose term expires December 31, 2000. In addition, the governing authority of Morgan County and the governing authority of the City of Madison shall jointly appoint one member whose term expires December 31, 2000. All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of four years and until their successors have been duly appointed. No person shall be appointed to membership on the authority unless he or she is a resident of Morgan County, Georgia, and has the same qualifications as are required for a person to vote in Morgan County, Georgia. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 1) 
Sec. 3-32. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this [article], the term: 
(1)  "Authority" means the Madison-Morgan County Airport Authority created by [section 3-31] of this [article]. 
(2)  "Cost of the project" embraces the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery, equipment, financing charges, and interest prior to and during construction; the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal, and legal expenses, plans, and specifications and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this [article]; the construction of any project and improvements on the same; the placing of the same in operation; and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of any funds of the authority. 
(3)  "Project" means and includes the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, improving, and operation of airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft and related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities pertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities; acquiring the necessary property, both real and personal; and the lease and sale of any part of or all of such facilities, including real and personal property, so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance, and operation of such airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft deemed by the authority to be necessary, convenient, or desirable. 
(4)  "Revenue bonds," "bonds," or "obligations" means revenue bonds as defined and provided for in Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], known as the "Revenue Bond Law," and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under said article and any amendments thereto and, in addition, such terms shall also mean obligations of the authority the issuance of which are authorized in this [article]. 
(b)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if in the judgment of the authority the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all properties used, leased, and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 2) 
Sec. 3-33. - Powers. 
(a)  The authority shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by the exercise of the power and right of eminent domain, which is hereby granted, by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property or rights or easements therein, or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or disposition of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority. The authority shall be under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this [article] except from the funds provided under the authority of this [article]. In any proceeding to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned. No property shall be acquired under the provisions of this [article] upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists unless, at the time such property is so acquired, a sufficient sum of money is deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(4)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys, and to fix their respective compensations; 
(5)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects or leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired. Any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they may deem advisable. The authority is further granted the authority to make contracts, leases, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient with the United States government or any agency or department thereof concerning the projects of the authority; 
(6)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects, as defined in paragraph (3) of Section 2 [section 3-32(a)(3)] of this [article], the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(7)  To accept loans and grants or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States, any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof, or any other source upon such terms and conditions as the United States or such agency, instrumentality, or other source may impose; 
(8)  To accept loans or grants of money, materials, or property of any kind from the State of Georgia, any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof, or any other source upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency, instrumentality, political subdivision, or other source may impose; 
(9)  To regulate traffic at any airport which it owns or operates; 
(10)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; and 
(11)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers especially given in this [article]. 
(b)  The authority and the trustee acting under the trust indenture are specifically authorized from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange, or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real or personal, or any interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the authority was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in other sections of this [article]. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 3) 
Sec. 3-34. - Meetings; quorum; compensation. 
The authority will hold its first regular meeting after this [article] becomes effective. The first regular meeting of each year thereafter shall be in January. The authority shall meet at such times as may be necessary to transact the business coming before it, but not less often than quarterly. At its first meeting and at its first meeting in January of each year thereafter, the authority shall elect one of its members as its chairperson and another member as secretary-treasurer. Only one person shall hold the office of secretary-treasurer. The chairperson and secretary-treasurer shall be elected for terms ending on December 31 of the year in which they were elected or until their successors are elected and qualified. Four members of the authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business coming before it. The members of the authority shall serve without compensation, but they shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 4) 
Sec. 3-35. - Vacancy. 
In the event of a vacancy on the authority by reason of death, resignation, or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by the governing authority, and the person so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 5) 
Sec. 3-36. - Revenue bonds—Generally. 
The authority or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created by this [article] shall have power and is authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as defined in this [article] of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided in this [article] for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates as may be authorized by the authority from time to time, shall be payable as provided by resolution of the authority, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 30 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity at the option of the authority at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to and in conformity with Georgia laws, and all procedures pertaining to such issuance and the conditions thereof shall be the same as those contained in said Georgia laws. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 6) 
Sec. 3-37. - Same—Form; denomination; registration. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 7) 
Sec. 3-38. - Same—Signatures and seals. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupons shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds or coupons, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if such officer had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairperson of the authority and attested by the secretary-treasurer of the authority, and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto. Any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairperson and secretary-treasurer of the authority. Any bond may be signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of delivery and payment of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 8) 
Sec. 3-39. - Same—Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this [article] shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instruments laws of this state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose, and said bonds, their transfer, and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 9) 
Sec. 3-40. - Same—Sale and price. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 10) 
Sec. 3-41. - Same—Proceeds; sinking fund. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit for the cost of the project or projects which, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same funds without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purposes. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into a sinking fund or used for additional construction as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 11) 
Sec. 3-42. - Same—Interim receipts; interim certificates; temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 12) 
Sec. 3-43. - Same—Replacement of mutilated, destroyed, or lost. 
The authority may provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 13) 
Sec. 3-44. - Same—Conditions precedent for issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions, or things which are specified or required by this [article]. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this [article] shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of the quorum as provided in this [article]. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 14) 
Sec. 3-45. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this [article] shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the City of Madison or Morgan County, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this [article] and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate said county or municipality to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment. All such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 15) 
Sec. 3-46. - Secured by trust indenture. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company inside or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority, including the proceeds derived from the sale from time to time of any surplus property of the authority, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of the property, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the authority, both real and personal, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor, and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 16) 
Sec. 3-47. - Payment of proceeds from sale. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes thereof, subject to such regulations as this [article] and such resolutions or trust indentures may provide. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 17) 
Sec. 3-48. - Revenues derived from bonds. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, tolls, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, and any moneys derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal, of the authority, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on such revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust instrument may provide. Such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund, which sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of a paying agent or agents for paying interest and principal, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as provided in this [article]. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture; provided, however, that except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 18) 
Sec. 3-49. - Remedies for bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this [article] or any of the coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given in this [article] may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted under this [article] or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this [article] or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 19) 
Sec. 3-50. - Revenue refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of revenue refunding bonds of the authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this [article] and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities, and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this [article] insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 20) 
Sec. 3-51. - Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedures of Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], known as the "Revenue Bond Law." The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States government or any department or agency thereof, if subject to be sued, which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated, and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds when validated and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds against the authority issuing the same, and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality of this state or the United States government, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the authority. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 21) 
Sec. 3-52. - Jurisdiction to enforce bond rights. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this [article] or any suit against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Morgan County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this [article] shall likewise be brought in said court, which shall have original jurisdiction of such actions. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 22) 
Sec. 3-53. - Rights of bondholders unaffected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority shall be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under this [article], the provisions of this [article] shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 23) 
Sec. 3-54. - Trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this [article], whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this [article]. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 24) 
Sec. 3-55. - General purpose of authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provisions of this [article], the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, improving, and operating airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, including any related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and leasing or selling any or all of such facilities, including real property, and to do any and all things deemed by the authority to be necessary, convenient, or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 25) 
Sec. 3-56. - Fix and collect fees and charges. 
The authority is authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls, and charges and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls, and charges for the services, facilities, or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions, or subleases of its lands or facilities. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 26) 
Sec. 3-57. - Duty to prescribe rules. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this [article], including the basis on which airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft shall be furnished. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 27) 
Sec. 3-58. - Supplemental and additional powers. 
The foregoing sections of this [article] shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized by this [article] and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 28) 
Sec. 3-59. - Liberal construction. 
This [article], being for the purpose of promoting the health, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the United States, of the State of Georgia, of Morgan County, and of the City of Madison, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes of this [article]. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 29) 
Sec. 3-60. - Eminent domain. 
Through the use and power of eminent domain, the authority shall have the right, power, privilege, and authority to condemn real property, rights-of-way, or easements for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this [article]. Such condemnation shall be conducted in accordance with the laws of this state. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 30) 
Sec. 3-61. - Jurisdiction of property owned by authority. 
All property the title to which shall vest in said authority shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the county wherein such property shall lie. 
(1996 Ga. Laws (Act No. 899), p. 4409, § 31) 
CHAPTER 4. - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1—4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MORGAN COUNTY WATER AUTHORITY 

Sec. 4-31. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Morgan County Water Authority Act." 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 1) 
Sec. 4-32. - Created; composition; qualifications; term; vacancy; public meetings. 
(a)  There is created a body corporate and politic, to be known as the "Morgan County Water Authority," which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. 
(b)  The authority shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be residents of Morgan County, any or all of whom may hold any state or local elective or appointive public office, and none of whom is required to be a user of the facilities of the authority. To be eligible for appointment as a member of the authority, a person shall be at least 21 years of age and a resident of Morgan County for at least one year prior to the date of his appointment and shall not have been convicted of a felony. From and after July 1, 1989, the five members of the authority shall consist of and be selected as provided in this section. Each of the county and municipal governing authorities shall be entitled to appoint one member of the authority. The member appointed by the governing authority of Morgan County shall be appointed for a term of five years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The member appointed by the governing authority of the City of Madison shall be appointed for a term of four years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The member appointed by the governing authority of the City of Rutledge shall be appointed for a term of three years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The member appointed by the governing authority of the City of Bostwick shall be appointed for a term of two years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The member appointed by the governing authority of the City of Buckhead shall be appointed for a term of two years and until a successor is appointed and qualified. No member appointed by the governing authority of Morgan County shall be a resident of the City of Madison, City of Rutledge, City of Bostwick, or City of Buckhead. Members appointed by the governing authority of a municipality need not be a resident of such municipality. Successors to the members appointed as provided in this subsection shall be appointed by the respective governing authority making the original appointment for terms of five years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Any member of the authority may be appointed to succeed himself. The authority shall select one of its members as chairman, one as vice-chairman, and one as secretary-treasurer, each of whom shall serve in such respective position for the succeeding year and until his or her successor is selected. Three members shall constitute a quorum. 
(c)  In the event of a vacancy by reason of death, disqualification, resignation, or other reason, the governing body which appointed the member whose position has been vacated shall select and appoint a qualified person to fill the unexpired term of the member whose position has been vacated. A vacancy shall exist in the office of any member of the authority who is convicted of a felony or who enters a plea of nolo contendere thereto; who is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or who enters a plea of nolo contendere thereto; who moves his residence from the county; who is convicted of any act of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance of his duties as a member of the authority; or who fails to attend any five consecutive regular or special meetings of the authority without an excuse approved by a resolution of the authority. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the authority. The members of the authority shall serve without compensation, but all members shall be reimbursed from funds available to the authority for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. The authority shall have perpetual existence. The authority shall meet at least annually in the month of January in each year and at such other times as it may deem necessary. 
(d)  Except as otherwise allowed by law, all meetings of the authority, whether regular or special, shall be open to the public. The authority may hold public hearings on its own initiative or at the request of residents of Morgan County or residents of any area affected by the actions of the authority. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 2) 
Sec. 4-33. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Authority" means the Morgan County Water Authority created by this Act. 
(2)  "Cost of the project" means the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction; the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal agents', and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and of other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; the cost of administrative expenses and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this Act; the cost of the acquisition or construction of any project; the cost of placing any project in operation; and the cost of condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(3)  "Project" means and includes the acquisition, construction, and equipping of water facilities for obtaining one or more sources of water supply, the treatment of water, and the distribution and sale of water to users and consumers, including, but not limited to, the State of Georgia and its counties and municipalities for the purpose of resale, inside and outside the territorial boundaries of Morgan County, and the operation, maintenance, additions, improvements, and extensions of such facilities so as to assure an adequate water utility system deemed by the authority to be necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of such type of undertaking. The term "project" shall also mean and include the acquisition, construction, and equipping of all necessary and usual facilities useful and necessary for the gathering of waste matter of every type, including both individual and industrial, and the treatment of sewage of any and every type, including, but not limited to, the acquisition and construction of treatment plants, ponds, and lagoons, inside and outside the territorial boundaries of Morgan County, and the operation, maintenance, additions, improvements, and extensions of such facilities so as to assure an adequate sewage system deemed by the authority necessary for the efficient operation of a sanitary and storm sewer system. Said water facilities and said sewerage facilities, at the discretion of the authority, may be combined at any time into a water and sewerage system as one revenue-producing undertaking and operated and maintained as such. 
(4)  "Revenue bond" and "bonds" mean revenue bonds as provided for in Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], as now or hereafter amended, known as the "Revenue Bond Law," and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under said "Revenue Bond Law" and any amendments thereto and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the authority, the issuance of which is specifically provided for in this Act. 
(5)  "Users of the facilities" or "users" means and includes each person, firm, partnership, company, corporation, association, organization, municipality, county, school board, political subdivision, authority, or other entity to which water is supplied or sewerage services are provided by the authority through the facilities of the authority and which actually makes payment to the authority for such water or sewerage services as are furnished by the authority. 
(b)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all facilities used in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the costs of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 3) 
Sec. 4-34. - Powers. 
The authority is authorized: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use real property, rights or easements therein, or franchises necessary for its corporate purposes; to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue; and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use or disposition of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority, the authority having no power to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act except from the funds provided under the authority of this Act. In any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned; and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists unless, at the time such property is acquired, a sufficient sum of money is deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(4)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys, and to fix their respective compensations; 
(5)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be constructed or acquired. In addition, any and all persons, firms, and corporations; the state; and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations, counties, and other political subdivisions and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of services and facilities by the authority to such municipal corporations, counties, and political subdivisions for terms not exceeding 50 years; 
(6)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects as defined in Section 3 [section 4-33(a)(3)] of this Act, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality thereof, including Morgan County; 
(7)  To make loans with and accept loans and grants of money, materials, or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(8)  To make loans with and accept loans and grants of money, materials, or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision thereof upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency, instrumentality, or political subdivision may impose; 
(9)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes, to execute evidences of such indebtedness, to secure the same, to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(10)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to make short-term loans and to approve, execute, and deliver appropriate evidence of any such indebtedness, which is not in conflict with the Constitution or general laws of this state; and 
(11)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 4) 
Sec. 4-35. - Revenue bonds—Generally. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created in this Act, shall have the power and is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds of the authority for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as defined in Section 3 [section 4-33(a)(2)] of this Act of any one or more projects. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided in this Act for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates per annum, shall be payable at such time or times, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority, and may be redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution for the issuance of bonds. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 5) 
Sec. 4-36. - Same—Form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereon, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both principal and interest. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 6) 
Sec. 4-37. - Same—Signatures; seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if such officer had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the authority and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto and attested by the secretary of the authority and any coupon attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and the secretary of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such person may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 7) 
Sec. 4-38. - Same—Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of this state. Such bonds, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 8) 
Sec. 4-39. - Same—Sale; price; proceeds. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority. The proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose or purposes provided in the resolutions and proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 9) 
Sec. 4-40. - Same—Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of any definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 10) 
Sec. 4-41. - Same—Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may provide for the replacement of any bonds or coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 11) 
Sec. 4-42. - Same—Conditions precedent to issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special meeting of the authority by a majority of its members. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 12) 
Sec. 4-43. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Morgan County or any municipality nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said county or any municipality; but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this Act and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate said county or any municipality to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment. All such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 13) 
Sec. 4-44. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issuance of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company inside or outside the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for the protecting and enforcing of the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insuring of the project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 14) 
Sec. 4-45. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
In the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, the authority shall provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes of this Act, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 15) 
Sec. 4-46. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust instrument may provide. Such funds so pledged from whatever source received, including funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund which shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)  The necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest and other investment charges; and 
(4)  Any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as provided in this section. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, any surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds, and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 16) 
Sec. 4-47. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given in this Act may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted under this Act or under such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 17) 
Sec. 4-48. - Refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 18) 
Sec. 4-49. - Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the "Revenue Bond Law," Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.]. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated; and the state or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the contract or contracts adjudicated as a part of the basis for the security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds when validated and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the authority issuing the same and the state and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said Morgan County Water Authority. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 19) 
Sec. 4-50. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Morgan County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such action. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 20) 
Sec. 4-51. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said authority or its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. No other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds, and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Act, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 21) 
Sec. 4-52. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 22) 
Sec. 4-53. - Purpose of the authority. 
(a)  Without limiting the generality of any provision of this Act, the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring an adequate source or sources of water supply, treatment of such water, and thereafter the distribution of the same to the various municipalities and citizens in Morgan County and environs, including adjoining counties and municipalities located therein, and further for the general purpose of gathering and treatment of waste, both individual and industrial; but such general purpose shall not restrict the authority from selling and delivering water directly to consumers in those areas where there does not now exist water distribution systems or furnishing sewer facilities to such customers and areas where neither any county nor municipality deems it desirable or feasible to furnish water in such locality. 
(b)  The authority shall also have the authority, where it deems it feasible, to sell its products and services to customers, governmental agencies, or governmental instrumentalities of adjoining states, providing the laws of the adjoining states do not prohibit or tax said activity. 
(c)  The authority shall not have the authority to construct water lines for the distribution of water directly to customers within any municipality without first obtaining the express written consent of the appropriate governing body of said municipality and, likewise, the authority shall not have the authority to construct sewer lines directly to customers for the collection of waste and sewage inside any municipality without first obtaining the express written consent of the appropriate governing body of said municipality. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 23) 
Sec. 4-54. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The authority is authorized to prescribe and fix rates and to revise the same from time to time and to collect fees, tolls, and charges for the services, facilities, and commodities furnished and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as provided in this Act to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvements, betterment, or extension of a water system, a sewerage system, or a combined water and sewerage system and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 24) 
Sec. 4-55. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed or acquired under the provisions of this Act, including the basis upon which water service and facilities, sewerage service and facilities, or both, shall be furnished. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 25) 
Sec. 4-56. - Tort immunity. 
The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as Morgan County; and the officers, agents, and employees of the authority when in the performance of the work of the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents, and employees of Morgan County when in the performance of their public duties or work of the county. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 26) 
Sec. 4-57. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized by this Act, shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1989 Ga. Laws (Act No. 271), p. 4670, § 27) 
SPECIAL ACTS AND LOCAL LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the Special Acts and Local Laws and any amendments thereto. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule power of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Morgan County, Georgia," and may be so cited. It may also be cited as "Morgan County Code." 
(Code 2000, § 1-101) 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
Words and phrases used in this Code shall have the following meanings, unless otherwise specified. In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners: 
General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
Advice and consent. The term "advice and consent" means an affirmative vote of the majority of the board of commissioners actually present at the time of the vote. 
Board of commissioners, board. The term "board of commissioners" or "board" means the board of commissioners of the County of Morgan, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" or "this Code" means The Code of Morgan County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any Code provision or ordinance or in any order issued pursuant to any ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except that if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday it shall be excluded; and when any such time is expressed in hours the whole of Sunday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either … or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either … or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the unincorporated areas of Morgan County, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or other officer of the county to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
Gender. Every word in any Code provision or ordinance importing the masculine or feminine gender shall extend to and be applied to females as well as males or vice-versa as the case may be. 
Governing authority or governing body . The term "governing authority" or "governing body" means the board of commissioners of the County of Morgan, Georgia. 
Joint authority. All words purporting to give a joint authority to three or more county officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority. 
Judge or recorder. The term "judge" or "recorder" means the judge of the superior court of the county, the judge of the magistrate court of the county or the judge of any state court of the county, as the case may be. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
Number. Every word importing the plural number only shall extend and be applied to one person or thing as well as to several persons or things. 
Oath. The term "oath" means an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" or "sworn." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Ordinance. The term "ordinance" means a legislative act of the governing body of a general and permanent nature. 
Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Owner. The term "owner" means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of a building or land. 
Person. The term "person" means a corporation, firm, agency, partnership, association, organization, government, and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means every type of property except real property. 
Preceding and following . The terms "preceding" and "following" mean immediately before and immediately after, respectively. 
Property. The term "property" means anything of value, including but not limited to real estate, tangible and intangible personal property, contract rights, services, choices in action, and other interests in or claims to wealth, admission or transportation tickets, captured or domestic animals, food and drink, and electric or other power. 
Provision. The term "provision" means any portion or part of this Code. 
Real property. The term "real property" means lands, tenements, and all rights pertaining thereto. 
Reasonable time or notice. The term "reasonable time or notice" means only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
Resolution. The term "resolution" means a legislative act of the governing body of a special or temporary character. 
Shall or will . These terms mean that a condition exists or an act or action will take place; these terms are mandatory and unconditional. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of the pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription . The term "signature" or "subscription" means a mark intended as such when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "this state" means the state of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approach thereto, within the county. 
Tenant or occupant . The term "tenant" or "occupant" means, with regard to a building or land, any person holding a written or oral lease thereof, or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The use of any verb in the present or past tense includes the future when applicable. 
Week. The term "week" means seven calendar days. 
Written or in writing . The term "written" or "in writing" means printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 2000, §§ 1-102, 1-103) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 1-3-1(d)(3), 1-3-2, 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  History notes, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
(Code 2000, § 1-104) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal or expiration of section or ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of a section or ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred, or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When any ordinance or law repealing a former section, ordinance, clause or provision, shall be itself repealed, such repeal shall not be construed to revive such former section, ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it shall be expressly so provided. 
(Code 2000, § 1-105) 
Sec. 1-5. - Amending Code. 
(a)  All ordinances or laws passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may, but are not required to be, numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, articles, sections, and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances or laws, such repealed portions may, but are not required to be, excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may but are not required to be made by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of The Code of Morgan County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows …." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may but is not required to be used. "The Code of Morgan County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or subsection chapter) to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows …." The new provision shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 2000, § 1-106) 
Sec. 1-6. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 1-107) 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability. 
(a)  If any chapter, section, paragraph, phrase or clause or any part of The Code of Morgan County, Georgia, shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of said document as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this document not so held to be invalid, or the application of this document to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent of the board of commissioners that The Code of Morgan County, Georgia, would have been adopted had such invalid or unconstitutional portion not been included herein. 
(b)  Where there is an apparent conflict in this document between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Code 2000, § 1-108) 
Sec. 1-8. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Code shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(b)  This Code and all inspections conducted and permits issued thereunder are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interest and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this Code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this Code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the county board of commissioners nor any county official or county employee shall be liable for damages to any entity for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Code 2000, § 1-109) 
Sec. 1-9. - Penalty where no penalty provided. 
Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall subject the person committing the violation to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 and costs or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 60 days, or to both such fine and imprisonment, any or all of such penalties to be imposed at the discretion of the judge of the magistrate court. 
(Code 2000, § 1-110; Ord. of 4-1-2008(1), § 2) 
State Law reference— Maximum sentences and fines which may be imposed for violation of county ordinance, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60 et seq., 36-1-20(b). 
Sec. 1-10. - Punishment. 
The infliction of a penalty under any provisions of this Code shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license and/or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the county's Code or other laws and regulations of the county or other governments. Except as otherwise provided by state law or the provisions of this Code, all matters alleging violation of this Code shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county as provided under O.C.G.A. § 15-10-2 or any applicable section of the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Code 2000, § 1-111) 
Sec. 1-11. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county, or any evidence of the county's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the county; 
(3)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners to any person, firm, or corporation; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county; 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(6)  Any temporary, special or other uncodified ordinance; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing charges, fees, or taxes now due or accrued; 
(8)  Any subdivision or rezoning ordinance, or ordinance amending a zoning map; 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision plat; 
(10)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county; 
(11)  Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(b)  All such actions, resolutions and ordinances of subsection (a) of this section are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect, or as continuing to be repealed, to the same extent as if set out at length in, or repealed by, as the case may be, this Code. 
State Law reference— Future operation of laws, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-5. 
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the county. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts or ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in the Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in the Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to this Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in this Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted in this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule power of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; general authority of counties to legislate, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 2-19. - De minimis expenditures. 
Any cost incurred below $500.00 shall be a de minimis expenditure. 
(Code 2000, § 3-204) 
Sec. 2-20. - Meetings; organization and procedure. 
(a)  Regular meetings. 
(1)  Date and time. Except as otherwise decided by the county board of commissioners (hereinafter sometimes referred to as "board"), the board shall hold regular meetings on the first Tuesday of each month beginning at 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that when the day fixed for any regular meeting of the board falls upon a day designated by law as a legal or national holiday, or for any good reason as determined by the board, such meeting shall be held at the same hour on the second Tuesday of said month. 
(2)  Place. Except as otherwise decided by the board, all regular meetings of the board shall be held in the Morgan County Courthouse, lower courtroom, 149 E. Jefferson St., Madison, Morgan County, Georgia. 
(3)  Meeting notice. The time, place, and dates of regular meetings shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the public at the regular meeting place of the board. 
(b)  Special meetings. The chairperson of the board shall call special meetings of the board whenever in his or her opinion the public business may require it, or at the express oral or written request of any three members of the board. Whenever a special meeting is called, the clerk of the board or the clerk's assistant shall notify each member of the board and any other entity legally required to be notified. Whenever any meeting required to be open to the public is to be held at the time and place other than at the time and place prescribed for regular meetings, the clerk or the clerk's assistant shall post a written notice for at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting at the place of regular meetings and by giving written or oral notice to the legal organ of the county. When special circumstances occur, a meeting may be held with less than 24 hours' notice upon giving such notice of the meeting and subjects expected to be considered at the meeting as is reasonable under the circumstances including notice to said legal organ or a newspaper having a general circulation in the county at least equal to that of the legal organ. 
(c)  Agenda. All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents, or other matters to be submitted to the board shall, if practicable prior to each board meeting, be delivered to the clerk, whereupon said clerk shall immediately arrange a list of such matters according to the order of business, post a copy of the same at the meeting site, and furnish each member of the board with a copy of the same prior to the board meeting and as far in advance of the meeting as time for preparation will permit. All persons wishing to speak to the board or be placed on the agenda shall so notify the said clerk at least 46 business hours prior to the board meeting. No matter not on the said agenda shall be considered by the board and no person not on said agenda shall speak to the board unless a majority of the members of the board vote to do otherwise. 
(d)  Election and duties. 
(1)  Election of chairperson. The chairperson shall be elected annually at the first meeting in January of each year by the members of the board. Voting for the chairperson shall be conducted the same as any other matter before the board: by motion/nomination, second, and vote, except that all five commissioners shall be entitled to make motions and vote for the chairperson. The county manager shall serve as the moderator for the board during this process of electing the chairperson. The chairperson shall assume his or her chair immediately after his or her election. 
(2)  Election of vice-chairperson. Immediately after the election of the chairperson, the members of the board shall elect a vice-chairperson, who shall serve as chairperson in the event of the absence of the chairperson. Voting for vice-chairperson shall be conducted in the same manner as for chairperson, except that the newly elected chairperson shall preside over that matter. All commissioners, including the chairperson, shall be entitled to move, second, and to vote for vice-chairperson. 
(3)  Chairperson's duties. The chairperson shall be the presiding officer of the board and shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the board. He or she shall state every question coming before the board, announce the decision of the board on all subjects, and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the board in which event a majority vote of the board shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. He or she shall not vote on any question, other than the election of chairperson and vice-chairperson, except in the event of a tie vote. 
(4)  Appointment of other officials. At the conclusion of voting for chairperson and vice-chairperson, the county attorney, county physician and any other county official shall be appointed by the board during its public meeting. 
(e)  Call to order; presiding officer. The chairperson, or, in his or her absence, the vice-chairperson, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall call the board to order. In the absence of the chairperson or vice-chairperson, the county clerk, or the clerk's assistant, shall call the board to order, whereupon a temporary chairperson shall be elected by the members of the board present. Upon the arrival of the chairperson or vice-chairperson, the temporary chairperson shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the board. 
(f)  Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the board, the county clerk or the clerk's deputy may call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(g)  Quorum. A majority of all the members elected to the board shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the board. In the absence of a quorum, the presiding officer shall, at the insistence of any two members present, compel the attendance of absent members. 
(h)  Order of business. At the hour set by law on the day of each regular meeting, the members of the board shall take their regular stations in the board chambers, and the business of the board shall generally be taken up for consideration and disposition and may use the following as a guide as to order: 
(1)  Roll call; 
(2)  Approval of minutes of previous meeting; 
(3)  Petitions, remonstrances and communications; 
(4)  Introduction and adoption of resolutions and ordinances; 
(5)  Report of officers, boards and committees; 
(6)  Unfinished business; 
(7)  New business; 
(8)  Miscellaneous; 
(9)  Appropriations; 
(10)  Adjournment. 
(i)  Reading of minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a board meeting is requested by a member of the board, such minutes may be approved without reading. 
(j)  Rules of debate. 
(1)  Presiding officer may debate and vote, etc. The chairperson or such other member of the board as may be presiding may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a board member by reason of his or her action as the presiding officer except as otherwise specified in this section. 
(2)  Obtaining the floor; improper references to be avoided. Every member desiring to speak shall address the chair, and, upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself or herself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. 
(3)  Interruptions. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is to call him or her to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he or she shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined, and, if in order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed. 
(4)  Privilege of closing date. The board member moving the adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate. 
(5)  Motion to reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the board may be made only on the date such action was taken. It may be made either immediately during the same session, or at a recessed or adjourned session thereof. Such motion must be made by one of the prevailing side, but may be seconded by any member, and may be made at any time and have precedence over all other motions or while a member has the floor; it shall be debatable. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any member of the board from making or remaking the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the board. 
(6)  Remarks of board member when entered in minutes. A board member may request, through the presiding officer, the privilege of having an abstract of his or her statement on any subject under consideration by the board entered in the minutes. If the board consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes. 
(7)  Synopsis of debate when entered in minutes. The clerk may be directed by the presiding officer, with consent of the board, to enter in the minutes a synopsis of the discussion on any question coming regularly before the board. 
(k)  Addressing the board. Any person on the agenda to address the board shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer so to do. 
(l)  Addressing the board after motion made. After a motion is made by the board, no person shall address the board without first securing the permission of the board so to do. 
(m)  Manner of addressing board; time limit. Each person addressing the board shall stand, shall give his or her name and address in an audible tone of voice, and, unless further time is granted by the board, shall limit his or her address to ten minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the board as a body and not to any member thereof. No person, other than the board and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the board, without the permission of the presiding officer. No question shall be asked a board member or county official or employee except through the presiding officer. 
(n)  Silence constitutes affirmative vote. Unless a member of the board states that he or she is not voting, his or her silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. 
(o)  Decorum. 
(1)  By board members. While the board is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the board nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the board or its presiding officer, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(2)  By persons. Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the board shall be forthwith, by the presiding officer, barred from further audience before the board, unless permission to continue is granted by a majority vote of the board. 
(p)  Enforcement of decorum. The sheriff, or such member or members of the sheriff's department as the sheriff may designate, shall be sergeant-at-arms of the board meetings. The sergeant-at-arms shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the board meeting. Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms, or any of them present, to place any person who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest, and cause him or her to be prosecuted under the provisions of this Code, the complaint to be signed by the presiding officer. 
(q)  Special committees. All special committees shall be appointed by the presiding officer, unless otherwise directed by the board. 
(r)  Standing committees. The only standing committee of the board shall be the committee of the whole. The chairperson of the board shall be presiding officer of the committee of the whole, and the rules of proceedings in the board shall be observed in the committee of the whole as far as the same may be applicable. 
(s)  Members may file protests against board action. Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for his or her dissent from, or protest against, any action of the board entered on the minutes. 
(t)  Reports of committees. The committee of the whole shall make its reports in writing, and shall return the petition, ordinance, resolution, account, or other paper submitted for consideration. 
(u)  Reports and resolutions to be filed with the clerk. All reports, ordinances and resolutions shall be filed with the clerk and entered on the minutes. 
(v)  Adjournment . A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate. 
(w)  Legal effect. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a majority of a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the board may vary any and all provisions of this article. The legal effect of any action taken by the board at any regular or special meeting shall not be affected in any way by the failure of the board to follow any rule or provision of this article unless the board's minutes show such failure was brought to the attention of the board at said meeting prior to the taking of the subject action. 
(Code 2000, § 3-205; Ord. of 1-10-2006, § 1(3-205)) 
Sec. 2-21. - Executive session meeting; affidavit. 
Prior to exiting any executive session meeting of the county board of commissioners, there shall be a motion properly made and approved that the board exit executive session and upon entering regular session adopt an ordinance authorizing and directing the presiding officer and entire board sign an affidavit in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-4(b) ratifying the propriety of the subject of such executive session within the exceptions provided by law and that no other matters were discussed other than those of a purely personal or nongovernmental nature. 
(Ord. of 8-3-1999, § 102) 
Secs. 2-22—2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEPARTMENTS, OFFICERS, AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 2-46. - Personnel ordinance. 
The board of commissioners has the power, by resolutions adopted from time to time, to establish, modify, adopt, and repeal policies and procedures related to the hiring, advancement, job classification, salary, discharge, and other activities of county employees, staff and personnel. 
(Code 2000, § 3-301) 
Sec. 2-47. - Nepotism clause. 
The county shall not employ any immediate family members of any current county commissioners. For the purposes of this section, the term "immediate family members" means spouses, parents, children, grandparents, grandchildren, brothers, and sisters. 
(Res. of 7-13-2004, § 1(exh. A)) 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for government service generally, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-48. - Compensation for elected officers. 
The clerk of the superior court, judge of the probate court, sheriff, and tax commissioner shall be compensated pursuant to salary tables set out in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Code 2000, § 3-302) 
State Law reference— Codification in the Georgia Statutes of the salaries for certain county officials, fee system abolished and minimum salary guidelines for sheriffs, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-16-19, 15-16-20; minimum salary guidelines for clerks of superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-88; minimum salary for judge of probate court, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-63; minimum salaries for tax collectors and tax commissioners not compensated by fee system, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183. 
Sec. 2-49. - County officials and employees covered under workers compensation. 
(a)  The board of commissioners, sheriff, probate judge, clerk of court, magistrate judge, tax commissioner, and coroner shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their elected duties, the officers shall be covered under the workers' compensation laws of the state. 
(b)  Volunteer rescue, first responders and volunteer firemen of the county shall be covered under the Association of County Commissioners of Georgia Group Self-Insured Workers' Compensation Fund. While performing their duties, said employees shall be covered under the worker's compensation laws of the state. 
(Code 2000, § 3-303) 
Sec. 2-50. - Safety belt required; exception; violation. 
(a)  All employees of the county, whether operating or riding in a county vehicle or his or her personal vehicle for county business during working hours must wear a safety belt while in the vehicle. 
(b)  The only exception to subsection (a) of this section is as follows: operators of vehicles and machinery which have no safety belts. 
(c)  An employee who fails to wear his or her safety belt will be considered in violation of a safety rule and will be subject to disciplinary action. A repeated violation of this section may subject an offender to dismissal from the work force of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 3-304) 
Sec. 2-51. - Services of building inspector. 
(a)  The county building inspector shall be authorized to conduct building inspections in the unincorporated areas of the county, and all other duties mutually agreed upon by the board of commissioners and the affected incorporated areas. 
(b)  The duties of the county building inspector in the affected incorporated area shall be as enumerated in the contract for services between the board of commissioners and the affected incorporated area or areas. 
(Code 2000, § 3-305) 
Secs. 2-52—2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COURTHOUSE 

Sec. 2-76. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The county courthouse shall be kept open for court and related business Monday through Friday from 8:30 a.m. each of said weekdays until 5:00 p.m. of each of said weekdays except during holidays. 
(b)  Unless otherwise approved by a superior court judge or the chairperson of the county board of commissioners, during all hours exclusively of those stated above, the county courthouse shall be closed to the public and the outside doors thereof kept locked. 
(c)  Unless given permission by the chairperson of the board of commissioners of the county or the sheriff of the county, no person except a worker in an office located in the said courthouse may be present in said courthouse except during the aforesaid mentioned permitted times. The aforesaid courthouse employees may only be permitted to be in said courthouse during the aforesaid prohibited times if they have been given permission by their supervisor. 
(d)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to the general penalty described in section 1-9. Each time such violation is committed shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2000, § 3-501) 
State Law reference— Duty of county governing authority to keep county courthouse open during normal working hours, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-12. 
Sec. 2-77. - Unclaimed money; notification; accounting. 
(a)  All unclaimed money collected by the clerks of court of the county shall be the property of the county for the county's use in its general operating budget. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "unclaimed money" means any money collected by the clerks of court of the county that has not been retrieved by the party to whom it is due within five years of notification by the clerk of court of the existence of the money. 
(b)  The clerk of the court in which the unclaimed money remains shall notify the party to whom money is due by certified mail to the party's last known address on record with the clerk. The five-year time period shall begin on the date that notice is mailed by the clerk. 
(c)  After the expiration of this five-year period, the clerk of court shall deposit all unclaimed money in the name of the county in the county depository, minus any amounts that may be due any officers of the county. At the time of each such deposit in the county depository, the clerk of said court shall make and deliver to the county manager an itemized statement of the sources of said money. 
(Code 2000, § 3-502) 
State Law reference— Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-190 et seq.; intangible property held by a state court or public corporation which remains unclaimed by owner for more than five years after becoming payable is presumed abandoned, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-204. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; county governing authority given power to regulate alcoholic beverages permitting and licensing, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Necessity of regulations. 
In accordance with the laws of the state, it is necessary and expedient for the county to exercise its police powers to establish and promulgate certain standards and regulations in regard to the sale, tax and control of packaged malt beverages and/or wine, as well as the sale for consumption on the premises of malt beverages and/or wine, in the unincorporated areas of the county. The business of manufacturing, distributing, selling, handling, and otherwise dealing in or possessing malt beverages and/or wine, as well as the business of selling malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises, is declared to be a privilege, not a right, and such privilege shall not be exercised in the county except as licensed under the terms of this chapter. This chapter does not permit the sale of distilled spirits by the drink or otherwise for consumption on the premises. Such sale of distilled spirits by the drink or otherwise for consumption on the premises is expressly prohibited. This chapter does not permit the sale of any alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises of the licensee. Licensing shall be solely for the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(1), 32-205(1); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 33-204(1), 32-205(1)) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, liquors, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine. 
Authorized catered function means a function in the unincorporated portions of the county for which an event permit has been issued by the county. 
Bed-and-breakfast means a private residence containing no more than ten rooms which may be set aside for overnight guests whose paid accommodations include some meals. 
Charitable organization means a nonprofit organization created for charitable purposes, which has received and maintained approval from the United States Internal Revenue Service as a bona fide section 501(c)(3) organization. 
Church means a building primarily used for public religious worship on a regular basis. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Food caterer means any person who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
Host means the person who organizes the catered event and who will be responsible, along with the licensed alcohol beverage caterer, for compliance with the rules set forth in this chapter. In the event that the host is an organization rather than an individual, the organization will designate one individual who will be the host for the purposes of this chapter. 
License means the authorization by the board of commissioners to engage in the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine, either in unbroken packages not for consumption on the licensed premises (also referred to hereinafter as a "package license") or for consumption only on the licensed premises (also referred to hereinafter as a "pouring license"). 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer who has been licensed by the state to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to O.C.G.A. ch. 4, title 3, art. 2, O.C.G.A. ch. 5, art. 2, or O.C.G.A. ch. 6, art. 2. 
Licensed location means the place where a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer maintains its principal place of business within the county. 
Licensee means any person who has been issued a license by the board of commissioners to engage in the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages not for consumption on the licensed premises (also referred to hereinafter as a "package licensee") or for consumption only on the licensed premises and not for resale (also referred to hereinafter as a "pouring licensee"). 
Lounge means a separate room where malt beverages and/or wine are served by the drink which is either connected with or part of a restaurant (as defined herein) and operated in conjunction therewith and under the same management as the restaurant operations. Lounges shall not be permitted. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Meal means the delivery and service of food in individual portions or by means of a self-service buffet to individual patrons of a place of business. The service of food to a patron shall not constitute a meal if payment for same is combined with payment of a cover charge or entrance fee or if payment for same is in fact merely ancillary to the service of malt beverages and wine. All meals must be prepared in the place of business for which the license is issued. 
Minor means any person under the age of 21 years, or as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 or by other state laws. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other entity, group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
Place of business means the premises described in the license issued pursuant to this chapter. For the purposes of this chapter, a "place of business" shall consist of one physical building and shall not include any adjacent structures that are not physically attached to the premises by heated and cooled space. Two or more separate, detached structures may not be combined to meet the requirements of this chapter. Outdoor patios or decks which are completely enclosed by a fence or wall and are accessible only through an enclosed building shall be considered as a part of a place of business. 
Premises means the location where the licensee is authorized to sell malt beverages and/or wine. 
Private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the county at least one year immediately prior to the application for a license hereunder, having at least 100 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly or semiannual dues, organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other nonprofit purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any shareholder or member, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the reasonable use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining and using a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals at least five days a week for its members and guests. Such club shall also be an organization which has received and has maintained approval from the United States Internal Revenue Service as a bona fide section 501(c)(3) organization. The building of such club shall be air-conditioned. To qualify as a private club under this chapter, no member or officer, agent or employee of the club may be paid, or directly or indirectly receive, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the club to its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meeting or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. No license shall be issued to any location or maintained at any location that does not have adequate on-premises parking as required by the then applicable parking regulations of the board of commissioners. 
Restaurant means any public or private place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the general public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations. Such place shall be air-conditioned and contain adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity for at least 40 people, and have employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its patrons. At least two distinct and separate meals per day shall be served at least five days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating or renovation. The serving of such meals and food shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of malt beverages and/or wine to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A restaurant shall derive at least 60 percent of its total annual gross food and nonalcoholic beverages sales from the sale of prepared meals or prepared food and shall have food sales in excess of $100,000.00 per year. The term "gross food and nonalcoholic beverage sales" shall not include or be combined with any receipts for cover charges or entrance fees. 
Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
School means a building, publicly or privately owned, which is used for teaching or giving instruction in any subject to pupils of the school. The term "school" shall not mean a private residential dwelling in which a child receives home schooling from a parent or other person. 
Wholesaler means any person who sells malt beverages and/or wine to other wholesale or retail dealers, or licensees. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this chapter. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(2), 32-205(2), 32-205A(1); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(2), 32-205(2), 32-205A(1); Ord. No. 2012-004, § 1, 11-6-2012) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 6-3. - Incorporation of federal and state law and regulations. 
The federal and state statutory laws and/or regulations relating to the sale and/or distribution of alcoholic beverages within the state and the United States of America are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out herein. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(24), 32-205(35); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(24), 32-205(35)) 
Secs. 6-4—6-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE, LICENSEE AND PREMISES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 6-25—6-51. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSEE QUALIFICATIONS 

Sec. 6-52. - Age requirement. 
No package license or pouring license shall be granted to any person or partnership unless the person or all partners or members shall be at least 25 years of age and has/have been a resident of the state for a minimum of one year prior to filing an application for such license. In the event a corporation should be an applicant and said corporation has not been incorporated and/or allowed to do business by the secretary of state for said one-year period, then the incorporator of said corporation and the owners of at least 80 percent of the stock of said corporation shall all have been residents of the state for one year prior to filing an application for such license. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(A), 32-205(5); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(A), 32-205(5)) 
Sec. 6-53. - Sworn statement. 
The applicant shall make a sworn statement of the applicant's qualifications according to the provisions of this chapter and shall place the same on file with the clerk before any license is issued. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(H), 32-205(6)(M); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(H), 32-205(6)(M)) 
Sec. 6-54. - Ineligibility—County officials; county employees; county board members. 
No officials or employees of the county, or member of the board of commissioners shall be eligible to receive a package license or pouring license. However, any private club is not automatically disqualified from receiving a retail consumption pouring license because such club is organized or owned by or operated by one or more members of the board of commissioners and/or employees thereof. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(B), 32-205(6)(B); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(B), 32-205(6)(B)) 
Sec. 6-55. - Same—Prior criminal record. 
No applicant who has a conviction of or has pled nolo contendre within the previous ten years of the date of application to a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall be granted a license if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which a license is being sought in conformity with the laws and regulations of the federal or state governments, or the laws and regulations of the county. No license shall be granted to an applicant who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law for a criminal offense involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or tax law violations if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which a license is being sought in conformity with the laws and regulations of the federal or state governments, or the laws and regulations of the county. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(F), 32-205(30); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(F), 32-205(30)) 
Sec. 6-56. - Same—Previous denial. 
Any applicant denied a license shall be prohibited from applying for another license for a period of one year from the filing date set forth on the application. Any partnership, company, corporation, trust or other entity in which an individual applicant is a member, shareholder, director or officer, or in which such entity acts as a surrogate for such applicant, shall also be subject to the prohibition contained in this section. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(O), 32-205(6)(K); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(O), 32-205(6)(K)) 
Sec. 6-57. - Corporate and partnership applicants. 
(a)  If the applicant is a partnership or limited liability company, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications. 
(b)  If the applicant is a corporation, the manager of the proposed licensed premises must be qualified to obtain a license and must make a sworn statement of these qualifications. A corporate license applicant shall appoint and designate to the board of commissioners an agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of the state. If no such designation is made, the board may serve or notify the applicant or license holder at any address of the applicant or license holder known to the board. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(I), (J), 32-205(6)(N), (O); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(I), (J), 32-205(6)(N)) 
Sec. 6-58. - Adequate participation. 
A license may be denied to any applicant where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(K), 32-205(6)(F); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(K), 32-205(6)(F)) 
Secs. 6-59—6-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSE APPLICATION 

Sec. 6-90. - Guidelines. 
Application for a license shall be made on forms furnished by the board of commissioners according to the following guidelines: 
(1)  All license applications shall be presented in person to the clerk. 
(2)  In addition to the completion and submission of an application form as required by the board, each applicant shall attach thereto a completed form with all attachments and requirements for a state license. 
(3)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints to be forwarded to the state bureau of investigation, which shall search the files of the state crime information center for any instance of criminal activity during the two years immediately preceding the date of the application. The state bureau of investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the board. 
(4)  All licenses shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and no such license may be renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next calendar year must make a new application for such year to the clerk prior to November 15 of the present year. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(5); 32-205(4); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(5), 32-205(4)) 
Secs. 6-91—6-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PREMISES 

Sec. 6-109. - Separate license. 
(a)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business, as defined herein. 
(b)  In addition, each pouring license granted will enable the licensee to sell the malt beverages and wine for consumption only in the areas of the premises allowed by state statutory laws and regulations. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(D), 32-205(8); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(D), 32-205(8)) 
Sec. 6-110. - Diagram of building. 
(a)  No license shall be issued to any person making a first-time application for a particular location unless complete and detailed diagrams of the building in which the business will be located and the outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. If a person is making application for a renewal license for a location for which a license was granted for the previous year, such person shall sign an affidavit, under oath, in lieu of submitting the aforesaid plans and specifications, that there has been no change in the plans of said building. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with all ordinances of the board of commissioners, rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the statutory laws of the state. Upon completion, the proposed building shall be subject to final inspection and approval by the building inspector. 
(b)  Each applicant for a license shall attach to his or her application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building, or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. 
(c)  Licensees shall provide on the premises for which the license is issued adequate sanitary toilet facilities as required by the health and building codes, and the building shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by customers therein. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(E), 32-205(9); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(E), 32-205(9)) 
Sec. 6-111. - Distance requirements. 
No license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 100 yards from the property line of any church and not less than 200 yards from any schoolyard or college campus, and not less than 100 yards from any building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center. The distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. Each first-time application for a package or pouring malt beverage and wine license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church, school, and alcohol rehabilitation center and a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this section. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(C), 32-205(10); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(C), 32-205(10)) 
Sec. 6-112. - Inspections. 
The business premises of the licensee shall be made available for inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(15), 32-205(20); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(15), 32-205(20)) 
Sec. 6-113. - Days of operation. 
No licensee shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any malt beverages and/or wine under this chapter at any of the following times: 
(1)  At any time on Christmas Day; or 
(2)  At any time in violation of a state statutory law, state rules or regulations, local ordinance or regulations. 
Licensees holding a license for sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption off premises ("package sales") may sell such beverages on Sundays in compliance with all other applicable state laws. However, sales for consumption on premises ("pouring sales") and sales by alcoholic beverage caterers are prohibited on Sundays. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(7)(b)(ii—iv), 32-205(11); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(7)(b)(ii—iv), 32-205(11); Ord. No. 2012-003, § 1(exh. A), 10-2-2012) 
Sec. 6-114. - Gambling. 
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch boards, vending machines, slot machines, pinball machines, lotteries, or tickets of chance therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any licensee's place of business or any room adjoining the same, owned, leased, or controlled by the licensee; provided, however, that the sale of state lottery tickets in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-1 et seq., shall be permitted. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(16), 32-205(23); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(16), 32-205(23)) 
Secs. 6-115—6-141. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DENIAL OF LICENSE 

Sec. 6-142. - Grounds. 
(a)  The board of commissioners, in its discretion, may consider any and all relevant and extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If, in the judgment of the board of commissioners, circumstances are such that the granting, suspension or revocation of the license would or would not be in the best interest of the general public, then such circumstances may be grounds for the denial of the application. 
(b)  Any misstatement, false statement, or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for the denial of the application for license issuance or revocation of the license issued and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(L), (M), 32-205(6)(G), (22); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(L), (M), 32-205(6)(G), (22)) 
Sec. 6-143. - Notice of denial. 
The board of commissioners shall give notice in writing to the applicant of any decision to grant or deny an application. The notice shall give the reason for the decision. Notice shall be given by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(6)(I); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(6)(I)) 
Sec. 6-144. - Denial hearing. 
(a)  Whenever the board of commissioners shall deny an application for a package license or pouring license, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of receipt of such notice of the denial to request a hearing before the board. If a hearing is requested, the following information shall be given to the applicant, in writing, by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing date: 
(1)  The date, time and location of the hearing, said hearing date not to be more than 20 days from the date of said written notice; 
(2)  A written statement of the reason for the proposed denial of the application; 
(3)  A list of witnesses, if any, the board of commissioners expects to testify or offer evidence in favor of the denial of the application; and 
(4)  Notice of the applicant's right to attend the hearing, to present evidence and testimony, to assert any defense of the application, to confront and cross examine anyone who would testify in favor of denial of application and to have an attorney present to represent the applicant. 
(b)  Any decision denying an application shall set forth the reason for such action in writing, which shall be delivered by regular mail to the applicant's address set forth in the application. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(N), 32-205(6)(J); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(N), 32-205(6)(J); Ord. of 4-1-2008(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 6-145—6-171. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSE 

Sec. 6-172. - Transferability. 
(a)  Except as otherwise stated in this section, no package or pouring license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location, and in the event that a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender said license to the board of commissioners. Under no circumstances will the license fee be refunded to the holder. 
(b)  All holders of licenses issued under this section shall, within six months after the issuance of such license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within such period shall serve as a forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license and no refund of the license fee shall be made to the license holder. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(13), 32-205(7); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(13), 32-205(7)) 
Secs. 6-173—6-197. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - DUTIES OF LICENSEE 

Sec. 6-198. - Management and operation. 
The licensee shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted and shall be responsible for all violations of this chapter by the licensee's agents and employees. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(4)(G), 32-205(6)(L); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(4)(G), 32-205(6)(L)) 
Sec. 6-199. - Purchase of malt beverages and wine. 
No licensee shall buy or arrange to buy or in any way cause the transfer of any malt beverages and/or wine except from a licensed wholesaler. A licensee under this chapter shall take delivery only at the licensed place of business from a licensed wholesaler or licensed common carrier acting for a licensed wholesaler. A licensee shall comply with all other requirements, including, without limitation, those set forth at Chapters 560-2 (Ga. Comp Rules and Regs. 560-2-1 et seq., Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division) and 560-8 (Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. 560-8-1 et seq., Alcohol and Tobacco Tax Division—Malt Beverages, Wine, Tobacco) of the Georgia Administrative Code, as well as the rules and regulations of the state department of revenue. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(7)(D), 32-204(31), 32-205(44), 32-205(46); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(7)(D), 32-204(31), 32-205(44), 32-205(46)) 
Sec. 6-200. - Inventory of malt beverage and wine. 
A licensee shall keep no inventory or stock of malt beverages and/or wine at any place except the licensed place of business, and within the licensed place of business the storage area for malt beverages and/or wine shall be immediately adjacent to and attached to the retail area or area of consumption. No licensee shall enter into any type of arrangement whereby malt beverages and/or wine ordered by the licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(7)(E), (33), 32-205(45); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(7)(E), (33), 32-205(45)) 
Sec. 6-201. - Display of license. 
A license issued under this chapter shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which it was issued. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(8), 32-205(25); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(8), 32-205(25)) 
Sec. 6-202. - Condition of premises. 
(a)  All premises used for the sale and/or consumption of malt beverages and/or wine, and/or for the storage of malt beverages and/or wine, shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the regulations of the county health department. 
(b)  All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by the health department, all county fire departments, the building inspector, and all authorized law or code enforcement officers to determine if the premises are in compliance with all county, state and federal rules, regulations, laws and codes. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(23), 32-205(33); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(23), 32-205(33)) 
Sec. 6-203. - Telephone. 
A licensee shall maintain on the premises at all times a telephone in good working order. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(7)(F), 32-205(34); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(7)(F), 32-205(34)) 
Sec. 6-204. - Violent or disorderly history. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any person with a criminal record for violence or disorder to frequent the licensed premises or loiter on the premises. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(7)(G), 32-205(27); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(7)(G), 32-205(27)) 
Sec. 6-205. - Prostitution. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any person to frequent the licensed premises for the purpose of soliciting prostitution. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(7)(H), 32-205(28); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(7)(H), 32-205(28)) 
Sec. 6-206. - Police reports. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to report to the police at the earliest possible time any known incident of a criminal nature that occur on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to willfully withhold from the police any information pertaining to any crime that may have occurred on the licensed premises. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(7)(I), 32-205(29); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(7)(I), 32-205(29)) 
Sec. 6-207. - Criminal acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any criminal act to be committed on the licensed premises. 
(Code 2000, § 32-204(7)(J); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-204(7)(J)) 
Sec. 6-208. - Compliance with laws. 
In addition to the rules and regulations set out in this chapter, each licensee under this chapter shall comply with all statutory laws of the state, all federal statutory laws, and all rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the sale and distribution of malt beverages and/or wine in the state; and any violation of same shall subject said licensee to suspension or revocation of his or her license and also may subject said licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by law and the ordinances of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 32-204(17); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-204(17)) 
Sec. 6-209. - Production of records. 
In conjunction with any license application or any license issued under the terms hereof, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license or in conjunction with any of the hearings contemplated by this chapter, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected hereunder, the board of commissioners shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of any applicant or licensee. Said subpoena right shall be had for the purposes of auditing the records of such applicant or licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this chapter, proving or disproving violation of any part of this chapter by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(22), 32-205(21); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(22), 32-205(21)) 
Sec. 6-210. - Copy of chapter. 
All licensees shall keep a copy of this chapter on the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there about compliance with the terms hereof. Each licensee and the licensee's agents selling packaged malt beverages and/or wine, or selling for consumption on the premises malt beverages and/or wine, shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of the licensee's agents and employees which are in violation of this chapter, the statutory laws of the state, and/or the rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(26), 32-205(19); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(26), 32-205(19)) 
Sec. 6-211. - Posting of warnings. 
The licensee shall post in a conspicuous place in his or her establishment a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "SALE OF BEER AND WINE TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE STRICTLY PROHIBITED." The licensee shall also post in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "WARNING: DRINKING BEER AND WINE DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS." 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(27), 32-205(13); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(27), 32-205(13); Ord. No. 2012-003, § 1(exh. A), 10-2-2012) 
Sec. 6-212. - Prohibited sales. 
No licensee nor any agent or employee of a licensee shall furnish, sell or offer to sell any malt beverage and/or wine to any person who is confined in any jail, penal institution, correctional facility, prison camp, penitentiary or other lawful place of confinement, or to any person who is a patient or inmate of the Central State Hospital, or to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or is of unsound mind, or is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee or the agent or employee. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(28), 32-205(14); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(28), 32-205(14)) 
Sec. 6-213. - Lock and key. 
All malt beverages and/or wine shall be under lock or fully covered by opaque material during those hours when their sale is not permitted except in the event of an emergency or under the direction of a law enforcement official, county official or his or her designate. All malt beverages and/or wine owned or possessed contrary to the provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be contraband and shall be seized by the proper authorities. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(29), 32-205(40); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(29), 32-205(40)) 
Sec. 6-214. - Containers. 
It shall be unlawful for licensees or their agents or employees to add to the contents of a container or to refill empty containers or in any manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any malt beverage and/or wine. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(30), 32-205(32); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(30), 32-205(32)) 
Secs. 6-215—6-236. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 6-237. - Employee list; employment requirements. 
(a)  Every licensee under this chapter shall maintain at all times on the premises for which the license has been issued a list of all persons currently employed by such licensee at such premises, which list shall show the current full legal name, alias, date of birth, current address, current home telephone number and social security number of each employee. 
(b)  The employee list shall be available during reasonable hours for inspection by any law enforcement officer or county official or his or her designee. If so required by such person, an employee must submit to a fingerprint identification and criminal history check. Every licensee shall cause each of the licensee's employees during the hours of his or her employment to be identified by a conspicuous label or badge upon which shall appear the employee's first name. 
(c)  No person under 21 years of age shall be employed in any capacity in any place of business licensed under this section. No holder of a pouring license shall employ, require or permit a person under 21 years of age to sell or take orders for malt beverages and/or wine. However, persons under 21 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries and drugstores that are licensed to engage in the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages and not for consumption on the premises may sell or handle malt beverages and/or wine which are sold pursuant to and in compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ on the premises any person who, in the preceding ten years, has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the state or who has been convicted of a crime outside the state which would be a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the state. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(25), 32-205(36); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(25), 32-205(36)) 
Secs. 6-238—6-267. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - MINORS 

Sec. 6-268. - Sale or possession of malt beverages and/or wine prohibited; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to attempt to purchase malt beverages and/or wine or for any other person to purchase malt beverages and/or wine for a minor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit fake, forged, or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain malt beverages and/or wine to which the minor is not legally entitled. 
(c)  No person engaged in the business regulated hereunder shall make or permit to be made any sale of malt beverages and/or wine to minors. 
(d)  No person shall allow anyone under 21 years of age to loiter about the premises of the licensee or possess any alcoholic beverage. This provision shall not apply to employees over the age of 18 years eligible for subject employment under the laws of the state. 
(e)  Any violations of the provisions of this division shall constitute a misdemeanor and the offender, upon being found guilty, shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor, and by possible loss of license and fine. 
(f)  The prohibition contained in this subsection shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of malt beverages and/or wine for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in the state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; or 
(3)  In the minor's home with parental consent. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(18), 32-205(31); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(18), 32-205(31)) 
Secs. 6-269—6-299. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - VIOLATION AND DUE PROCESS 

Sec. 6-300. - Violations. 
(a)  Any violation of one or more provisions of this chapter shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-9, and shall be tried in the magistrate court as set forth in section 1-10. 
(b)  In addition to any punishment for violating this chapter, any such violation may subject a licensee to the revocation or suspension of his or her license, as set forth in sections 6-301 and 6-302. 
(1)  Any revocation or suspension based upon a violation of this chapter will subject the licensee to a reinstatement fee between $500.00 and $1,000.00, to be determined in the discretion of the board. 
a.  This reinstatement fee is non-refundable and must be paid prior to the reinstatement of any license issued under this chapter. 
b.  No new license shall be issued to a licensee whose previous license was revoked or suspended until the reinstatement fee is paid. 
c.  Payment of the non-refundable reinstatement fee does not guarantee the reinstatement or issuance of a license, but is instead a condition precedent to the consideration of reinstatement or issuance by the board. 
(2)  In addition to any other punishments or civil penalties set forth herein, any revocation or suspension based upon a violation of this chapter, may subject a licensee to the forfeiture of all stock of malt beverages and wine. 
(3)  The following suspension and revocation guidelines apply to a licensee who violates this chapter by selling or allowing the sale at his or her establishment of beer and/or wine to an ineligible individual under this chapter (including but not limited to a minor), sells during hours and/or days on which sales of beer and/or wine are prohibited under this chapter, and/or sells without a valid license, whether suspended, revoked, or not yet issued: 
a.  For a first offense within the previous five years, a 30-day suspension of his or her license and a reinstatement fee of $500.00. 
b.  For a second or subsequent offense within five years of a first offense, the revocation of his or her license for the remainder of the year, a reinstatement fee of $1,000.00, and forfeiture of all stock in malt beverages and wine. 
c.  These guidelines in subsections i. and ii. above are those a licensee can expect to receive as a minimum, although the board will make the final decision in each instance and has the right to impose differing suspensions, revocations, and reinstatement fees. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(19), 32-205(47); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(19), 32-205(47); Ord. of 4-1-2008(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 6-301. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the package sale of malt beverages and/or wine, or the sale of the same for consumption on the premises, in the unincorporated areas of the county without first complying with the rules and requirements set out in this chapter. Any license issued hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The making of any false statement on an application for a license issued hereunder; 
(2)  A violation of the rules and regulations set out in this section and/or the laws and/or regulations of the United States and/or the state and/or the county; 
(3)  The failure to have the financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned; 
(4)  Default in any obligation, of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the county; 
(5)  Cancellation, suspension or revocation of a state malt beverage and/or wine license; 
(6)  Any violation of this section; or 
(7)  For any other legal and sufficient cause. 
(b)  In addition to the above-listed grounds for suspension or revocation, any pouring license issued hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation for a failure to meet the food/alcohol percentage requirement set forth in the definition of restaurant in section 6-2 in any one calendar quarter. 
(c)  Any action taken by the board of commissioners to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder shall not preclude and may be in addition to any fines and prosecution by a proper authority as provided by the laws and/or ordinances of the county, the state, and/or the United States and forfeiture of all stock of malt beverage and wine. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(20), 32-205(42); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(20), 32-205(42)) 
Sec. 6-302. - Due process. 
(a)  Whenever the board of commissioners wishes to take any action to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder, the board shall provide ten days' written notice, by personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee prior to taking such action. The notice shall set forth the reasons for such action. The licensee shall have ten days from the date of receipt of such notification of such action (as set forth on the aforesaid receipt) to request a hearing before the board. Said notification shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the board by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  If a hearing is requested, the following information shall be given to the licensee, in writing, by regular mail to the licensee's last known address, at least ten days prior to the hearing date: 
(1)  A written copy of all charges or reasons for the proposed suspension or revocation; 
(2)  The date, time and location of the hearing, said hearing date to be not more than 20 days from the date of said written notice; 
(3)  A list of witnesses, if any, the board expects to testify or offer evidence in favor of the suspension or revocation; and 
(4)  Notice of the licensee's right to attend the hearing, to present evidence and testimony, to assert any defense, to confront and cross examine opposing witnesses, and to have an attorney present to represent the licensee. 
(c)  All decisions suspending or revoking a license shall set forth the reason for such action in writing, and shall be delivered to the licensee at his or her last known address by regular mail. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-204(21), 32-205(43); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-204(21), 32-205(43); Ord. of 4-1-2008(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 6-303—6-322. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PACKAGE SALE OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 et seq., 3-5-80 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of wine, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-40 et seq., 3-6-60 et seq. 

Sec. 6-323. - Off-premises consumption. 
Malt beverages and/or wine sold pursuant to a package license granted under this chapter will be for consumption only off the premises of the licensee. 
(Code 2000, § 32-204(3); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-204(3)) 
Sec. 6-324. - Bond requirement. 
Before any package license is granted, the applicant must post with the board of commissioners, along with the application, a cash bond or performance bond with an insurance company as surety. Said bond shall require the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this section. Upon the violation of this section, or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violation as determined by the board. Said bond is to be approved by the board and shall be properly executed. Said bond shall be in the amount of $2,500.00 for a wholesale permit and $500.00 for a retail license. 
(Code 2000, § 32-204(5)(d); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-204(5)(d)) 
Sec. 6-325. - Annual license fee. 
The annual fee for a license shall be $500.00 per annum and shall be paid after acceptance and approval of the application by the board of commissioners, but prior to the issuance of such license. The fee shall be paid either in cash or by bank certified check. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which they were granted. No license fee shall be prorated. 
(Code 2000, § 32-204(6); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-204(6)) 
Sec. 6-326. - Regulations. 
(a)  No licensee shall sell or deliver any malt beverages and/or wine to any person except in the licensee's place of business. A licensee shall be permitted to load purchased goods in a customer's vehicle when the sale physically takes place and monies have been exchanged inside the place of business. A licensee may have a drive-in window and may deliver packaged malt beverages and/or wine through such window. Said drive-in window must be visible from the nearest street. "Curb service" type sales and sales to customers in vehicles parked in the parking area of the place of business are prohibited. 
(b)  No licensee shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any malt beverages and/or wine at any times except: 
(1)  Between 6:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on Mondays through Saturday; and 
(2)  Between 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sundays. 
(c)  No person shall sell or possess for the purpose of sale, any malt beverages and/or wine where such person does not have a license from the board of commissioners to sell or possess for sale such beverages and/or wine. 
(Code 2000, § 32-204(7), (32); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-204(7), (32); Ord. No. 2012-003, § 1(exh. A), 10-2-2012) 
Sec. 6-327. - Location and relocation. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49, no license shall be granted to any person authorizing the location of a new retail package liquor licensed place of business or the relocation of an existing retail package liquor licensed place of business engaged in the retail package sales of distilled spirits within 500 yards of any other business licensed to sell package liquor at retail, as measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(Code 2000, § 32-204(4)(C); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-204(4)(C)) 
Sec. 6-328. - Wholesale permits. 
Any wholesale distributor in malt beverages and wine licensed by the state or the agent of such licensed wholesale distributor may be granted a permit to distribute such malt beverages and wine in the county, upon application for such permit to the clerk, and upon the presentation of evidence satisfactory to said county that the applicant understands and will comply with all terms and conditions and provisions of the chapter governing the package sale of malt beverages and wine in the county, as said chapter may be amended, including, but not limited to, those under which malt beverages and wine licenses are issued, and upon payment of an annual fee of $100.00 for malt beverage wholesale distributors pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-43, a fee of $500.00 for wine wholesale distributors and a fee of $600.00 for wholesale distributors of both beer and wine; provided, however, that malt beverage wholesale distributors who have their principal place of business in the county shall pay an annual fee of $2,500.00. 
(Code 2000, § 32-204(9); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-204(9)) 
Sec. 6-329. - Malt beverage taxes; distributor reports. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80 and O.C.G.A. § 3-5-81, there is hereby levied upon wholesale malt beverages distributors a tax on malt beverages as follows: 
(1)  Malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, shall be at a rate of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15 1/2 gallons, and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15 1/2 gallons. 
(2)  When malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the board of commissioners a report itemizing all purchase invoices for malt beverages sold to each licensee in the county, on or before the tenth day of the month following such purchase. Said invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Code 2000, § 32-204(10); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-204(10)) 
Sec. 6-330. - Wine taxes; exemptions; reports. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60, there is hereby levied on the first sale or use of wine by the package a tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the time rate on all fractional parts of a liter. Each month the first purchaser or user shall furnish to the board of commissioners a report itemizing each first purchase or use during the month. The report shall be furnished before the tenth day of the month following the month reported. The report shall show the amount of excise tax paid during the reported month. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-70 and O.C.G.A. § 3-6-71, no tax shall be levied by the board with respect to: 
(1)  Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only; 
(2)  Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state or under the Constitution of the United States; 
(3)  Wine sold to persons outside this state for resale or consumption outside this state; or 
(4)  Wines which contain less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
(Code 2000, § 32-204(11); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-204(11)) 
Sec. 6-331. - Financial responsibility. 
Any applicant for a license must show financial responsibility to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners. Financial statements must be submitted with each completed application as prescribed by the board. Any applicant who becomes licensed must maintain a minimum of $1,000.00 stock of goods while said license is held by said licensee. The stock shall be subject to inventory audit at the discretion of the board. 
(Code 2000, § 32-204(12); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-204(12)) 
Sec. 6-332. - Transportation. 
(a)  All malt beverages transported or delivered to a licensee shall be packaged in the following manner, to-wit: seven-ounce, eight-ounce or 12-ounce sealed containers packaged four, six or 12 per package; 16-ounce sealed containers packaged six per package; 24-ounce sealed containers packaged only by the full case; 32-ounce sealed containers packaged only by the case; and draft beer in sealed containers which contain one-half barrel (15 1/2 gallons), one-quarter barrel (7 3/4 gallons) or any other size as draft beer is normally sold, transported and delivered in sealed containers within the state. 
(b)  All wine transported or delivered to a licensee shall be packaged in containers specified in the Standards of Fill for Wine prescribed by the Department of the Treasury of the United States for wines shipped in interstate commerce. The federal regulations relating to Standards of Fill for Wine are adopted and incorporated by reference into this subsection. Wines manufactured and produced in the state shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection to the extent that they are exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-6-28, as amended from time to time. 
(Code 2000, § 32-204(14); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-204(14)) 
Secs. 6-333—6-352. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALE OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-5-40 et seq., 3-5-80 et seq.; governing authority of county has power to locally regulate, license, and tax the manufacturing, distribution and selling of wine, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-40 et seq., 3-6-60 et seq.; local government may authorize issuance license to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on premises where sold, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-90 et seq. 

Sec. 6-353. - Unlawful sales without license. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises without first complying with the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter. It shall be unlawful in any case for any person to sell or offer to sell any malt beverage and/or wine for consumption on the premises without first complying with this chapter. It shall be unlawful in any case for any person to sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  A bed-and-breakfast may serve wine and/or malt beverages to its overnight guests without a license under this chapter so long as: 
(1)  The cost of the guests' lodging and meals exceeds the cost of alcohol provided; and 
(2)  No alcohol is provided to guests not staying at the bed-and-breakfast. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(3); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(3)) 
State Law reference— Unlawful to knowingly or intentionally allow drinking of contents of alcoholic beverage on premises where sold without a license for consumption on the premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 
Sec. 6-354. - Bond requirement. 
Before any pouring license is granted, the applicant must post with the board of commissioners, along with the application, a cash bond or performance bond with an insurance company as surety. Said bond shall require the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this article. Upon the violation of this article, or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violation as determined by the board. Said bond is to be approved by the board and shall be properly executed. Said bond shall be in the amount of $1,000.00 for a pouring license. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(4)(D); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(4)(D)) 
Sec. 6-355. - Additional application requirements. 
(a)  No malt beverages and/or wine shall be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises except under a pouring license granted by the board of commissioners. Application for such license may be made only on behalf of restaurants and private clubs located within the unincorporated areas of the county, and shall be made on forms provided by the board. 
(b)  Any application for a pouring license hereunder for a private club shall contain certified copies of all documents necessary for the board to ascertain that the applicant meets the requirements of a private club as defined in this chapter. 
(c)  All applications for pouring licenses submitted by applicants who are operating a place of business under a preexisting license issued pursuant to this article shall be approved or disapproved at the regularly called December meeting of the board. 
(d)  All applicants for a pouring license must show financial responsibility. The board may require all applicants to provide financial statements and other evidence of financial responsibility in conjunction with the application. The form of the application shall be set by the board, and must be fully completed by the applicant and filed by the applicant with the clerk of the board. 
(e)  All pouring license applicants must be persons operating at the proposed licensed place of business a "restaurant" or "private club" as defined in this chapter. No lounges shall be permitted. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-205(4), (6); Ord. of 11-2-2004, §§ 32-205(4), (6)) 
Sec. 6-356. - Reports. 
(a)  Each licensee under this section shall, as a condition of maintaining such license, file with the clerk within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter: 
(1)  A sworn statement of the licensee's sales during the preceding calendar quarter on forms approved by the county. The forms for such quarterly verified statements shall reflect the licensee's gross dollar sales amount for total sales for the applicable calendar quarter, the gross dollar sales amount for malt beverages and wine for the applicable calendar quarter, and gross dollar sales amount for food items for the applicable calendar quarter. 
(2)  Certified copies of the licensee's state department of revenue sales and use tax monthly reports as filed with the state department of revenue for each month during the respective calendar quarter. 
(b)  Any sale of a food or beverage containing any malt beverage and/or wine shall be deemed to be a sale solely of a malt beverage and/or wine, and such sale shall not be included as a food sale in the quarterly reports. The fact that the sale of food during any calendar quarter exceeds by three times the sales of malt beverages and/or wine shall not be conclusive that the licensee is meeting the requirements of operating a restaurant as defined in this chapter. However, the failure of the food sales to so exceed by three times the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be prima facie evidence that the establishment is not meeting the definition of a restaurant. 
(c)  The quarterly statements shall be confidential in nature and shall not be open for public inspection except as otherwise required by law. Said forms shall be used solely by the county manager for determination of whether or not the licensee remains qualified to hold a pouring license. Failure to timely file such statements shall be a violation of this article punishable by a fine of up to $500.00, and cause for suspension or revocation of the license granted under this article. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(12); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(12)) 
Sec. 6-357. - On-premises consumption. 
No licensee may sell malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(16); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(16)) 
Sec. 6-358. - Annual license fees. 
The annual fee for a malt beverage and wine pouring license shall be $1,000.00 per annum per requested license and shall be paid after acceptance and approval of the application by the board of commissioners but prior to the issuance of such license. The fee shall be paid either in cash or by bank certified check. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which they were granted. No license fee shall be prorated. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(17); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(17)) 
Sec. 6-359. - Malt beverage taxes. 
(a)  Where malt beverages are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container as tap or draft beer, there is levied a state excise tax on malt beverages of $10.00 on each container sold containing not more than 31 gallons, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 31 gallons. 
(b)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers other than barrels or other bulk containers, a state excise tax of $0.045 per 12 ounces shall be collected, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts shall be collected. 
(c)  There is levied a state excise tax on all such beverages in excess of 576 ounces or two standard cases of 12-ounce size or the equivalent thereof or one 7.75-gallon keg or barrel of such beverages, said tax being levied at the rate of taxation of $0.045 per 12 ounces. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall impose an excise tax, in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more that 15 1/2 gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15 1/2 gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any malt beverages on which such taxes have not been paid. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(18)(A); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(18)(A)) 
Sec. 6-360. - Wine taxes. 
(a)  There is levied and imposed on the first sale, use or final delivery within this state of all table wines a state excise tax in the amount of $0.11 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  There is imposed upon the importation for use, consumption, or final delivery into this state of all table wines a state import tax in the amount of $0.29 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(c)  There is levied and imposed on the first sale, use or final delivery within this state of all dessert wines a state excise tax in the amount of $0.27 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  There is imposed upon the importation for use, consumption, or final delivery into this state of all dessert wines a state import tax in the amount of $0.40 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(e)  There is hereby levied by the board of commissioners an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine by the package at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate for any fractional parts of a liter. 
(f)  The taxes imposed on wine shall not be levied on any wine sold to established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only, or for any wine exempt from taxation under the Constitution of the United States, or for any wine sold to persons for resale or consumption outside this state. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any wine on which such taxes have not been paid. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(18)(B); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(18)(B)) 
Sec. 6-361. - Soliciting. 
No retail licensee shall require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guests of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any malt beverage and/or wine, or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his or her establishment or to his or her agent or manager to solicit for himself or herself or for others, the purchase by the patron of malt beverage and/or wine. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(25); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(25)) 
Sec. 6-362. - Delivery. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to make delivery of any malt beverage and/or wine except inside of the premises or area licensed for the sale thereof. It shall be unlawful for any such licensee to sell malt beverages and/or wine for consumption off the premises. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(26); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(26)) 
Sec. 6-363. - Promotions. 
No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of malt beverages and/or wine: 
(1)  The giving away of any ticket, token or any other item that can be exchanged for any malt beverage and/or wine upon the purchase of any other malt beverage and/or wine; 
(2)  The sale of two or more malt beverages and/or wine for a single price, or the sale of one serving of malt beverage and/or wine with a ticket, token or any other items redeemable for a subsequent serving of malt beverage and/or wine. Also prohibited hereunder is the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(37); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(37)) 
Sec. 6-364. - Prohibited acts. 
No licensee shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring onto the premises one or more alcoholic beverages purchased elsewhere, nor shall any such licensee authorize or permit any patron or customer to take out of the premises one or more alcoholic beverages. No licensee shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring or carry any deadly weapon or firearm on the premises except a law enforcement officer or other person authorized by federal or state law to bring or carry any deadly weapon or firearm on the premises, nor shall the licensee act as a keeper, bailee or custodian of any kind of deadly weapon or firearm for any customer or patron. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(38); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(38)) 
Sec. 6-365. - Clearing service areas. 
All licensees shall remove or cause to be removed from the area of the premises utilized by the customers or patrons all malt beverages and/or wine within one-half hour after the time for last call specified in section 6-366. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(39); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(39)) 
Sec. 6-366. - Hours. 
No malt beverage and/or wine may be served before 8:00 a.m. or after 11:45 p.m., Mondays through Saturdays. Malt beverages and beer may not be served on Sundays. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205(41); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205(41); Ord. No. 2012-003, § 1(exh. A), 10-2-2012) 
Secs. 6-367—6-390. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CATERING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local government has authority to issue an off-premises license allowing alcoholic beverage caterer to sell malt beverages or wine by the drink off premises and in connection with an authorized catered function, O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-391. - Off-premises alcoholic beverage catering license. 
(a)  Any licensed alcoholic beverage caterer who holds a valid license from the county to sell: 
(1)  At a fixed location within the county, malt beverages or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises; or 
(2)  By the package for consumption off the premises; 
may be issued an off-premises license which authorizes such licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute malt beverages and/or wine at an authorized catered function. 
(b)  Application for an off-premises license as provided herein shall be made to the county clerk upon forms to be prepared and approved by the board of commissioners. Applications will be decided according to the same rules and guidelines set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  The annual fee for an alcoholic beverage caterer's license shall be $100.00 annually for each licensed location. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205A(2); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205A(2)) 
Sec. 6-392. - Event permits. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage caterer licensed by the county. In order to distribute malt beverages and/or wine at an authorized catered function, an alcoholic beverage caterer licensed by the county shall be required to: 
(1)  Apply for an event permit. The application shall include: 
a.  The name of the alcoholic beverage caterer, including the name of the specific representative of the caterer who will be responsible for, and present at, the catered function; 
b.  The date of the event; 
c.  The address of the event; 
d.  The time of the event; 
e.  The licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's license number; and 
f.  The name, address and phone number of the host of the catered function. 
No event permit fee shall be charged. 
(2)  Provide satisfactory reports to the state revenue commissioner on forms provided by that department, stating the quantity of any and all alcoholic beverages transported from the licensee's primary premises to the location of the authorized catered function and such other information as required by the commissioner. 
(3)  Maintain original local event permits and documents required by the state revenue department in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered function at all times. 
(4)  Comply with all laws and ordinances regulating the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages, and no permit will be issued to any alcohol beverage caterer on probation or with a suspended license. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverage caterer licensed by other jurisdictions. In order to distribute malt beverages and/or wine at an authorized catered function, an alcoholic beverage caterer licensed by a subdivision of the state other than the county shall be required to: 
(1)  Apply for an event permit. The application shall include: 
a.  The name of the alcoholic beverage caterer, including the name of the specific representative of the caterer who will be responsible for, and present at, the catered function; 
b.  The date of the event; 
c.  The address of the event; 
d.  The time of the event; 
e.  The jurisdiction issuing the alcoholic beverage caterer's license; 
f.  The licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's license number; 
g.  A photocopy of the alcoholic beverage caterer's license; and 
h.  The name, address and phone number of the host of the catered function. 
(2)  Pay an event permit fee of $10.00; 
(3)  Pay local excise taxes that will be levied on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the county by the caterer, as calculated under this article, within 15 days of the conclusion of the catered event; 
(4)  Provide satisfactory reports to the state revenue commissioner on forms provided by that department, stating the quantity of any and all alcoholic beverages transported from the licensee's primary premises to the location of the authorized catered function and such other information as required by the commissioner; and 
(5)  Maintain original local event permits and documents required by the revenue department in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered function at all times. 
(c)  Charitable organizations. 
(1)  Charitable organizations, as defined in this chapter, may serve malt beverages and/or wine at authorized catered functions without an alcoholic beverage catering license, so long as the qualified charitable organizations apply for an event permit. The application shall include: 
a.  The name of the charitable organization; 
b.  The name of the caterer; 
c.  The date of the event; 
d.  The address of the event; 
e.  The time of the event; and 
f.  The name, address and phone number of the host of the catered function. 
(2)  A charitable organization serving alcoholic beverages under this subsection is limited to 12 event permits per calendar year. 
(d)  Issuance of event permits. The issuance of event permits is an administrative function of the county, and the county is permitted under this article to request additional information from the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer and/or host of the catered event in deciding whether to issue an event permit. However, no event permit will be issued: 
(1)  Where the requirements set forth under subsection (a), (b) or (c) of this section have not been met; 
(2)  Where the host or the alcoholic beverage caterer has violated any of the prohibitions set forth in section 6-393; or 
(3)  To licensed alcoholic beverage caterers, where the total cost of alcohol at a catered event will exceed the total cost of food at an event. This subsection does not apply to qualified charitable organizations. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205A(3); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205A(3)) 
Sec. 6-393. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a food caterer to distribute or sell malt beverages and/or wine off the premises of the food caterer's business without a license issued pursuant to this section. This subsection shall not affect any other provisions of this chapter which may require a food caterer who has a license to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises of the food caterer's business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer licensed under this article to distribute malt beverages and/or wine off premises except in connection with an authorized catered function within the scope of the event permit for that function. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for anyone, including licensed alcoholic beverage caterers, to distribute distilled spirits in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute malt beverages and/or wine during any of the following times: 
(1)  At any time on Sundays; 
(2)  At any time on Christmas Day; or 
(3)  At any time in violation of state law, state rules or regulations, local ordinances or regulations. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to employ any person under 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. It is the intent of this subsection to prevent any person employed by such caterer, or any other employee, to knowingly violate any prohibitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, relating to furnishing alcoholic beverages to, and the purchase and possession of alcoholic beverages by, a person under 21 years of age. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for anyone, including, but not limited to, hosts of catered functions and licensed alcoholic beverage caterers, to charge admission to a catered function. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for anyone, including, but not limited to, hosts of catered functions and licensed alcoholic beverage caterers, to charge attendees at catered events for alcoholic beverages, directly or indirectly. 
(h)  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment up to one year. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205A(4); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205A(4)) 
Sec. 6-394. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Charitable organizations (as defined in section 6-2) holding authorized catered functions may charge admission to catered alcohol events and may charge attendees for alcoholic beverages, so long as the money collected is used primarily for charitable purposes and not solely to defray the costs of the alcohol provided. 
(b)  Fundraisers for candidates for political office may accept contributions from attendees at authorized catered functions, so long as the contributions are primarily used for the candidates' political campaigns and not solely to defray the costs of the alcohol provided. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section is intended to prohibit anyone from hosting private functions within the county where the host provides alcohol to guests free of charge. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205A(5); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205A(5)) 
Sec. 6-395. - Compliance with this chapter. 
In addition to the requirements set forth herein, all licensed alcoholic beverage caterers performing alcoholic beverage catering services in the county are required to comply with all of the provisions of article III of this chapter that are not inconsistent with this article. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205A(6); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205A(6)) 
Sec. 6-396. - State law. 
All licensed alcoholic beverage caterers performing alcoholic beverage catering services in the county are required to comply with all state laws, including but not limited to O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-20 et seq., 3-5-20 et seq., 3-6-20 et seq., and 3-11-1 et seq., and all regulations promulgated by the state department of revenue, including but not limited to Ga. Admin. Code § 560-2-10 et seq. 
(Code 2000, § 32-205A(7); Ord. of 11-2-2004, § 32-205A(7)) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animal control is a local home rule power, Ga. Const. art. IX, §§ I, III(a)(3). 

Sec. 10-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to create the position of animal control officer; to establish his or her duties; to provide regulations for the vaccination of dogs; to provide for the confinement, disposition and humane disposal of dogs; to provide for regulating animals and fowl running at large; to provide for the classification and registration of dangerous animals, potentially dangerous animals and exotic animals in the county; to provide for requirements for possessing such animals or exotic animals; to provide grounds for the confiscation and disposition of such animals or exotic animals; to comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; and for other purposes. 
(Code 2000, § 30-101; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-101)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-101) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate food means palatable, noncontaminated, and nutritionally adequate food that is fed according to the species requirements or is fed as directed by a veterinarian. 
Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water offered to animals at suitable intervals according to species or as directed by a veterinarian. 
Animal means any and all types of animals, both domesticated and wild. 
Animal control officer means an individual selected by the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22 to aid in the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
Animal establishment means any pet shop, grooming shop, animal auction, kennel, performing animal exhibition, or animal shelter, except this term shall not include veterinary medical facilities, licensed research facilities, facilities operated by government agencies, or licensed animal dealers regulated by the USDA. 
Animal shelter means a facility designated or recognized by the county for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals. 
At large means off the premises of the owner of the animal or fowl, and not under the immediate control of the owner. 
Board means the county board of commissioners. 
Business days means Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. Saturdays, Sundays, and official federal, state and county holidays are not business days. 
Cat means small quadruped, of the feline family, typically domesticated. 
County manager means the individual so appointed to serve by the the county board of commissioners. 
Dangerous animal means any animal that: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being or other animal without provocation on public or private property at any time after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans or other animals without provocation after the animal has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Dead animal means any carcass or parts of a carcass of any animal. 
Dog means a common canine quadruped, mainly domesticated. 
Domesticated animal means those taxa of animals which have traditionally lived in a state of dependence on and under the dominion and control of man and have been kept as tame pets, raised as livestock, or used for commercial breeding purposes, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, and poultry. Animals which live in a captive or tame state and which lack a genetic distinction from members of the same taxon living in the wild are presumptively wild animals. 
Equine means a horse, pony, mule, donkey, or hinny. 
Excessively loud and disturbing noise means continual repetitive noise which a person inside a residence can clearly hear and distinguish from the background ambient noise, and which can be ascertained and identified as to its nature and source. 
Exotic animal means any wild animal, wildlife, vertebrate or invertebrate recognized by the state as wild animal, wildlife, exotic or hybrid or regulated by state law in O.C.G.A. § 27-5-5 irrespective of its actual or asserted state of docility, domesticity, tameness or intended use and/or capable of causing severe injury by means of venoms, poisons, toxins, constriction or bite. The term "exotic animal" shall not include psittaciformes, ferrets, miniature pigs, hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, chinchillas, dogs, cats or llamas, any other animals recognized by the state as customarily and legally obtained and kept as a pet or snakes that are exotic animals and are recognized as pets by the state (boa, python, etc.) less than four feet in length. 
Feral means existing in a wild or untamed state, or having returned to an untamed state from domestication. 
Fowl means any and all fowl, domesticated and wild. 
Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon verbal command and any dog which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of property. 
Humane care means, but is not limited to, the provision of adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, and adequate food and adequate water, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Inoculate means vaccination, by a state-licensed veterinarian, of a specified dose of antirabies vaccine to an animal, such vaccine having the U.S. government license number or approval stamped on the label of the vaccine container and having been approved by the state department of human resources. 
Kennel means an establishment for breeding, selling, training or boarding dogs or cats. 
Licensing authority means the county agency or designated representative thereof charged with administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under this chapter. 
Livestock means bovine (cows), caprine (goats), equine (horses), ovine (sheep), porcine (pigs), ratite (ostrich) and llamas. 
Llama means a South American camelid which is an animal of the genus lama, commonly referred to as a "one llama," including llamas, alpacas, guanacos, and vicunas. 
Local government means the county board of commissioners. 
Neutered means rendered permanently incapable of reproduction. 
Nuisance means a dog or cat that: 
(1)  Soils or defecates on public roads, walks or recreation areas, or on private property other than the owner's, unless such waste is immediaty removed and properly disposed of by the owner; 
(2)  Causes a disturbance by excessively loud and disturbing noise; or 
(3)  Chases vehicles or molests, attacks or interferes with persons or other domestic animals on public or private property or otherwise causes any damage to any property, private or public. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, a partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, keeping or having custody or control of any domesticated animal within the county. 
Person means any person, firm, corporation, entity, partnership, society or association. 
Potentially dangerous animal means any animal that without provocation bites a human being or other animal, but does not inflict a severe injury. 
Poultry means domestic fowl including, but not limited to, water fowl such as geese and ducks, and birds which are bred for meat and egg production, exhibition, or competition. Such term shall not include ratites, which are considered to be livestock. 
Proper animal health care means a program of disease control and prevention, veterinary care and, when necessary, humane euthanasia. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and which prevents the animal from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the animal is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height, and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner, as to prevent the animal's escape either from over or under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
Proper enclosure (exotic animal) means a structure constructed, based on requirements of the animal's size, species and breed, to provide sufficient strength to contain the animal securely in all directions and restrict the entrance of unwanted animals and people, protect the animals from injury or suffering, with sufficient space for each animal to turn about freely and to easily move about. Standards used or recognized by federal or state laboratories, universities or accredited zoos shall be utilized by the county to determine the suitability of the structure. 
Qualified dog pound means any dog pound operated by the local government or by an entity with whom the local government has a written agreement regarding the boarding of dogs. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of an animal control officer or animal control board as provided in this section and by the laws of the state. 
Service of notice means a notice that will be made by official representatives of the county animal control pertaining to any activity governed by this document, and shall include one of the following: 
(1)  Delivery in person of verbal information and/or written documents; 
(2)  Delivery by mail, regular or certified; 
(3)  Delivery by notice of written documents posted in a conspicuous place; or 
(4)  Delivery of information by phone. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery, or physical injury that results in hospital treatment or death. 
Veterinarian means any person who holds a license to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
Wild animal means any animal which is not wildlife and is not normally a domesticated animal in this state. This term specifically includes any hybrid or cross between any combination of a wild animal, wildlife, and a domesticated animal. Offspring from all subsequent generations of such crosses or hybrids are wild animals. 
Wildlife means any vertebrate or invertebrate animal life indigenous to this state or any species introduced or specified by the state and includes fish, mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, reptiles, crustaceans, and mollusks or any part thereof. 
(Code 2000, § 30-102; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-102)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-102) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21. 
Sec. 10-3. - Jurisdiction and exceptions to definitions. 
(a)  The jurisdiction of the local government for the enforcement of this chapter shall be the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)  The terms "dangerous animal" and "potentially dangerous animal," as defined in section 10-2, shall not include the following: 
(1)  A dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties; or 
(2)  An animal that inflicts an injury within the meaning of this chapter if the injury was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal, or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the lawful use of any animal in the preparation for and/or the conducting of hunting. 
(d)  No section of this chapter shall apply to livestock, poultry or any animal raised solely for human consumption, unless it is an exotic animal. 
(e)  The animal control officer is authorized to impound animals related to violations of this chapter. 
(f)  The animal control officer is authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 30-103; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-103)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-103) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-21. 
Sec. 10-4. - Hearings. 
(a)  The hearings provided for in section 10-13 shall be held by the county board of commissioners. 
(b)  Any person shall furnish his or her name, address and telephone number when for any reason contacting the county board of commissioners, the animal control officer or any employee of the local government or of a constitutional officer of the county regarding any matter governed under this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 30-104; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-104)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-104) 
State Law reference— County authorized to create animal control board and empower it to hear and determine matters regarding dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22. 
Sec. 10-5. - Animal control officer appointment. 
The county may appoint an animal control officer. The animal control officer shall serve at the pleasure of the county. The animal control officer shall have the power to issue citations for violations of this chapter. The animal control officer's compensation shall be established from time to time by the county. At the discretion of the county, the animal control officer position may be an additional job given to an existing employee of the county or an employee of a constitutional officer of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 30-105; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-105)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-105) 
Sec. 10-6. - Rabies inoculation required. 
(a)  When appropriate for the species, all animals over four months of age within the county must be inoculated for rabies by a state-licensed veterinarian. 
(b)  A certificate of inoculation for rabies shall be issued to the owner of each animal vaccinated, along with an inoculation tag indicating the year issued. The owner must, upon request, provide to the animal control officer a copy of the rabies certificate. 
(c)  The rabies tag shall be secured to a collar on the animal in a manner that it cannot be easily removed or lost by the animal. 
(d)  Any person convicted for a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2000, § 30-106; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-106)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-106) 
State Law reference— County governing authority is responsible for and has power to control rabies through the regulation, licensing, and required inoculation of animals within jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 
Sec. 10-7. - Animal care; noise; nuisance; feral dogs; cruelty; humane care; dead animal disposal. 
(a)  No person shall permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or any other combat between animals or between animals and humans. 
(b)  No owner of an animal shall abandon any animal or dead animal. 
(c)  An owner of any animal or fowl who no longer has the means or will to properly care for said animal may voluntarily surrender the animal to the county. To be valid, the surrender of an animal must be accompanied by the written certification and statement of surrender form as provided by the county. Upon the completion of this surrender form, the animal described shall become the property of the county and may be humanely disposed of immediately at the discretion of the animal control officer. 
(d)  No dog owner in the county shall permit same to emit any excessively loud and disturbing noise. 
(e)  Any feral animal may be captured and may immediately become the property of the county. The feral animal may be humanely disposed of immediately at the discretion of the animal control officer. If the feral animal cannot reasonably and/or safely be captured, then reasonable means may be used to ensure the public safety, including but not limited to immediate destruction of the animal. The animal control officer shall have discretion in determining whether an animal is a feral animal or is a domesticated animal with an owner. 
(f)  No animal may be permitted to be a nuisance. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to work an animal who is lame, starved or in a famished condition, or to overload, whip, beat, maim, bruise, deprive of food, torture or abuse, in any manner, any animal. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause pain, suffering, or death of any living animal, either by an overt act or by any omission or neglect. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of an animal to fail to provide that animal with humane care. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the county who owns or is caring for an animal that has died or has been killed to abandon the animal, its parts, or blood. 
(k)  The owner may dispose of the body by burning, incineration, burial, rendering, or any method using appropriate disposal technology which has been approved by the local government. Disposal of animal carcasses by any of the approved methods must be completed within 12 hours after death or discovery of the carcass. Carcasses which are buried must be buried at least three feet below the ground level and have not less than three feet of earth over the carcass. 
(l)  Any person convicted for a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 2000, § 30-107; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-107)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-107) 
State Law reference— Georgia Animal Protection Act authorizes county to enact and enforce animal protection ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-18; dead animal disposal, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-5-3, 4-5-5. 
Sec. 10-8. - Defense of person or property. 
(a)  Any person may defend his or her person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage caused by an animal. 
(b)  Any person may injure or kill an animal reasonably believed to constitute a threat of injury or damage to person, property or domesticated animal. 
(c)  The method used to injure or kill such animal shall be as humane as possible under the circumstances. Any person who humanely injures or kills an animal under these circumstances shall incur no civil or criminal liability for such injury or death. 
(Code 2000, § 30-108; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-108)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-108) 
Sec. 10-9. - Property owner or injured party may impound. 
Any person finding a threatening or annoying stray, feral or owned animal or fowl upon his or her property, after making a reasonable attempt to find the owner of such animal or fowl, may remove it to any animal shelter that will take possession of it and impound said animal. If no such shelter is available, he or she may hold the animal or fowl in his or her own possession, and as soon as possible notify the animal control officer of this custody, giving a description of the animal or fowl and the name of the owner if known. Persons impounding animals under these circumstances must notify county animal control of the impound and either deliver the animal to animal control or make the animal available for collection. 
(Code 2000, § 30-109; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-108)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-109) 
Sec. 10-10. - At-large animals. 
Animals shall not be at large. 
(Code 2000, § 30-110; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-110)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-110) 
State Law reference— Unlawful to allow livestock to run at large or stray, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-3; unlawful to allow dangerous dogs to roam outside of a proper enclosure without a muzzle and restraint by a leash held by a responsible person, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26. 
Sec. 10-11. - Owner liable for costs of impoundment. 
The owner of an impounded animal shall be liable for the cost of maintenance of said animal during such impoundment. In addition, said owner shall be liable for all other actual expenses of the county, including but not limited to veterinarian fees. All said costs shall be payable prior to the owner retrieving said animal, or upon the disposal of such animal, whichever event first occurs. 
(Code 2000, § 30-111; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-111)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-111) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-9.3(c). 
Sec. 10-12. - Disposition of unretrieved cats and dogs. 
(a)  The owner of an impounded animal that the county recognizes as an owned animal shall have three business days to retrieve said animal after service of notice. Upon expiration of the three business days, said animal may be disposed of by legally recognized means of return to the owner, adoption, agency transfer or euthanasia. In cases involving seriously injured and/or diseased owned animals, the available information will be used to make a reasonable attempt at contacting the owner. If the owner cannot be reached and/or secure the animal in a reasonable amount of time, based on the animal's condition, the animal will be euthanized. 
(b)  Animals recognized by the county as stray or feral will be held in accordance with county animal control policies and procedures. 
(c)  Upon adoption by any person of any animal under the control of the county, such animal shall be required to undergo a spay/neuter procedure as determined by the county before the adoption is complete. All persons adopting animals shall sign all forms required by the county and pay all required fees to the local government. Once adopted, the animal becomes the sole responsibility of the new owner. 
(Code 2000, § 30-112; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-112)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-112) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-11-9.4—4-11-9.6. 
Sec. 10-13. - Procedures for classifying dangerous animals and potentially dangerous animals; notice; hearing. 
(a)  The animal control officer, upon receiving a report of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal, shall make such investigations as may be necessary to determine whether the animal should be classified as dangerous or potentially dangerous, or reclassified as a dangerous animal if previously classified as a potentially dangerous animal. 
(b)  Should the animal control officer determine that an animal is a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal, the animal control officer shall classify such animal accordingly. The animal control officer shall then notify the animal's owner of such classification. The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the animal's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal; 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the animal is a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal; 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the county board of commissioners; 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the animal is a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal will become effective for all purposes on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the county board of commissioners and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the board. 
(c)  When the county board of commissioners receives a request for a hearing as provided in subsection (b) of this section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The board shall notify the animal owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the animal owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the animal shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and cross examine witnesses. In addition, the board shall receive at the hearing such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the animal. 
(d)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the county board of commissioners shall notify the animal owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the animal is a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal, the notice shall specify the effective date of the determinations of the date of the original classification by the animal control officer. 
(Code 2000, § 30-113; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-113)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-113) 
State Law reference— Similar provision regarding investigation and determination of a dangerous dog, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-23, 4-8-24. 
Sec. 10-14. - Requirements for possessing a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal. 
(a)  No one shall have, own or possess within the county a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal without a certificate of registration. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal only if the owner presents to the animal control officer sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal; 
(2)  Proof of current rabies inoculation in the form of a certificate from a veterinarian; and 
(3)  The posting of the premises where the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous animal on the property. The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall receive such sign from the animal control officer at the time the owner pays the annual registration fee as required in subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, the owner of a dangerous animal shall present to the animal control officer evidence of: 
(1)  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state insuring the owner of the dangerous animal against liability for any injuries inflicted by the animal; or 
(2)  A surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous animal. 
(d)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall pay an annual registration fee at the time the annual certificate of registration is issued. The annual registration fee shall be set by the county on an annual basis. Certificates of registration shall be renewed annually by the owner in the month of the initial registration. 
(e)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the animal control officer if the animal is moving out of the county. 
(f)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal who is a new resident of the county shall within ten days register such animal as required hereunder and present to the animal control officer a current certificate of rabies inoculation. 
(g)  The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the animal is at large, is unconfined, has bitten and/or attacked a human or has been sold or donated. If the animal has been sold or donated, the owner shall provide the animal control officer with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the animal. 
(Code 2000, § 30-114; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-114)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-114) 
State Law reference— Similar provision regarding dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25. 
Sec. 10-15. - Restrictions on permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous animals outside of a proper enclosure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain, leash or container and is under the adequate physical control of a responsible person. The muzzle or container shall be made in a manner that will prevent the animal from biting any person. The muzzle or container shall not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its respiration. For animals other than dogs, an animal inside of an adequate container, approved by a veterinarian, shall be considered as muzzled. Dangerous dogs must be muzzled at all times when they are outside of a proper enclosure. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(Code 2000, § 30-115; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-115)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-115) 
State Law reference— Similar provision regarding dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26. 
Sec. 10-16. - Confiscation of animals; grounds; disposition. 
(a)  A dangerous animal shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal control officer if any requirement of this section or sections 10-14 and 10-15 is not met. 
(b)  A potentially dangerous animal shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous animal if any requirement of this section or sections 10-14 and 10-15 is not met. 
(c)  Any animal that has been confiscated under this section shall be returned to its owner only upon the owner's full compliance with this chapter as determined by the animal control officer and upon payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner has not fully complied with this chapter within 20 days of the date the animal is confiscated, the animal shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Code 2000, § 30-116; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-116)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-116) 
Sec. 10-17. - Requirements for possessing an exotic animal. 
(a)  No person shall be the owner of an exotic animal without a certificate of registration issued by the county. 
(b)  The animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of the exotic animal only if the owner presents to the animal control officer sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure for an exotic animal. 
(2)  Proper animal health care. 
(3)  Ability of the owner to provide humane care and to properly handle and control the exotic animal. 
(4)  The posting of the premises where the exotic animal is located with a clearly visible sign warning as to the types and numbers of exotic animals located. This sign will have to be approved for use by the animal control officer. 
(5)  Keeping and transporting said animal in a manner set forth in O.C.G.A. § 27-5-6. 
(c)  The owner of the exotic animal shall pay a registration fee set by the county on an annual basis. 
(d)  The owner of the exotic animal shall notify the animal control officer if the exotic animal is moving out of the county. 
(e)  The owner of an exotic animal shall register it within ten days of moving to the county. 
(f)  The owner of an exotic animal shall not allow it to be at large. The owner must immediately notify animal control of any escape of the exotic animal. 
(g)  The owner of an exotic animal that attacks a human must notify animal control of the attack once care of the victim has been secured. 
(h)  The owner must notify the animal control officer within 24 hours of the sale or transfer of ownership of the exotic animal. The owner shall provide the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. 
(Code 2000, § 30-117; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-117)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-117) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 27-5-4, 27-5-6. 
Sec. 10-18. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person convicted for a violation of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty described in section 1-9. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties for violations under this chapter or state law, a dangerous animal which bites or attacks a human being shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal control officer and, thereafter, the dangerous animal shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner or by any other legal means. 
(c)  All penalties provided for in this section are in addition to those provided for under the laws of the state. 
(Code 2000, § 30-118; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-118)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-118) 
State Law reference— Similar provision for destruction of potentially dangerous dogs by county, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. 
Sec. 10-19. - Liability for damages. 
It is the intent of this chapter that the owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused by such animal. Under no circumstances shall the county, any employee, agent, or official thereof, any constitutional officer of the county, or any employee, or agent of such constitutional officer, who enforces or fails to enforce this chapter, be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by an animal. 
(Code 2000, § 30-119; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-119)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-119) 
State Law reference— Similar provision regarding dangerous dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. 
Sec. 10-20. - Pursuit. 
(a)  Any employee or agent of the county or a constitutional officer of the county empowered to perform any duty under this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for impounding a dog or other animal which the employee is in immediate pursuit of, with the exception of any occupied building into which the dog or other animal may enter. In the latter case, if the occupant or owner of the premises gives permission to enter the premises, the employee or agent may remove said dog or other animal. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner, interfere with, hinder, resist, obstruct, or molest such employee or agent in the performance of his or her duties, or for any person to remove any animal from the animal control vehicle or animal shelter without the permission of the said employee or agent. 
(Code 2000, § 30-120; Ord. of 2-5-2002, § 2(exh. B(30-120)); Ord. of 9-12-2006, § 30-120) 
State Law reference— Unlawful to interfere with animal control officer's discharge of duties, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-6. 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County has home rule authority to exercise power regarding codes, including building, housing, plumbing, and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); state minimum construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter and/or the technical codes adopted by reference in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official or building inspector means the official or assistant as designated by the board of commissioners to administer and enforce the provisions of said code; and includes and may be substituted for the term "electrical official," "gas official," "plumbing official," or "housing official" in every case where the board of commissioners has either chosen not to specifically appoint such trade official or has failed to do so. 
Department means the state department of community affairs. 
Governing authority or governing body means the board of commissioners of Morgan County, Georgia. 
Trade official means the electrical official, gas official, plumbing official, or housing official. 
Sec. 14-2. - Federal and state authority. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this Code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.2)) 
Sec. 14-3. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person or entity who shall violate any of the technical codes or fail to comply therewith, or who shall do work in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted hereunder, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, shall, for each such failure or violation or noncompliance, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be punished, in the discretion of the judge of the superior court or the judge of the magistrate court, according to the penalties provided in section 1-9. It shall be a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed or continued, and upon conviction there shall be punishment as provided by state laws. 
(Code 2000, §§ 36-108(6), 36-110(4)) 
Secs. 14-4—14-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STATE MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 14-25. - Standard codes adopted. 
(a)  The following are adopted by reference: 
(1)  The state minimum codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i), as now or hereafter revised or modified pursuant to state law. 
(2)  The most recent editions of the following: 
a.  The International Property Maintenance Code. 
b.  The International Existing Building Code. 
c.  The ICC Performance Code. 
d.  The International Private Sewage Disposal Code. 
e.  The National Fire Codes. 
f.  The NFPA 101 Life Safety Code. 
g.  The Georgia Accessibility Code, chapter 120-30-20. 
h.  The National Electrical Code. 
i.  The International Fuel Gas Code. 
j.  The International Fire Code. 
k.  The International Building Code. 
l.  The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings. 
m.  The International Plumbing Code. 
n.  The International Mechanical Code. 
o.  The International Energy Conservation Code. 
(b)  If any of the publications listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section are adopted as a state minimum code pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2, art. 1, part 2 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.), then the edition adopted by the state shall control. If any of the publications listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section are less stringent than the state minimum codes promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2, art. 1, part 2 (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.), the state minimum code shall control. 
(c)  A copy of each of the publications listed in subsection (a)(2) of this section, as adopted by the state, is filed in the planning and development office, and available for review by the public. The same is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(d)  The building official and the county building department shall enforce the state minimum codes adopted herein. 
(Code 2000, § 36-101) 
Secs. 14-26—14-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-54. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the state minimum standard codes. Hereinafter all of the codes adopted shall be referred to as the "technical codes." 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.1)) 
Sec. 14-55. - Code remedial. 
These codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as "service systems." 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.2.1)) 
Sec. 14-56. - Quality control. 
Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this Code, except to the extent quality control relates to the purposes stated in this article. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.2.2)) 
Sec. 14-57. - No warranty created. 
The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan under the requirements of this Code shall not be construed as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan, or their adequacy. Neither the county nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.2.3)) 
Sec. 14-58. - Conflicts. 
Where, in any specific case, different sections of the codes adopted in this chapter specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.1)) 
Sec. 14-59. - Appendices. 
Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.3)) 
Sec. 14-60. - Referenced standards. 
Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.4)) 
Sec. 14-61. - Maintenance. 
All buildings and structures, and electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes at the time of construction, alteration, or repair shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his or her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings and structures, and electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.5)) 
Sec. 14-62. - Existing buildings. 
Alteration, repair or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure or building, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, without requiring the building or structure, or plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system, to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes, if said work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.5.1)) 
Sec. 14-63. - Change of occupancy. 
If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building and all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.5.2)) 
Sec. 14-64. - Special historic buildings. 
The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings, if such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings will facilitate or ensure the public's health, safety and welfare. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.6)) 
Sec. 14-65. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings and structures, and electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe, and are hereby declared illegal. They shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes adopted in this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(2.5)) 
Secs. 14-66—14-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICABILITY 

Sec. 14-119. - Building. 
The provisions of the International Building Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.1)) 
Sec. 14-120. - Electrical. 
The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.1)) 
Sec. 14-121. - Gas. 
The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories, as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.1)) 
Sec. 14-122. - Mechanical. 
The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.1)) 
Sec. 14-123. - Plumbing. 
The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as amended, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.1)) 
Sec. 14-124. - Fire prevention. 
The provisions of the International Fire Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.1)) 
Sec. 14-125. - Energy. 
The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as amended, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the efficient use of energy in new building construction. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.1)) 
Sec. 14-126. - Residential one- and two-family dwellings. 
The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of every one- or two-family dwelling and any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.1)) 
Sec. 14-127. - Unsafe building abatement. 
The provisions of this chapter provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.3.1)) 
Secs. 14-128—14-152. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING DEPARTMENT AND BUILDING OFFICIAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-153. - Created. 
There is hereby established a department to be called the building department. The person in charge shall be known as the building official. The qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel are established by resolution of the board. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.4)) 
Sec. 14-154. - Restrictions on employees. 
An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this Code, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system in the county, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he or she is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any work which is inconsistent with his or her duties or in conflict with the interests of the department or the county. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.4.1)) 
Sec. 14-155. - Records. 
The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to state law. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.4.2)) 
Sec. 14-156. - Liability. 
Any county officer or employee, or member of the planning commission of the county board of commissioners, charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his or her duties. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.4.3)) 
Sec. 14-157. - Reports. 
The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(1.4.4)) 
Secs. 14-158—14-182. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POWERS OF BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 14-183. - Powers generally. 
The building official shall enforce the provisions of the technical codes and render interpretations of the technical codes, consistent with its intent and scope. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(2.1)) 
Sec. 14-184. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe there exists any condition or code violation which makes a building, structure, or premises, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these technical codes. If such building or premises is occupied, he or she shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he or she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including the procurement of a warrant from the magistrate. 
(b)  After the building official has obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(2.2.1, 2.2.2)) 
Sec. 14-185. - Stop work orders. 
Upon notice from the building official, work on any building or structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or done in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Written notice to stop work shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. When an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give written notice to stop the work. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(2.3)) 
Sec. 14-186. - Tests; proof of compliance. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his or her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(4)) 
Sec. 14-187. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, if any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, if the building official finds the alternate, for the purpose intended, is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any request for an alternate. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(2.7)) 
Secs. 14-188—14-212. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERMITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-213. - Work authorized. 
A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install only the work shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, additional permits shall be required. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.1.2)) 
Sec. 14-214. - Contractor's responsibilities. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor, who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs for which a permit is required, to comply with state and local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. If the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license, the contractor shall supply the local government with the license number before receiving a permit. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.5)) 
Secs. 14-215—14-236. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION 

Sec. 14-237. - When required. 
Any person or entity who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.1.1)) 
Sec. 14-238. - Exceptions. 
Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any portable evaporative cooler. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108) 
Sec. 14-239. - Minor repairs. 
Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, if such repairs will not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.1.3)) 
Sec. 14-240. - Form; information required. 
Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his or her authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.1.4)) 
Sec. 14-241. - Time limitations. 
An application for a permit shall be deemed abandoned six months after the date of filing, unless a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time, for periods of not more than 90 days each, may be allowed by the building official for the application, if the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.1.5)) 
Secs. 14-242—14-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLANS, DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 14-261. - Requirements. 
When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the design professional or person responsible for the plan, drawing or specification. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.2.1)) 
Sec. 14-262. - Additional data. 
The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.2.2)) 
Sec. 14-263. - Design professional. 
(a)  The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering, and shall affix his or her official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data for the following: 
(1)  All Group A, E and I occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 sq. ft. or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
(b)  Exception. Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect or engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.2.3)) 
Sec. 14-264. - Structural and fire resistance integrity. 
Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems, and shall also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire-resistant floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.2.4)) 
Sec. 14-265. - Site drawings. 
Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.2.5)) 
Sec. 14-266. - Additional requirements. 
The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building, and which shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire-rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquidtight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.2.6)) 
Secs. 14-267—14-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 14-296. - Application examination. 
The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws and ordinances. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.3.1)) 
Sec. 14-297. - Affidavits. 
(a)  The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and, if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, if the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies: 
(1)  Of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure; or 
(2)  Of electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. 
(b)  Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.3.2)) 
Secs. 14-298—14-327. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ISSUANCE, REVOCATION, AND REFUSAL 

Sec. 14-328. - Action on permits. 
The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws, regulations, and ordinances, he or she shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.4.1)) 
Sec. 14-329. - Refusal to issue permit. 
If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws, regulations, or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his or her refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.4.2)) 
Sec. 14-330. - Public right-of-way. 
A permit shall not be issued by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building which will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant ascertained the lines of the public street on which he or she proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and the building official shall see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in the building code. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.4.3)) 
Sec. 14-331. - Misrepresentation of application. 
The building official may revoke a permit or approval issued under this chapter if there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to any material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(2.4.1)) 
Sec. 14-332. - Violations of Code provisions. 
The building official may revoke a permit upon determination that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building or structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems is in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(2.4.2)) 
Secs. 14-333—14-352. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CONDITIONS OF THE PERMIT 

Sec. 14-353. - Code compliance; work commencement; extension. 
(a)  A permit shall be a license to proceed with the work, not authority to violate, cancel, alter or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes. Nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from requiring correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. 
(b)  Every permit issued shall become invalid if: 
(1)  The work authorized is not commenced within six months after issuance; or 
(2)  The work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for six consecutive months after the work is commenced. 
(c)  One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.6.1)) 
Sec. 14-354. - Permit based on affidavit. 
Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work may be hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that an architect or engineer shall supervise such work. In addition, said architect or engineer shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion file with the building official a written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the plans and the technical codes. If such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.6.2)) 
Sec. 14-355. - Plans reviewed. 
When the building official issues a permit, he or she shall mark both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his or her authorized representative. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.6.3)) 
Secs. 14-356—14-383. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - FEES 

Sec. 14-384. - Prescribed fees. 
A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the board of commissioners have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building or structure, or electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.7.1)) 
Sec. 14-385. - Penalty. 
Any person who commences any work on a building or structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, before obtaining the necessary permits shall pay a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee, plus the required permit fees. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.7.2)) 
Sec. 14-386. - Accounting. 
The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.7.3)) 
Sec. 14-387. - Schedule of permit fees. 
On all buildings or structures, and electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules set by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.7.4)) 
Sec. 14-388. - Building permit valuations. 
If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of the building or structure, or the electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates that meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.7.5)) 
Secs. 14-389—14-419. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 14-420. - Existing building inspections. 
Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building or structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He or she shall inspect all buildings and structures, and all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during work and upon completion. He or she shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.8.1)) 
Sec. 14-421. - Manufacturers and fabricators. 
When deemed necessary by the building official, he or she shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.8.2)) 
Sec. 14-422. - Inspection service. 
The building official may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services if after investigation he or she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports, unless in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.8.3)) 
Sec. 14-423. - Inspections required for certificate of occupancy or completion. 
The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building or structure, and every electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.8.4)) 
Sec. 14-424. - Posting of permit. 
Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his or her agent posts the permit in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located so as to allow the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.8.5)) 
Sec. 14-425. - Required inspections. 
The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his or her agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or notify the permit holder or his or her agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
(1)  Building . 
a.  Foundation inspection. The foundation inspection is to be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.  Frame inspection. The frame inspection is to be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place, and all concealing wiring, pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.  Final inspection. The final inspection is to be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical . 
a.  Underground inspection. The underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. The rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. The final inspection is to be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing . 
a.  Underground inspection. The underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. The rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. The final inspection is to be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection. The underground inspection is to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection. The rough-in inspection is to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection. The final inspection is to be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
a.  Rough piping inspection. The rough piping inspection is to be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection. The final piping inspection is to be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection. The final inspection is to be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to ensure compliance with all the requirements of this Code and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with permitted plans. 
(6)  Energy . 
a.  Foundation inspection. The foundation inspection is to be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
b.  Frame inspection. The frame inspection is to be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior wall insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner to restrict air passage. 
c.  Final inspection. The final inspection is to be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. The final inspection shall verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation and verify correct Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio (SEER) ratings on appliances. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.8.6)) 
Sec. 14-426. - Release—Continuing work. 
Work shall not be done on any part of a building or structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.8.7)) 
Sec. 14-427. - Same—To cover or conceal. 
Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, mechanical and electrical work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining permission from the building official. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.8.8)) 
Sec. 14-428. - Same—Plaster fire protection. 
In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his or her agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.8.9)) 
Sec. 14-429. - Exemption from self-inspection statute. 
The board of commissioners exempts the county from the provisions of House Bill 1221, Act No. 1046, codified as O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), which allows inter alia, master plumbers and utility contractors to self-inspect their own installation of water and sewer lines under conditions. 
(Code 2000, § 36-111) 
Secs. 14-430—14-456. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - CERTIFICATES 

Sec. 14-457. - Certificate of occupancy—Generally. 
A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and approved by the building official. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.9.1.1)) 
Sec. 14-458. - Same—Contents. 
Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, and after the final inspection and review of the plans and specifications, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy. The certificate of occupancy shall state the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.9.1.2)) 
Sec. 14-459. - Same—Temporary or partial. 
A temporary or partial certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building official for a portion of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.9.1.3)) 
Sec. 14-460. - Same—Existing building. 
A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and date necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. The building official may determine, if necessary, that two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.9.1.4)) 
Sec. 14-461. - Certificate of completion. 
Upon satisfactory completion of a building or structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and, for certain types of permits, is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.9.2)) 
Sec. 14-462. - Service utilities—Connection. 
No person shall make connection from a utility source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.9.3.1)) 
Sec. 14-463. - Same—Temporary connection. 
The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.9.3.2)) 
Sec. 14-464. - Same—Authority to disconnect. 
The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes, where necessary, to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system, of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.9.3.3)) 
Secs. 14-465—14-481. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - POSTING FLOOR LOADS 

Sec. 14-482. - Occupancy. 
No building shall be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes when he or she is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.10.1)) 
Sec. 14-483. - Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent engineer to compute the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.10.2)) 
Sec. 14-484. - Signs required. 
In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, but if lost, removed or defaced, shall be immediately replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(3.10.3)) 
Secs. 14-485—14-506. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - APPEALS 

Sec. 14-507. - Board of commissioners to hear appeals. 
The board of commissioners shall have the power, as further defined in this article, to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the technical codes. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(5.1)) 
Sec. 14-508. - Decision of the building official. 
The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his or her duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the board of commissioners whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system; 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter do not apply to this specific case; 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case; and/or 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of this chapter or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(5.2.1)) 
Sec. 14-509. - Variances. 
The board of commissioners may vary the application of any provision of this chapter to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the relevant technical code or public interest in general, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others; 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant; 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this chapter to other buildings, structures or service systems; 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system; and 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this chapter and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(5.2.2)) 
Sec. 14-510. - Condition of variances. 
In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed, or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this chapter. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(5.2.2.1)) 
Sec. 14-511. - Notice of appeal. 
Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building official. Appeals shall be in a form reasonably acceptable to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(5.2.3)) 
Sec. 14-512. - Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. 
In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his or her order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(5.2.4)) 
Sec. 14-513. - Rules and regulations. 
The board may establish rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after a notice of appeal has been received. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(5.3)) 
Sec. 14-514. - Decisions. 
The board of commissioners shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. The building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Code 2000, § 36-108(5.5.1)) 
Sec. 14-515. - Schedule of fees. 
Fees for building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permits will, from time to time, be set by resolution of the board of commissioners and are available for public review in the office of the county clerk or his or her designee. 
(Code 2000, § 36-109) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESS AND LICENSING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VIDEO GAMBLING 

Sec. 18-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Arcade means a location where more than three noncash redemption machines as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c) or (d) are operated. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine includes coin-operated amusement machines and means: 
(1)  Every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment the operation of which requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket, or similar object and the result of which the operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(b)—(g), and which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Pinball machines; 
b.  Console machines; 
c.  Video games; 
d.  Crane machines; 
e.  Claw machines; 
f.  Pusher machines; 
g.  Bowling machines; 
h.  Novelty arcade games; 
i.  Football or table soccer machines; 
j.  Miniature racetrack, football, or golf machines; 
k.  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
l.  Basketball machines; 
m.  Shuffleboard games; 
n.  Kiddie ride games; 
o.  Skeeball machines; 
p.  Air hockey machines; 
q.  Roll down machines; 
r.  Trivia machines; 
s.  Laser games; 
t.  Simulator games; 
u.  Virtual reality machines; 
v.  Matchup or lineup games which require the player to use skill stops to complete the game; 
w.  Maze games; 
x.  Racing games; 
y.  Coin-operated pool tables or coin-operated billiard tables as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1(3); and 
z.  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in the state. 
(2)  Every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide music the operation of which requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket, or similar object such as jukeboxes or other similar types of music machines. 
License means a license issued by the county board of commissioners to operate an arcade. 
Location means a separate building. 
Registrant means any person who, or any firm, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or other entity which, as the owner, lessee, or beneficiary, has under his or her or its control any location, establishment, place or premises in or at which bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play by the general public. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(1)) 
Sec. 18-20. - Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine. 
No registrant shall make available for use within the unincorporated area of the county,, any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine unless: 
(1)  The state licenses and required sticker is affixed to the machine pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq.; 
(2)  The bona fide coin-operated amusement machine is registered with the board; and 
(3)  If required, the bona fide coin-operated amusement machine is located and used in an arcade which has been duly licensed under this article. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(2)) 
Sec. 18-21. - Waiver of certain fees. 
No registration fee shall be required to register a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine. No license fee shall be required to license an arcade. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(3)) 
Sec. 18-22. - Registration requirements. 
The machine registration shall be filed in writing on a form to be provided by the board of commissioners and shall specify: 
(1)  The name and address of the registrant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership, or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses; 
(2)  The location and address of the premises where the licensed machine or machines are to operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such place; 
(3)  The number of machines to be maintained on the premises; 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the machine or machines, if other than the registrant; 
(5)  Specific identifying information on the type of each machine, its function and operation, and its state license number; and 
(6)  Other identifying information about the registrant's business, including but not limited to federal employer identification and state sales tax numbers, and other pertinent information as determined by the reasonable discretion of the county board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(4)) 
Sec. 18-23. - Amended registration. 
In the event a registrant desires to increase the number of machines to be used or played, or exhibited for use or play at his or her location, so that he or she then has more machines than as shown on his or her original or amended registration, he or she shall, prior to the operation of the new machines, notify the board of commissioners and register the new machines. An amended registration shall also be required at any time a machine is replaced, even if by another machine of the same type or nature. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(5)) 
Sec. 18-24. - Regulations. 
All registrants hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Gambling is prohibited. Gambling devices or any gambling on the premises is prohibited. Only noncash redemption is permitted as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(a.1)—(g). Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize, permit, or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever or any gambling contrary to state law. 
(2)  Machines are to be kept in plain view. All such machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person or persons who may frequent or be in any place of business where such devices are kept or used for play by the public. 
(3)  Inspection. The county sheriff, his or her designee and/or the building inspector shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such machine or machines are operated or set up for operation, and to inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(4)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any registrant to open his or her business to the public unless an employee of the registrant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. 
(5)  Refunds and adjustments. Refunds and adjustments to all customers shall be the responsibility of the registrant of the location of the machine in question; provided, however, that such refunds or adjustments shall not include refunds for any unused games or credits. 
(6)  Gross income requirements. No registrant shall derive more than 50 percent of such registrant's annual income from the business location in which the amusement machine or machines are situated from amusement machines that provide for noncash redemption as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c), (d). For the purpose of this subsection, the term "annual income" means the sum of the total gross receipts generated by the registrant's business at the business location where the machines are located in a calendar year. Upon request by the county board of commissioners, the registrant shall provide the necessary financial documents to verify the amount of annual income and the amount of such income generated from the bona fide coin-operated amusement machines as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c), (d). 
(7)  Consumption of alcohol on premises. No registrant who holds an arcade license shall allow the sale, consumption or use of alcoholic beverages, beer or wine on the subject premises. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(6)) 
Sec. 18-25. - Application and licensing. 
(a)  Any registrant who proposes to locate more than three noncash redemption machines in any place of business, any business premises, or any other location shall apply for and receive a valid arcade license prior to placing such machines into operation. 
(b)  An application for an arcade license shall be made in writing on forms prescribed by the building inspector or his or her designee. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(7)) 
Sec. 18-26. - Distance requirements; plat required. 
(a)  Every application for a license to operate an arcade shall be accompanied by a plat of survey prepared by a state-registered surveyor showing the location of the proposed arcade and the distances between the main entrance of the proposed arcade and all adjoining lands, as hereafter provided. 
(b)  No license for the operation of an arcade shall be issued for any location: 
(1)  Within 350 yards of the property line of a residential dwelling; 
(2)  Within 350 yards of the property line of any public library or branch of any public library; 
(3)  Within 350 yards from the property line of any church, shrine, chapel of a mortuary or other place used exclusively for religious purposes; 
(4)  Within 350 yards of the property line of any school or college campus. The schools and colleges referred to herein shall include only such public, private, or church-supported schools which teach the subjects commonly taught in the public schools and colleges of this state, and shall not include private schools or colleges wherein a specialized subject such as business, music, art, vocational occupations, and other special subjects are taught; 
(5)  Within 350 yards of any premises holding a license for the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  The distance requirements set out in subsection (b) of this section shall apply in any and all directions from the main entrance door of the proposed location, as measured in a straight line. The plat shall accompany and be made a part of the application for such license. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(8)) 
Sec. 18-27. - License approval; renewal; audit. 
(a)  Considerations for approval. In determining whether or not an arcade license applied for hereunder shall be granted, renewed, transferred, or issued to a new location, in addition to all the provisions of this section, the following shall be considered to be in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  Reputation, character. The registrant's reputation, character, trade and business associations or past business ventures, mental and physical capacity to conduct this business; 
(2)  Previous violations of license laws. If the registrant is a previous holder of an arcade license in the county or in any other jurisdiction and has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; 
(3)  Manner of conducting prior arcade business. If the registrant is a previous holder of an arcade license, the manner in which he or she conducted the business thereunder, especially as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; 
(4)  Location. The location for which the license is sought, as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values; 
(5)  Number of licenses in general area. The number of licenses already granted for arcades in the general area of the place for which the license is sought; 
(6)  Previous revocation of license. If the registrant has had any license issued under the police powers of any governing authority previously suspended or revoked, or has had an arcade license suspended or revoked; 
(7)  Payment of taxes and other charges. Whether or not the registrant or business is delinquent in the payment of any local taxes or other fees or charges; 
(8)  Prior incidents. Evidence that a substantial number of incidents requiring police intervention have occurred within the immediate area during the 12 months immediately preceding the date of application; 
(9)  Previous denial or revocation. The denial of an application, or the revocation of a license, occurring within the preceding 12 months, which was based on the qualifications of the proposed location. 
(b)  Renewal. 
(1)  Expiration. All licenses granted hereunder are privilege licenses and shall expire on December 31 of each year. Registrants who desire to renew their licenses shall file an application therefor with the county board of commissioners for such renewal, upon forms approved by the building inspector or his or her designee, on or before December 1 of the preceding year. 
(2)  Suspended or revoked licenses. Any licenses that have been placed on probation, suspension or have been revoked by the county board of commissioners during the year shall be submitted on a separate list by the building inspector for review and further consideration. 
(c)  Audit. Upon renewal of a license to operate an arcade, verified records of sales from amusement games as they relate to the total annual income of the business shall be furnished. Verifications must be submitted by both the license holder and the management of the establishment. The county board of commissioners may cause an audit of the books of a business holding an arcade license to be made at any time. Failure of a registrant who holds a license to operate an arcade to cooperate in the execution of the audit shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(9)) 
Sec. 18-28. - Ineligibilty for license. 
The following individuals and organizations are not eligible for an arcade license: 
(1)  A person or persons or a corporation, partnership or other form of business organization or entity in which any of the officers, directors or partners have been convicted of a felony in any jurisdiction. A conviction, for purposes of this subsection, includes a guilty plea or plea of nolo contendere. 
(2)  A person or persons or a corporation, partnership, or other form of business organization or entity in which any of the officers, directors or partners have been convicted in any jurisdiction of a nonelonious crime of moral turpitude, lottery, gambling, or illegal possession or sale of narcotics or alcoholic beverages within the five years preceding the filing of the application. A conviction, for purposes of this subsection, includes a guilty plea or a plea of nolo contendere. 
(3)  A person whose license to operate an arcade has been revoked for cause in any state or territory of the United States within the ten years preceding the filing of the application. 
(4)  A person who has knowingly falsified information or made any material misrepresentation on the application for a license under this Code within the ten years preceding the filing of the application. 
(5)  Should any such registrant or partner, or officer or director of any registrant entity, after a license has been granted, be convicted of or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude, or to the violation of any laws of the state regulating gambling or the lottery laws, said license shall be subject after hearing to immediate suspension or revocation. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(10)) 
Sec. 18-29. - Notice of application. 
All registrants for a license to operate an arcade shall give notice of their intention to make such application by advertisement in the form prescribed by the building inspector. Advertising as referred to in this section means there shall be a sign posted 30 days prior to the hearing of the application in a prominent position on the property (where it can be read from the road); also, all new registrants shall be required to advertise three times in the legal organ of the county before applications are heard by the board of commissioners. Advertising in the newspaper shall be during the 30-day period prior to the hearing of the application by the board of commissioners. Before the application is presented to the board of commissioners, the registrant shall furnish proof that the advertisement has been completed as required in this section. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(11)) 
Sec. 18-30. - Sale; transfer; assignment. 
No license to operate an arcade may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a registrant, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons, corporation, partnership, or other business entity, or to any other location or any expansion of an existing location. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the registrant is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, or one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the building inspector, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. A license to operate an arcade issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred, or assigned. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(12)) 
Sec. 18-31. - Suspension. 
The county board of commissioners shall have the right to temporarily suspend any license issued under this article whenever a person, firm, corporation, or other business organization doing business hereunder shall deviate from the normal operation for which the license was obtained or fails in performance to meet the required regulations and codes set forth by the board of commissioners, or county health department; or violates any law, ordinance, or regulation of the United States, the state or the county; or when it shall be proven before the board of commissioners, or its designated hearing officer, that there is a violation of nuisance laws; or when the health, interests, and safety of the public demand the suspension of such license. The hearing officer shall report the suspension of such license to the next regular or called meeting of the board of commissioners; then the license shall be suspended, placed on probation or permanently revoked, or otherwise it shall be restored and remain in full force. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(13)) 
Sec. 18-32. - Violation. 
(a)  Violation of this article shall be punishable as a misdemeanor local ordinance violation and shall include the penalties provided in section 1-9 and/or one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Suspension or revocation of the registrant's arcade license and any other county licenses held by the registrant, including but not limited to a license for the sale of beer and/or wine. 
(2)  Revocation of machine registration and prohibition of machine operation at any location which does not require an arcade license. 
(b)  In addition, the county board of commissioners or its designee may notify the appropriate state agencies of any violations pertaining to the improper use of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines. The agencies to be notified may include, but not be limited to, the state revenue department, the state bureau of investigation, and the state lottery commission, and violators may be prosecuted under O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, and any other applicable provision of state or federal law. 
(Code 2000, § 32-206(14)) 
Secs. 18-33—18-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TOWING SERVICES 

Sec. 18-60. - Necessity of regulations. 
In accordance with the laws of the state, it is necessary and expedient for the county to exercise its police powers to establish and promulgate certain public safety standards and public safety regulations in regard to the licensing of towing services in the unincorporated areas of the county. The business of towing vehicles is declared to be a privilege, not a right, and such privilege shall not be exercised in the county except as licensed under the terms of this article. Licensing shall be solely for the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(1)) 
Sec. 18-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any entity applying for a towing license under this article. 
Clerk or county clerk means the individual so employed by the board as the clerk or his or her designee. 
Entity or person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, entity, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other entity, group or combination acting as a unit or body politic. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners of Morgan County, Georgia. 
License means the authorization by the board to engage in the towing of vehicles for compensation. 
Licensee means any person who has been issued a license by the board to engage in the towing of vehicles for compensation. 
911 center means the Emergency 911 Advisory Board established by the board on November 2, 1999. 
Officer means a county sheriff's deputy or other law enforcement employee. 
Place of business means the premises described in the licenses issued pursuant to this article. 
Sheriff means the duly elected sheriff of the county or his or her deputy. 
Towing list means a list maintained by the 911 center showing the entities which have received a towing license. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(2)) 
Sec. 18-62. - Licensee qualifications. 
(a)  No towing license shall be granted to any person unless such person is at least 21 years of age and has been a resident of the state for a minimum of one year prior to filing an application for such license. In the event a corporation should be an applicant and said corporation has not been incorporated and/or allowed to do business by the secretary of state for said one-year period, then the incorporator of said corporation and the owners of at least 80 percent of the stock of said corporation shall all have been residents of the state for one year prior to filing an application for such license. 
(b)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(c)  An applicant must promise to maintain and a licensee must maintain the following: 
(1)  A lighted storage area for towed vehicles consisting of an area of no less than 300 square feet with a six-foot or higher chainlink fence surrounding no less than 300 square feet of the property. If said fencing is not equipped with a working lock, an enclosed building (with a working lock) of no less than 1,500 square feet must be located on the property. 
(2)  Liability insurance which covers all stored vehicles and contents in an amount of no less than $40,000.00 per vehicle. 
(3)  All vehicles used in its towing business must have no less than the higher of the minimum liability insurance required by the state public service commission and the United States Highway Administration or the following amounts: 
a.  Intrastate towing: 
1.  $100,000.00 per person; 
2.  $300,000.00 per accident; 
3.  $50,000.00 for property damage. 
b.  Interstate towing: 
1.  $750,000.00 liability; 
2.  MCS-90 proof of insurance. 
(d)  No applicant who has a conviction of or has pled nolo contendere within the previous ten years of the date of his or her application to a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall be granted a license if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant would not maintain the operation for which a license is being sought in conformity with the laws and regulations of the federal or state governments, or the laws and regulations of the county. 
(e)  The licensee shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted and shall be responsible for all violations of this article by his or her agents and employees. 
(f)  The applicant shall make a sworn statement of his or her qualifications according to the above and shall place the same on file with the clerk, or his or her designee, before any license is issued. 
(g)  If the application covers a partnership, all members of the partnership must be qualified to obtain a license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications. 
(h)  If the application covers a corporation, the manager of the proposed licensed premises must be qualified to obtain a license and must make a sworn statement of these qualifications. A corporate license applicant shall appoint and designate to the board an agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of the state. If no such designation is made, the board may serve or notify the applicant of licensee at any address of the applicant or licensee known to the board. 
(i)  A license may be denied to any applicant where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(j)  The board, in its discretion, may consider any and all relevant circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If, in its sole judgment, circumstances are such that the granting, suspension or revocation of the license would or would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for the decision of the board. 
(k)  Any misstatement or concealment of fact in the application shall be grounds for revocation of the license issued and shall make the applicant liable to prosecution for perjury under the law of the state. 
(l)  Whenever the board shall deny an application for a license or permit, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of the denial to request a hearing before the board. The applicant shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(3)) 
Sec. 18-63. - Application for a license. 
Application for a license shall be made on forms furnished by the board as follows: 
(1)  All license applications shall be presented in person. 
(2)  In addition to the completion and submission of an application form as required by the board, each applicant shall attach thereto a completed form with all attachments and requirements for any required state and/or federal license. 
(3)  Before any license is granted, the applicant must post with the board, along with his or her application, a cash bond or performance bond with an insurance company as surety. Said bond shall require the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this article. Upon the violation of this article, or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violation as determined by the board. Said bond is to be approved by the board and shall be properly executed. Said bond shall be in the amount of $500.00. 
(4)  A license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and no such license may be renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next calendar year must make a new application for such year prior to December 1 of the present year. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(4)) 
Sec. 18-64. - License fee. 
The annual fee for a license shall be $100.00 per annum and shall be paid prior to the issuance of such license, said fee to accompany the application and shall be either in cash or bank certified check. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which they were granted. No license fee shall be prorated. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(5)) 
Sec. 18-65. - Display of license. 
Licenses under this article shall be displayed prominently at all times inside the licensed premises. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(6)) 
Sec. 18-66. - Financial responsibility. 
Any applicant for a license must show financial responsibility to the satisfaction of the board. Financial statements must be submitted with each completed application as prescribed by the board. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(7)) 
Sec. 18-67. - Transferability. 
(a)  No license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location, and in the event that a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender said license to the board. Under no circumstances will the license fee be refunded to the licensee. 
(b)  All holders of licenses issued under this article shall, within two months after the issuance of such license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within such period shall serve as a forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license and no refund of the license fee shall be made to the licensee. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(8)) 
Sec. 18-68. - Inspections. 
The business premises, equipment and work sites of the licensee shall be made available for inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(9)) 
Sec. 18-69. - Compliance with laws. 
In additions to the rules and regulations set out in this article, each licensee under this article shall comply with all federal and state laws, rules and regulations, and any violation of same shall subject said licensee to suspension or revocation of his or her license and also may subject said licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by law and the ordinances of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(10)) 
Sec. 18-70. - Hours and telephone. 
All licensees must maintain regular business hours of no less than 30 hours per week and at least one but not more than two listed public business telephone numbers to be called by the public. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(11)) 
Sec. 18-71. - Access. 
All licensees must provide to the board reasonable access seven days per week and 24 hours per day to any towed vehicle in the licensee's possession. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(12)) 
Sec. 18-72. - Ownership/lease. 
All licensees must provide to the board proof of ownership or a lease agreement for each towing vehicle used in its business. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(13)) 
Sec. 18-73. - Public service commission. 
All licensees must maintain proof of registration with the state public service commission and comply with said commission's safety rules and regulations. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(14)) 
Sec. 18-74. - Personnel. 
All licensees must maintain and provide to the 911 center a list of all personnel operating wrecker equipment, as well as a current state motor vehicle report on all such drivers. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(15)) 
Sec. 18-75. - Driving license. 
All drivers employed by the licensee must maintain a valid driver's license of the appropriate class with the appropriate endorsements required for operation the licensee's equipment under state law. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(16)) 
Sec. 18-76. - Response. 
If called and the licensee is unable to respond to a call, the licensee must notify the 911 center immediately. The licensee is prohibited from calling its own backup towing service, but may obtain assistance as needed after responding to the call. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(17)) 
Sec. 18-77. - Equipment. 
The following equipment must be maintained on or carried in all towing vehicles of the licensee: 
(1)  For intrastate carriers, the licensee's state public service commission card with the current year's stamp. For interstate carriers, said card and the federal required registration for interstate carriers. 
(2)  If intrastate towing only is offered, a state department of transportation (GADOT) number must be affixed to the outside of the vehicle. 
(3)  If interstate towing is offered, a U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT) number or United States Motor Carrier (MC) number must be affixed to the outside of the vehicle. In addition, the GADOT number must also be so affixed. 
(4)  A current valid registration tag must be affixed to the vehicle. 
(5)  Flashing or revolving amber light with 360-degree visibility must be affixed to the vehicle. 
(6)  A valid emergency light permit must be affixed to the vehicle. 
(7)  Battery jumper cables. 
(8)  Fire extinguisher. 
(9)  Sweeping broom. 
(10)  Flat shovel. 
(11)  Container for debris. 
(12)  Four motorcycle straps. 
(13)  No less than 100 pounds of oil sorb. 
(14)  Tow-away lamps (tail, stop and turn signal lights for vehicles being towed). 
(15)  Licensee's name, address and telephone number permanently affixed to both sides of the outside of the vehicle. The letters must be readable at a distance of 50 feet while the vehicle is stationary. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(18)) 
Sec. 18-78. - Operational procedures. 
(a)  When a need for a towing vehicle arises, and the owner/operator of the stranded vehicle has no preference as to which licensee is used, the towing service next on the 911 center's towing list will generally be used. 
(b)  A request for a specified licensee by the owner/operator of a stranded vehicle must be made on an individual incident basis. Advance blanket requests are not practical for safety and efficiency, and therefore will not be honored. 
(c)  If the use of the requested licensee would result in an excessive delay to the officer in the execution of his or her duties, the officer may exercise the option of using another licensee on the 911 center's towing list. 
(d)  In a towing emergency situation involving significant threat to life or property, the officer may utilize the closest equipment or services necessary to stabilize the situation. 
(e)  It will be the responsibility of the towing driver to ensure that all safety equipment, such as chains or cables, are used in accordance with state and federal laws, rules and regulations, as well as the manufacturer's requirements, and as designed for the safe and legal operation of recovery vehicles. 
(f)  No towing service is allowed to utilize a nonconsensual service call to solicit business. 
(g)  If the licensee is unable to promptly respond to the initial call, the 911 center will generally contact the next licensee on the list. 
(h)  The 911 center may survey its territories and attempt to locate towing services that can provide resources beyond normal services proved by licensee, i.e., larger wreckers and specialized equipment. If more than one service wishes to participate in providing the same type services, the 911 center may establish a list of those requests to be maintained. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(19)) 
Sec. 18-79. - Violations. 
Any violation of one or more provisions of this article shall subject the offender to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation in addition to such violation being a cause for revocation or suspension of the license of the offending licensee by the board and criminal prosecution. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(20)) 
Sec. 18-80. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
No person shall engage in the towing of vehicles for compensation in the unincorporated areas of the county without first complying with the rules and requirements set out in this article. Any license issued hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The making of any false statement on an application for a license issued hereunder; 
(2)  A violation of the rules and regulations set out in this article and/or the statutory laws and/or regulations of the United States and/or the state and/or the county; 
(3)  The failure to have the financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned; 
(4)  Default in any obligation, of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the county; 
(5)  Repeated and substantiated complaints from customers of fraudulent and/or unethical business practices of the licensee and/or employees regarding towing and/or related services; 
(6)  Poor and/or inefficient service under the license which adversely affects the public safety and/or law enforcement; 
(7)  Failure to promptly respond to service calls; 
(8)  Any violation of this article; or 
(9)  For any other legal and sufficient cause. 
Any action taken by the board to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder shall not preclude and may be in addition to any fines and prosecution by a proper authority as provided by the laws and/or ordinances of the county, the state, and/or the United States. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(21)) 
Sec. 18-81. - Due process. 
The grant or refusal and the suspension or revocation of a license under this article shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall constitute ascertainable standards upon which all decisions pertaining to licenses shall be based. 
(2)  Whenever the board wishes to take any action to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder, the board shall provide ten days' written notice to the licensee prior to taking such action. The notice shall set forth the reasons for such action. The licensee shall have ten days following notification of such action to request a hearing before the board. 
(3)  If a hearing is requested, the following information shall be given to the licensee: 
a.  A written copy of all charges or reasons for the proposed suspension or revocation; 
b.  The date, time and location of the hearing; 
c.  A list of witnesses the board expects to testify in favor of the suspension or revocation; and 
d.  Notice of the licensee's right to attend the hearing, to present a defense, to have an attorney in attendance, to have the attorney present evidence and testimony and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(4)  All decisions suspending or revoking a license shall set forth the reason for such action in writing, and shall be delivered to the licensee at his or her last known address. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(22)) 
Sec. 18-82. - Production of records. 
In conjunction with any license application or any license issued under the terms hereof, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license or in conjunction with any of the hearings contemplated by this article, the board shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of any applicant or licensee. Said subpoena right shall be had for the purposes of auditing the records of such applicant or licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this article, proving and disproving violation of any part of this article by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder. 
(Code 2000, § 32-207(23)) 
Secs. 18-83—18-104. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of June 5, 2007, § 1, amended Article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Article IV pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— County governing authority has power to enact legislation to restrict operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 

Sec. 18-105. - Findings; public purposes. 
(a)  Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, and on the experiences of the county, which experiences we believe are relevant to the problem faced by the county, we take note of the conditions and occurrences generally associated with adult entertainment establishments. It is the finding of the board of commissioners that adult entertainment establishments, particularly those where alcoholic beverages are served, result in an increase in criminal behavior and create undesirable community conditions. An increase in instances of disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, prostitution, drug trafficking and loitering of individuals with criminal histories has been the experience of other counties and municipalities which permit adult entertainment establishments, particularly those in which alcoholic beverages are served. 
(b)  The board of commissioners and sheriff have carefully reviewed relevant portions of voluminous documentation, including without limitation information from the December, 1994 St. Cloud Adult Use Regulation Report, a detailed 18 page report from Dr. Richard McCleary in the 2005 case involving Starship Enterprise of Atlanta Inc. v. Fulton County and others, a 26 page report from Dr. Richard McCleary in the 2005 case of Reliable Consultants Inc. v. City of Kennedale, Texas, a detailed April, 1997 report from appraiser Peter Malin to the City of Dallas city attorney, and certain documentation from a 2002 criminal case involving the State of Tennessee and various individuals regarding an adult entertainment business in Chattanooga, Tennessee. All this documentation reviewed by the board of commissioners and sheriff is being attached to the minutes of the meeting approving this ordinance, and is officially made a part of the record. The board of commissioners also recognizes that courts have made findings in these issues, and the board relies on its collective wisdom and common sense. The board further relies on the evidentiary foundation set forth in City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120 S.Ct. 1382, 146 L.Ed.2d 265, (2000), and in Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 106 S.Ct. 925 to the effect that secondary effects are caused by the presence of even one adult entertainment establishment in a given neighborhood. 
(c)  An increase in instances of disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, public indecency, public solicitation, violent crime, prostitution, exploitation of young women, drug use, drug trafficking and loitering of individuals with criminal histories has been the experience of other counties and municipalities that permit adult entertainment establishments, particularly where there are two or more such businesses in close proximity, and particularly in such businesses that serve alcohol. The board of commissioners has a substantial interest in guarding against these undesirable secondary effects, to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to preserve and protect the quality of life in the county. The board of commissioners also wishes to guard against public indecency which is a crime per O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8, and to guard against certain sexual contact provided for money, which is a crime per O.C.G.A. § 16-6-16. 
(d)  The board of commissioners also finds that the increase in criminal behavior which accompanies adult entertainment establishments causes undesirable community conditions, particularly where there are two or more such businesses in close proximity, and particularly in such businesses that serve alcohol. Conditions experienced in other counties and municipalities are: depression of property values in neighborhoods surrounding the adult entertainment establishment, neighborhood blight, an increased burden on and expenditure for law enforcement, and an increase in the criminal case load in the judicial system due to a greater number of arrests because of the above mentioned crime problems. The board of commissioners notes a substantial governmental interest in regulating this and any atmosphere conducive to violence, sexual harassment, public intoxication, prostitution, spread of sexually transmitted diseases and other negative effects. The board of commissioners wishes to protect against neighborhood blight and downgrade of surrounding neighborhoods due to the problems and undesirable behavior associated with adult entertainment establishments. 
(e)  The board of commissioners finds that the above-stated undesirable secondary effects will harm the county unless these regulations are imposed to limit such adverse affects. These regulations are to minimize the adverse effects in order to preserve quality of life and to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals and to maintain the integrity of this community, especially in residential areas, and areas which have a church, school, daycare center, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground. These regulations are to promote these legitimate public and governmental interests in a way that will not infringe upon the constitutional right of freedom of expression. The board of commissioners is not attempting to preclude adult entertainment; rather, the board seeks to regulate adult entertainment establishments to protect the public from the above-described, negative secondary effects. The board of commissioners has narrowly tailored these regulations to combat the negative secondary effects and protect the public health, safety and welfare, while allowing reasonable avenues of protected first amendment communication. The board of commissioners has found no less-restrictive alternative to these regulations that would adequately protect the public health, safety and welfare. The restrictions posed by these regulations are no greater than is essential to the furtherance of the government interest stated above. 
(f)  Therefore, the purpose of this article is to regulate adult entertainment establishments to prevent increases in criminal activity and undesirable community conditions. It is recognized that such regulation cannot approach prohibition, or a protected form of expression would vanish. Therefore, this article represents an attempt to balance the competing interests of reduced criminal activity and neighborhood protection versus the rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208; Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 101; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means: 
(1)  An establishment having as a portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, with a display area or section of such materials of more than ten square feet; or 
(2)  An establishment which derives five percent or more of its gross sales from the sale or rental of such materials. 
Adult entertainment establishment means any establishment which operates as any of the following, which are defined herein: an adult bookstore, an adult motion picture theater, an adult motion picture mini-theater, an adult motion picture arcade, an adult video store, an erotic dance establishment, an escort bureau or introduction service, a message parlor, or any other establishment having characteristics resembling any such establishment as defined herein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture mini-theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means: 
(1)  An establishment having as its stock in trade videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
(2)  An establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material; or 
(3)  An establishment which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos or movies or other reproductions which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Board of commissioners means the governing body of Morgan County, Georgia, hereinafter sometimes referred to as "board." 
Church means a building primarily used for public religious worship on a regular basis. 
County clerk means the individual so employed by the board as the clerk or his or her designee. 
County manager means the individual employed to serve as the Manager of Morgan County, Georgia. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by any of the following: topless and/or bottomless dancers; dancers wearing lingerie; dancers wearing panties, thongs, or g-strings and pasties; go-go dancers; strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by the performance of specified sexual activities or the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau or introduction service means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Governmental building means a building owned by any local, state or federal government. 
Library means a building open to the general public which contains a collection of books. 
License means authorization by the county to operate an adult entertainment establishment. This license is sometimes referred to as an adult entertainment establishment license. 
Licensee means the holder of a current, valid adult entertainment establishment license. 
Licensing officer means the county employee in charge of the granting, denial or suspension of all licenses and permits under this article. The county manager will act as licensing officer. 
Massage parlor means a business used for commercial entertainment, sometimes also described as a "bath house," where the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact with or to allow personal contact by, employees, devices or equipment or by personnel provided by the establishment which involves specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Minor means, for the purposes of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Permit means authorization by the county after approval by the licensing officer for a person to be an employee of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Public park means a large piece of ground, with grass and trees, for recreation that is open to the general public. 
Public playground means an open space or courtyard for recreation which is open to the general public. 
School means a building, publicly or privately owned, that is used for teaching or giving instruction in any subject to pupils of the school. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  Activities of the following nature which are actual or simulated: Sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, or zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicting human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(2); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 102; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-107. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. The issuance of such license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the statutory laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  No licensee shall employ or contract with a person to be a dancer who is under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(d)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(e)  An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. No licensee shall permit his or her place of business to be open on any Sunday nor on Christmas Day. 
(f)  No licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(g)  A licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(h)  All dancing at any erotic dance establishment shall occur on a platform used solely for dancing that is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(i)  No dancing at any erotic dance establishment shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(j)  No dancer at any erotic dance establishment shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(k)  No patron at any erotic dance establishment shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(l)  No dancer at any erotic dance establishment shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(m)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. The term "fully lighted" means illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(3); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 103; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-108. - Prohibited activities. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion, including the display of sexually explicit nudity, specified sexual activities or materials or videos depicting such. All adult entertainment business operations shall be inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered or mirror tinted so that the inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(4); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 104; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-109. - License required. 
(a)  In or upon any premises within the unincorporated areas of the county, it shall be unlawful for any person, association, entity, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a license to do so. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the statutory laws of the state or the United States. The annual fee for the license shall be $1,000.00, and no license to an otherwise qualifying applicant shall be issued until such fee has been paid to the county clerk in full. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture mini-theater, adult motion picture arcade, escort bureau or introduction service, or erotic dance establishment unless such business has a current, valid license, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(c)  Each type of adult entertainment establishment shall constitute a separate adult entertainment business, requiring its own, separate license. 
(Code 2000, §§ 32-208(5) and (6); Ord. of 7-14-1998, §§ 105, 106; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-110. - Condition of premises. 
(a)  In the event an adult entertainment establishment maintains booths, cubicles, rooms or similar (collectively "booths") for the use of its patrons, the following rules apply: 
(1)  No doors are permitted on the booths; 
(2)  Illumination must meet or exceed three and five tenths foot candles per square foot; 
(3)  The booth interiors must be fully visible from the entrance to the premises; 
(4)  Each booth shall be separated from adjacent booths and any nonpublic areas by a wall; 
(5)  Each booth shall have a permanently open entranceway and view not less than two feet eight inches wide and not less than seven feet high, which may not be closed by any door, curtain, or other partition which would be capable of wholly or partially obscuring any person in the viewing room. This entranceway and view shall open directly to an adjacent public room where the front counter is located or to a main aisle so that a person located in the front room or main aisle is able to view any person or persons located in any viewing rooms in order to monitor compliance with this ordinance; 
(6)  Specified sexual activities in booths or on the premises are prohibited; 
(7)  No more than one chair (couches are prohibited) is allowed in a booth; 
(b)  Holes in interior walls to facilitate specified sexual activities are prohibited in booths and on the premises generally. 
(c)  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
(d)  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(6); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 106; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-111. - Admission of minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, entity, partnership or corporation to admit or permit the admission of minors within an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(7); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 107; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-112. - Sales to minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, exotic dance establishment or any other adult entertainment establishment defined in this article. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(8); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 108; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-113. - Location. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
(5)  In the same building as another adult entertainment establishment; or 
(6)  On less than three acres of land or on any parcel containing less than 100 feet of road frontage. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement between property lines, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(c)  The location of adult entertainment establishments must comply with all other federal, state and local laws, including but not limited to the county's zoning ordinance and development regulations. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(9); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 109; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-114. - Employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 21 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character. Any employee who is convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall cease to work and not thereafter work at any adult entertainment establishment in the county for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. The terms "employed at the adult entertainment establishment premises" and "work at any adult entertainment establishment premises" shall include work done or services performed while in the scope of employment by an adult entertainment establishment off the premises of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work at an adult entertainment establishment, he or she shall file a notice with the licensing officer of the intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and must receive approval for such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the licensing officer requires, including a set of fingerprints, on county or United States Department of Justice forms. The notice of intended employment shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of $50.00 or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. Upon the issuance of a permit showing approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. Approval and a permit shall be granted if the qualifications defined in subsection (a) of this section are met. Approval shall be denied if said qualifications are not met. An appeal from such decision shall be governed by this article. 
(c)  Permit suspension or revocation. Violation of the provisions of this article, any other ordinances of the county, or any laws or regulations of the state shall subject an employee and/or licensee to permit suspension or permit revocation. An appeal from such a decision shall be governed by this article. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors of adult entertainment establishments shall be considered as employees and must comply with employee permit requirements, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(10); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 110; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-115. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the licensing officer. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the county clerk, or his or her designee, to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The county clerk, or his or her designee, shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the licensing officer at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(11); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 111; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-116. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's true full name and any other names ever used by the applicant; 
(1)  The applicant's present address and telephone number; 
(3)  The applicant's previous addresses and the dates of residence at each address for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, eye and hair color, and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two color photographs of the applicant at least two inches long by two inches wide taken within the last six months, which clearly show the applicant's face; 
(7)  A statement of the business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application, and of any and all partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  A statement of the business license history of the applicant and of any and all partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding, and whether said persons or the corporate applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory, has had a license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reasons therefor, and the business activities or occupations subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk, or his or her designee, or the state. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner and/or lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  Such other identification and information as the investigating law enforcement agency or agencies may require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified in this section as required to be set forth in the application; 
(12)  If the applicant, any partners of a partnership or any of the officers of a corporation or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the past five years, a complete description of any such crime must be provided including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(13)  The county shall require an individual applicant to furnish the applicant's fingerprints; 
(14)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the properly recorded trade name must be provided. If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant must provide a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(15)  At least three character references from individuals who are unrelated to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this section for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(16)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(17)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal rights; 
(18)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the acreage of the proposed site, the location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(19)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct: 
(a)  If the applicant is an individual, by the individual; 
(b)  If the applicant is a partnership, by the managing or general partner; 
(c)  If the applicant is a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
(d)  If the applicant is any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(12); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 112; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-117. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the licensing officer and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $50.00 has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(13); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 113; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-118. - Investigation. 
The licensing officer shall have 60 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the licensing officer may grant a license if he or she finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application complies in all respects with the requirements of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly or negligently made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his or her application; 
(5)  As of the date of the application, the applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked for cause by the board of commissioners or any other city, county, state or territory within the United States; 
(6)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(7)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(8)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined in this article to be committed in violation of the ordinances of the county and/or the statutory laws of the state and/or the United States upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located nor has the applicant used the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined in this article openly occur in violation of the ordinances of the county and/or the statutory laws of the state and/or the United States; 
(9)  That on the date the business for which a license is required in this article commences, and thereafter, there will be a person of good moral character on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(10)  That the proposed premises are not located in violation of the requirements of this article; 
(11)  That the granting of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other statutory law, ordinance or regulation of the county, the state or the United States; 
(12)  That any other inquiry deemed necessary by the county to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county or the preservation of its neighborhoods has been made and the results of the inquiry demonstrate the granting of the permit will not threaten the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the county or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(14); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 114; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-119. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes for the business at that location; 
(2)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold a business license and/or conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state, or the county. 
(b)  Should there be a number of current licenses sufficient to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the county, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50, 81. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(15); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 115; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-120. - Denial of permit or license; appeal. 
(a)  If the licensing officer, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, he or she shall notify the county clerk, or his or her designee, of such opinion and within 60 days of the date of application provide copies of the investigation report to the county clerk, or his or her designee. The county clerk, or his or her designee, shall within ten days notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a license or permit may appeal such denial to the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the board of commissioners and shall specify the subject matters of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision and the date of receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the board of commissioners and the name and address of the appellant. 
(c)  The county clerk, or his or her designee, shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners meeting occurring not less than 15 or more than 45 days after receipt of the application for board action. 
(d)  When an appeal is placed on the board of commissioners' agenda, the board may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the county clerk, or his or her designee, to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The county clerk, or his or her designee, shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
(e)  When the county clerk, or his or her designee, has scheduled an appeal before the board of commissioners, at the scheduled time and date, the board shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee and from competent witnesses. The board of commissioners may sustain, overrule or modify the decision appealed from. The action of the board shall be final. 
(f)  The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as the hearing officer may deem advisable. 
(g)  Neither the board nor the hearing officer shall be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. 
(h)  Within a time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is completed, the hearing officer shall submit a written report to the board of commissioners. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. Such report shall be filed with the county clerk, or his or her designee, and shall be considered public record. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant the same day it is filed with the county clerk, or his or her designee. Copies shall be given to the county manager and the county sheriff. 
(i)  The county clerk, or his or her designee, shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(j)  The board of commissioners may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the board of commissioners does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points. In either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as required by this section; or 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record with or without taking additional evidence. If additional evidence is taken, the board of commissioners must comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(16); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 116; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-121. - Duration of license, no renewals. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments are only valid for the calendar year for which they are issued. A current licensee may apply in June of the current year for a license for the upcoming year. A new applicant may apply in July of the current year for a license for the upcoming year. Issuance of a license does not create a subsequent right or entitlement to renewal of any license. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(17); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 117; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-122. - Nontransferability of license. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a holder of such license (licensee) or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void. However, if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license if they individually and collectively continue to remain eligible, and in such case the license, upon notification to the county clerk, or his or her designee, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void if any of the outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or if any of the stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(18); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 118; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-123. - Location and/or name change. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee of $100.00 has been deposited with the county clerk, or his or her designee, and approval has been obtained from the licensing officer and the building inspector. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations contained in all city ordinances, laws and regulations have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than the licensee's name and the name of the business as specified on his or her license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require an investigation as provided for by this article and shall comply with all other provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(19); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 119; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-124. - Appeal of licensee or employee from adverse decision. 
(a)  The licensee or employee shall, within ten days after he or she has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the county clerk, or his or her designee. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the board of commissioners and shall specify the subject matters of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision and the date of receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the board and the name and address of the appellant. 
(c)  The county clerk, or his or her designee, shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners meeting occurring not less than five or more than 35 days after receipt of the application for board action. 
(d)  When an appeal is placed on the board of commissioners' agenda, the board may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the county clerk, or his or her designee, to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a county employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The county clerk, or his or her designee, shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
(e)  When the county clerk, or his or her designee, has scheduled an appeal before the board of commissioners, at the scheduled time and date, the board shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee and from competent witnesses. The board may sustain, overrule or modify the decision appealed from. The action of the board shall be final. 
(f)  The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as the hearing officer may deem advisable. 
(g)  Neither the board nor the hearing officer shall be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Instead the rules of evidence of an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(h)  Within a time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is completed, the hearing officer shall submit a written report to the board of commissioners. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. Such report shall be filed with the county clerk, or his or her designee, and shall be considered public record. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant the same day it is filed with the county clerk, or his or her designee. Copies shall be given to the licensing officer and the sheriff. 
(i)  The county clerk, or his or her designee, shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioner's meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(j)  The board of commissioners may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the board does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points. In either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as required by this section; or 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record with or without taking additional evidence. If additional evidence is taken, the board of commissioners must comply with the requirements of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(20); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 120; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-125. - Penalty for violations. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished according to the general penalty described in section 1-9. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any license issued hereunder. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(21); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 121; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-126. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The board of commissioners may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. The board of commissioners shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin the operation of an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of any provision of this article shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license or permit granted hereunder. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(22); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 122; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-127. - Miscellaneous activities. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever that is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under any applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. This section shall supersede and limit all other provisions of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(23); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 123; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 18-128. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
The licensee or the licensee's designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record the findings of the inspections on a form supplied by the licensing officer. All licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Code 2000, § 32-208(24); Ord. of 7-14-1998, § 124; Ord. of 6-5-2007, § 1) 
Secs. 18-129—18-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE - V. 
GARAGE SALES, FLEA MARKETS AND OTHER OUTDOOR SALES 

Sec. 18-200. - Intent and purpose. 
The Morgan County Board of Commissioners finds, determines and declares that: 
A garage sale serves as a method by which a residential lessee or homeowner may sell or dispose of unwanted items of personal property and correspondingly provides an opportunity for other persons to purchase bargains; 
The unregulated allowance of garage sales in the unincorporated areas of Morgan County presents an opportunity for abuse in that some persons may be conducting business activities under the guise of having a garage sale; 
The existence of non-regulated and recurring garage sales and flea markets causes annoyance to citizens in the unincorporated areas of Morgan County and congestion of the state and local roads; 
This article is adopted for the purpose of prohibiting the encroachment of commercial activities into residential areas by regulating the term and frequency of garage sales and flea markets so as to prevent the disturbance or disruption of the residential environment throughout Morgan County; 
This article is not intended to prohibit isolated or casual sales by individuals of household or other personal items; and 
The provisions and prohibitions contained in this article are adopted not for the purpose of preventing, but for the purpose of regulating the garage sales and flea markets in the unincorporated areas of Morgan County for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County planned function means an event which is sponsored by the county. 
Exempt organization means a charitable, nonprofit, tax-exempt organization or community service organization, contributions to which are deductible for federal or state income tax purpose. 
Garage sale means and includes all general sales, open to the public, conducted from or on residential premises for the purpose of disposing of personal property of the owner or lessee of such residence and shall include but not be limited to all sales entitled "estate," "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "back yard," "patio" or "rummage" sale; however, neighborhood owners and/or lessees may participate in any such garage sale so as to authorize multifamily garage sales so long as the owner or lessee of the premises at which the sale is operated is conducting and in charge of the garage sale. 
Indoor flea market means a regular business at which the owner or lessee of the subject real property makes spaces available (all of such space is totally enclosed within a permanent structure) to persons who sell new, consigned and/or used merchandise at retail or wholesale to the public on a permanent basis. An indoor flea market is not included within the definition of the term "garage sale" or "outdoor flea market" as set forth in this section. 
Outdoor flea market means an event, transaction or occurrence at which an owner or sponsor in any area makes outside space available to persons who sell new, consigned and/or used merchandise at retail or wholesale to the public on a daily, weekend, occasional, temporary or permanent basis. An outdoor flea market is not included within the definition of the term "garage sale" or "indoor flea market" as set forth in this section. 
Personal property means property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his residence or household and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining the residence or household where such garage sale is to be conducted. This term does not include merchandise which was purchased for the purpose of resale or which is obtained on a consignment. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-202. - Prohibitions. 
No garage sale shall be held or conducted in the county unless it is conducted at the residence of the person holding such garage sale and a permit for such sale is obtained from Morgan County 72 hours prior to the beginning of the garage sale. Such permit shall be issued free of charge unless the county determines that the issuance of the permit would not be in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. An aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the county to the board of commissioners, if such appeal is filed within ten days after receipt of the decision of the county. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-203. - Outdoor flea market requirements. 
No outdoor flea market shall be operated or conducted in the county unless the license required by the rules and regulations of the county shall have been obtained and the cost paid. This fee shall be a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each entity having a place of sale at an outdoor flea market. If a flea market operator has purchased a license for an indoor flea market, such operator may, instead of a daily fee per entity, purchase an annual license, which shall be a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-204. - Indoor flea market requirements. 
No indoor flea market shall be operated or conducted in the county unless the owner or lessee of the premises where such indoor flea market is being operated or conducted obtains a business license from the county for a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-205. - Garage sales; hours of operation; number of sales. 
All garage sales shall be operated or conducted during the daylight hours, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. No person or group of persons shall hold more than four garage sales during any calendar year. Each yard sale shall be limited to a three-day period. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-206. - Display of personal property. 
Personal property offered for sale at a garage sale may be displayed within the residence, in a carport, in a garage, in the front, side or rear yard, or in the driveway. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-207. - Advertising signs. 
Signs permitted. Only the following signs may be displayed for the purpose of advertising a pending garage sale: 
(1)  Two signs of not more than four square feet each may be displayed on the property of the residence where the garage sale is to be conducted. 
(2)  Two signs of not more than two square feet each for the purpose of giving direction to the residence where the garage sale is to be or is being conducted. 
Placement of signs . The signs advertising the garage sale as authorized by this section shall: 
(1)  Not be erected on public property or on public facilities. 
(2)  Have permission to erect such signs from the owners of the property upon which such signs are to be placed. 
Erection of signs. No sign or other form of advertisement shall be exhibited for more than three days prior to the date such garage sale is to commence. 
Removal of signs. Signs advertising or giving directions to a garage sale must be removed within 24 hours after the end of a garage sale. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-208. - Responsibility. 
The owner or lessee of the premises upon which a garage sale is conducted shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on the premises during the hours of such sale. No such individual shall allow or permit any loud or boisterous language or conduct on the premises nor permit vehicles to impede the passage of traffic on roads or streets in the area of the premises where the garage sale is being conducted. All such individuals shall obey the reasonable orders of any member of the sheriff or fire department of the county reasonably necessary to maintain the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-209. - Parking—Law enforcement. 
The parking of vehicles in the vicinity of a garage sale shall be in compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. The sheriff department may enforce such temporary controls as may be necessary to alleviate any special health hazards and/or traffic congestion created by a garage sale. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-210. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect: 
Persons selling goods or personal property at a judicial or foreclosure sale pursuant to the order of any court of competent jurisdiction or any trustee, executor or administrator conducting an estate sale authorized or required by law. 
Any person given permission to hold an outdoor sale in a designated area of the county during a county planned function. 
Any public official acting in accordance with and pursuant to their duties, powers and responsibilities as public officials. 
A sale by an exempt organization. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-211. - Violation. 
Any article sold on each day conducted in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Sec. 18-212. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. of 7-5-2011, §§ 1, 2(exh. A)) 
Secs. 18-213—18-250. - Reserved. 
Chapter 22 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981 provides for local organizations and emergency powers for use in emergencies and disasters, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 22-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this article, except where the context clearly indicates different meaning: 
Emergency means any natural or man-made event requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan. 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor, or the President of the United States. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the governor to head the state emergency management agency. 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Code 2000, § 14-101; Ord. of 1-20-2009) 
Sec. 22-21. - Office of the emergency management director. 
There is hereby established the county emergency management agency. The chairperson of the board of commissioners, with concurrence of the mayors of the incorporated cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of emergency management for the entire county. Upon appointment, the emergency management director shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the county manager or board of commissioners and shall serve at the pleasure of the county manager or board of commissioners. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the county and said cities therein on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist county and city officials in organizing county and city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the county emergency operations plan for emergency functions set forth in section 22-20. Such plan will be in accordance with the state natural disaster operations plan and nuclear emergency operations plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  To maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activities. 
(6)  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operating center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of county governing officials. 
(Code 2000, § 14-102; Ord. of 1-20-2009) 
Sec. 22-22. - County emergency management agency. 
The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing county and city departments and the emergency functions listed in section 22-20 are assigned as follows (Primary = (P), Secondary = (S)): 

 
Heads of departments listed above are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes and/or SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Code 2000, § 14-103; Ord. of 1-20-2009) 
Sec. 22-23. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county and cities therein, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county and city officers and employees. 
(Code 2000, § 14-105; Ord. of 1-20-2009) 
Sec. 22-24. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to any sections of this article, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for a misdemeanor, and subject to the general penalties described in sections 1-9 and 1-10. 
(Code 2000, § 14-106; Ord. of 1-20-2009) 
Sec. 22-25. - State Mutual Aid Act; cooperation. 
(a)  Pursuant to the state Mutual Aid Act, the sheriff, the fire coordinator and/or the director of the emergency management agency may request assistance and cooperation from neighboring political subdivisions during local emergencies in the county pursuant to the state Mutual Aid Act. 
(b)  The sheriff, fire coordinator and the director of the emergency management agency of shall cooperate with and provide assistance during local emergencies to neighboring political subdivisions of the state. 
(Code 2000, § 14-107; Ord. of 1-20-2009) 
Secs. 22-26—22-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - E-911 SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Dec. 4, 2007, effective 3-5-2008, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 22-40—22-52, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— Local governing authorities authorized to impose a monthly 911 charge upon exchange access facilities subscribed to by telephone subscribers, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-133. 

Sec. 22-40. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addressing means the assigning of a numerical address and street name (the name may be numerical) to each location within the county's geographical area necessary to provide public safety service as determined by the county. This address replaces any route and box number currently in place in the 911 database and facilitates quicker response by public safety agencies. 
ALS (advanced life support) means the base level of services and equipment to be provided by a service supplier which shall include, at a minimum, basic life support plus the use of adjunctive equipment, the establishment of an intravenous line, the administration of fluids and drugs, cardiac monitoring, defibrillation, the control of arrhythmias, and postresuscitation care. 
Call means any communication, message, signal or transmission. 
Consumer means a person who purchases prepaid wireless telecommunications service in a retail transaction. 
County means Morgan County. 
Division means the telecommunications division of the department of administrative services. 
Emergency 911 system means a telephone service, computer service, wireless service, or other service which facilitates the placing of calls by persons in need of emergency systems services to a public safety answering point by dialing the telephone number 911 and under which calls to 911 are answered or otherwise responded to by public safety answering points established and operated by the county subscribing to the 911 service. The term "emergency 911 system" also includes the term "enhanced 911 service" which means an emergency system that provides the user with emergency 911 system service and, in addition, directs 911 calls to appropriate public safety answering points by selective routing based on the geographical location from which the call originated and provides the capability for automatic number identification and automatic location identification features. 
Exchange access facility means the access from a particular telephone subscriber's premises to the telephone system of a service supplier. Exchange access facilities include service supplier provided access lines, PBX trunks, and Centrex network access registers, all as defined by tariffs of the telephone companies as approved by the Georgia Public Service Commission. The term "exchange access facility," also includes Voice over Internet Protocol service suppliers and any other communication, message, signal, or information delivery system capable of initiating a 911 emergency call. Exchange access facilities do not include service supplier owned and operated telephone pay station lines, Wide Area Telecommunications Services (WATS), Foreign Exchange (FX), or incoming only lines. 
911 charge means a contribution to the county for the 911 service startup equipment costs, subscriber notification costs, addressing costs, billing costs, nonrecurring and recurring installation, maintenance, service and network charges of a service supplier providing 911 service pursuant to this article, and costs associated with the hiring, training and compensating of dispatchers employed by the county to operate said 911 system at the public safety answering points. 
911 number means the digits, address, Internet Protocol address, or other information used to access or initiate a call to a public safety answering point. 
Prepaid wireless 911 charge means a $.75 charge per retail transaction that is required to be collected by a seller from a consumer. 
Prepaid wireless service means any method pursuant to which a consumer pays a wireless service supplier or seller in advance for a wireless telecommunications connection. Such term shall include, without limitation, calling or usage privileges included with the purchase of a wireless telephone as well as additional calling or usage privileges purchased by any means, including, without limitation, a calling card, a wireless communication, or an Internet transaction. 
Public agency means the state and any city, county, city and county, municipal corporation, chartered organization, public district, or public authority located in whole or in part within the county, which provides or has authority to provide firefighting, law enforcement, ambulance, medical or other emergency services. 
Public safety agency means a functional division of a public agency which provides firefighting, law enforcement, emergency medical, suicide prevention, civil defense, poison control, drug prevention, child abuse, spouse abuse, or other emergency services. 
Retail transaction means the purchase of prepaid wireless service from a seller for any purpose other than resale. 
Seller means a person who sells prepaid wireless service to another person. 
Service supplier means a person or entity who provides telephone service to a telephone subscriber within the county. 
Telephone service means any method by which a 911 emergency call is delivered to a public safety answering point. The term "telephone service" shall include local exchange telephone service or other telephone communication service, wireless service, prepaid wireless service, mobile telecommunications service, computer service, Voice over Internet Protocol service, or any technology that delivers or is required by law to deliver a call to a public safety answering point. 
Telephone subscriber means a person or entity to whom telephone service, either residential or commercial, is provided. When the same person, business or organization has several telephone access lines, each exchange access facility shall constitute a separate subscription. When the same person, business, or organization has several wireless telephones, each wireless telecommunications connection shall constitute a separate connection. 
Voice over Internet Protocol service means any technology that permits a voice conversation using a voice connection to a computer, whether through a microphone, a telephone, or other device, which sends a digital signal over the Internet through a broadband connection to be converted back to the human voice at a distant terminal and that delivers or is required by law to deliver a c all to a public safety answering point. Voice over Internet Protocol service shall also include interconnected Voice over Internet Protocol service, which is service that enables real-time, two-way voice communications, requires a broadband connection from the user's location, requires Internet protocol compatible customer premises equipment, and allows users to receive calls that originate on the public service telephone network and to terminate calls to the public switched telephone network. 
Voice over Internet Protocol service supplier means a person or entity who provides Voice over Internet Protocol service to subscribers for a fee. 
Wireless enhanced 911 charge means a contribution to the county for the following: The costs to the county of implementing or upgrading, and maintaining, an emergency 911 system which is capable of receiving and utilizing the following information, as it relates to 911 calls made from a wireless telecommunications connection: 
(1)  Automatic number identification, the location of the base station or cell site which receives the 911 call, and the location of the wireless telecommunications connection; 
(2)  Nonrecurring and recurring installation, maintenance, service, and network charges of a wireless service supplier to provide the information described in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph; and 
(3)  Other costs which may be paid with money from the emergency telephone system fund, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(e). 
Wireless service means "commercial mobile service" as defined under section 11 332(D) of the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. Section 157 et seq.), regulations of the Federal Communications Commission, and the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (P.L. 103-66) and includes real-time, two-way interconnected voice service which is provided over networks which utilize intelligent switching capability and offer seamless handoff to customers. The term does not include one-way signaling service, data transmission service, nonlocal radio access line service, or a private telecommunications service. The term does include prepaid wireless service. 
Wireless service supplier means a provider of wireless service. 
Wireless telecommunications connection means any mobile station for wireless service that connects a provider of wireless service to a provider of local exchange telephone service. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2007(1), eff. 3-5-2008; Ord. of 8-2-2011(2), exh. A)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-2. 
Sec. 22-41. - Liability; loss. 
(a)  Neither the emergency 911 system provider, the county nor any of its employees, directors, officers and agents, except in cases of wanton and willful misconduct, or bad faith, shall be liable for death or injury to the person or for damage to property as a result of either developing, adopting, establishing or carrying out duties involved in operating the 911 emergency telephone system or in the identification of the telephone number, address or name associated with any person accessing an emergency 911 system. 
(b)  The county shall not be required to release, indemnify, defend or hold harmless any emergency 911 system provider from any loss, claim, demand, suit or other action or any liability whatsoever which arises out of subsection (a) of this section unless the county agrees or has agreed to assume such obligations. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2007(1), eff. 3-5-2008; Ord. of 8-2-2011(2), exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-42. - Maintenance fee; collection. 
(a)  The service supplier providing enhanced emergency telephone number 911 service shall divide its maintenance fee among the telephone subscribers whose telephones are in the area served by the enhanced 911 system and bill such subscribers on a pro rata basis for their share of such maintenance fee. 
(b)  It is the duty of the service supplier providing an enhanced emergency telephone number 911 system to the county to impose and collect the maintenance fee from telephone subscribers within the area served by such system. The imposition and collection of such fee shall be a condition of doing business in the area served by such system. 
(c)  The maintenance fee collected for the provision of an enhanced emergency telephone number 911 system shall be collected and expended exclusively for those purposes allowed by law pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and as set forth herein. Such maintenance fee shall not be imposed, collected or expended for any other purpose. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed as affecting the jurisdiction or powers of the public service commission to establish rates, charges and tariffs. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2007(1), eff. 3-5-2008; Ord. of 8-2-2011(2), exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-43. - Billing. 
(a)  Non-wireless service. 
(1)  The telephone subscriber of any telephone service shall be billed for the monthly 911 charge imposed with respect to such telephone service by the service supplier. Such 911 charge shall be $1.50 per month per telephone service provided to the telephone subscriber. In the event that any telephone service supplier, due to its normal billing practices, is unable to charge differing amounts set by each local government as the 911 charge, such telephone service supplier shall collect on behalf of local governments that have authorized a 911 charge $1.50 per month per telephone service provided to the telephone subscribers to whom it provides telephone service in every area served by the emergency 911 system. 
(2)  All telephone services billed to federal, state, or local governments shall be exempt from the 911 charge. Each service supplier shall, on behalf of the county, collect the 911 charge from those telephone subscribers to whom it provides telephone service in the area served by the emergency 911 system. As part of its normal billing process, the service supplier shall collect the 911 charge for each month a telephone 24 service is in service, and it shall list the 911 charge as a separate entry on each bill. If a service supplier receives a partial payment for a bill from a telephone subscriber, the service supplier shall apply the payment against the amount the telephone subscriber owes the service supplier first. 
(3)  This paragraph shall not apply to wireless service or prepaid wireless service or the telephone subscribers or service suppliers of such services. 
(b)  Wireless service. 
(1)  The subscriber of a wireless telecommunications connection whose billing address is within the geographic area that is served by the county shall be billed for the monthly wireless enhanced 911 charge of $1.50. 
(2)  The subscriber of a wireless telecommunications connection whose place of primary use is within the geographic area served by the county, that subscriber shall be billed for the monthly wireless enhanced 911 charge of $1.50. 
(3)  All wireless telecommunications connections billed to federal, state, or local governments shall be exempt from the wireless enhanced 911 charge. 
(4)  Each wireless service supplier shall, on behalf of the county, collect the wireless enhanced charge from those telephone subscribers whose place of primary use is within the geographic area that is served by the county or that would be served by the county for the purpose of such an emergency 911 system. As part of its normal billing process, the wireless service supplier shall collect the wireless enhanced charge for each month a wireless telecommunications connection is in service, and it shall list the wireless enhanced 911 charge as a separate entry on each bill. If a wireless service supplier receives partial payment for a bill from a telephone subscriber, the wireless service supplier shall apply the payment against the amount the telephone subscriber owes the wireless service supplier first. 
(5)  This paragraph shall not apply to prepaid wireless service or the telephone subscribers or service suppliers of such service. 
(c)  Prepaid wireless service. 
(1)  Beginning January 1, 2012, the seller of prepaid wireless service shall collect from each consumer a prepaid wireless 911 fee of $.75 for every retail transaction and remit that fee, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, to the commissioner of the department of revenue. 
(2)  The amount of the prepaid wireless 911 charge shall be either separately stated on an invoice, receipt, or other similar document that is provided to the consumer by the seller, or otherwise disclosed to the consumer. 
(3)  The prepaid wireless 911 charge shall be the liability of the consumer and not of the seller or of any provider, except that the seller shall be liable to remit all prepaid wireless 911 charges that the seller collects from consumers as provided in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2 and herein, including all such charges that the seller is deemed to collect where the amount of the charge has not been separately stated on an invoice, receipt, or other similar document provided to the consumer by the seller. 
(4)  The amount of the prepaid wireless 911 charge that is collected by a seller from a consumer, if such amount is separately stated on an invoice, receipt, or other similar document provided to the consumer by the seller, shall not be included in the base for measuring any tax, fee, surcharge, or other charge that is imposed by this state, any political subdivision of this state, or any intergovernmental agency. 
(5)  If a minimal amount of prepaid wireless telecommunications service is sold with a prepaid wireless device for a single, nonitemized price, then the seller may elect not to apply the $.75 prepaid wireless 911 charge for that transaction. For purposes of this subsection, the term "minimal" means an amount of service denominated as ten minutes or less, or $5.00 or less. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2007(1), eff. 3-5-2008; Ord. of 1-6-2009(1); Ord. of 8-2-2011(2), exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-44. - Subscriber liable for 911 charge. 
Every telephone subscriber in the area served by the emergency 911 system shall be liable for the 911 charge imposed under this article until it has been paid to the service supplier. A service supplier shall have no obligation to take any legal action to enforce the collection of the 911 charge. The service supplier shall provide the county within 60 days with the name and address of each subscriber who has refused to pay the 911 charge after such 911 charge has become due. A collection action may be initiated by the county, and reasonable costs and attorney's fees associated with that collection action may be awarded to the county collecting the 911 charge. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2007(1), eff. 3-5-2008; Ord. of 8-2-2011(2), exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-45. - Emergency installation service; equipment maintenance. 
The county contracting for the operation of an emergency 911 system shall remain ultimately responsible to the service supplier for all emergency 911 system installation, service, equipment, operation and maintenance charges owed to the service supplier. Any taxes due on emergency 911 system service provided by the service supplier will be billed to the county subscribing to the service. State and local taxes do not apply to the 911 charge billed to telephone subscribers under this article. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2007(1), eff. 3-5-2008; Ord. of 8-2-2011(2), exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-46. - Responsibilities of board. 
(a)  Each service supplier that collects 911 charges on behalf of the county is entitled to retain as an administrative fee an amount equal to three percent of the gross 911 charge receipts to be remitted to the county. The remaining amount shall be due quarterly to the county and shall be remitted to it no later than 60 days after the close of a calendar quarter. The 911 charges collected by the service supplier shall be deposited and accounted for in a separate restricted revenue fund known as the emergency telephone system fund maintained by the county. The county may invest the monies in the fund in the same manner that other monies of the county may be invested and any income earned from such investment shall be deposited into the emergency telephone system fund. 
(b)  Such monthly 911 charge may be reduced at any time by the governing authority board by resolution; provided, however, that the said governing authority board shall be required to reduce such monthly 911 charge at any time the projected revenues from 911 charges will cause the unexpended revenues in the emergency telephone system fund at the end of the fiscal year to exceed by one and one-half times the unexpended revenues in such fund at the end of the immediately preceding fiscal year or at any time the unexpended revenues in such fund at the end of the fiscal year exceed by one and one-half times the unexpended revenues in such fund at the end of the immediately preceding fiscal year. Such reduction in the 911 charge shall be in an amount which will avert the accumulation of revenues in such fund at the end of the fiscal year which will exceed by one and one-half times the amount of revenues in the fund at the end of the immediately preceding fiscal year. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2007(1), eff. 3-5-2008; Ord. of 8-2-2011(2), exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-47. - Emergency telephone system fund use. 
Money from the emergency telephone system fund shall be used only for those purposes allowed by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2007(1), eff. 3-5-2008; Ord. of 8-2-2011(2), exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-48. - Term of service; records; funding. 
(a)  The county may contract with a service supplier for any term negotiated by the service supplier and the county for an emergency 911 system and may make payments from the emergency telephone system fund to provide any payments required by the contract. 
(b)  The service supplier shall maintain records of the amount of the 911 charge collected for a period of at least three years from the date of collection. The county may, at its expense, require an annual audit of the service supplier's books and records with respect to the collection and remittance of the 911 charge. 
(c)  In order to provide additional funding for the county for emergency 911 system purposes, the county may receive federal, state, municipal or private funds which shall be expended for the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2007(1), eff. 3-5-2008; Ord. of 8-2-2011(2), exh. A)) 
Sec. 22-49. - Service supplier not liable for damages. 
A service supplier, including any service supplier and its employees, directors, officers and agents, is not liable for any damages in a civil action for injuries, death or loss to persons or property incurred by any person as a result of any act or omission of a service supplier or any of its employees, directors, officers or agents, except for willful or wanton misconduct, either in connection with developing, adopting, implementing, maintaining or operating any emergency 911 system or in the identification of the telephone number, address or name associated with any person accessing an emergency 911 system. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2007(1), eff. 3-5-2008; Ord. of 8-2-2011(2), exh. A)) 
Secs. 22-50—22-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STATE OF EMERGENCY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-70. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in the undertaking or carrying on of any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this article from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Doing business means the person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity: 
(1)  Has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or making the improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2)  Performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
Exempt individuals means, unless otherwise specified in division 2 of this article or a resolution implementing a curfew, those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, and utility emergency repairs. At the discretion of the board, this exempt group may also include regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to county regulations concerning registration and licensing of building and repair services during a state of emergency, and performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
Fees means any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, variances, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to the higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting form the emergency. 
State of emergency means, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his or her judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor, unless extended by official action of the board. 
Temporary dwelling means any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle, manufactured home, industrialized building or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning ordinance in a particular zoning district. 
(Code 2000, §§ 40-101, 40-102(2)(a), (b), 40-103(2)(a), (b), 40-104(2)(a), (b)) 
Sec. 22-71. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairperson of the board of commissioners, jointly with the mayors of the affected cities, or in their absences their legally appointed successors, vice-chairperson/mayor pro tempore, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 14-104) 
Sec. 22-72. - Overcharging. 
(a)  In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)  Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2000, § 40-101) 
Sec. 22-73. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, firm, or corporation found in violation of any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to the general penalty described in section 1-9. 
(Code 2000, § 40-102(4)) 
Secs. 22-74—22-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EMERGENCY CURFEWS 

Sec. 22-101. - Instituting a curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the board of commissioners, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the county. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Code 2000, § 40-102(1)) 
Sec. 22-102. - Curfew territory. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to curfew, including but not limited to streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of the unincorporated county during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Code 2000, § 40-102(3)) 
Secs. 22-103—22-132. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EMERGENCY BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES 

Sec. 22-133. - Registration requirement. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the board of commissioners and having paid fees as provided by this division. 
(Code 2000, § 40-103(1)) 
Sec. 22-134. - Registration form. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the county clerk of the board or such other person designated by the board at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the board with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Code 2000, § 40-103(3)) 
Sec. 22-135. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this division at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall by paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Code 2000, § 40-103(4)) 
Sec. 22-136. - Violation. 
Any building contractor who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this division and subject to the general penalty described in section 1-9. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 2000, § 40-103(5)) 
Sec. 22-137. - Nontransferability. 
Each certification issued under this division is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Code 2000, § 40-103(6)) 
Sec. 22-138. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued under this division shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his or her person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when requested. 
(Code 2000, § 40-103(7)) 
Sec. 22-139. - Revocation; suspension. 
(a)  Each certification granted under this division is a mere permit to engage in the business, but only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The board hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted under this division, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his or her employment, violates this division or any other county, state or federal law. 
(b)  If, after issuance of certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation and cross examine witnesses. 
(Code 2000, § 40-103(8)) 
Secs. 22-140—22-161. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SUSPENSION OF PROCEDURES AND FORMALITIES 

Sec. 22-162. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures in an emergency. 
Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency, disaster, or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, or upon the determination by the board, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the board, its designee, or the emergency interim successor has the authority to engage in the following actions: 
(1)  Meetings. Conduct the affairs and business of the county at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient, or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside the county, all actions taken by the board shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. The presiding officer or any two members of the board, without regard to or compliance with the time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law, may call such meetings. 
(2)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical, and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(3)  Code enforcement. Temporarily suspend the enforcement of any ordinances of the county, or any portion thereof, where: 
a.  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; 
b.  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
c.  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(4)  Fees. Temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(5)  Temporary dwellings. Allow temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired, provided that an engineer designs such temporary dwellings or parks and the plans are approved by the county health department and building inspector or his or her designee. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the board or its designee, the permit may be extended for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Code 2000, § 40-104(1)) 
Chapter 26 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire protection is a home rule power of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); governing body of county has authority to enact ordinances necessary to carry out fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PROTECTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 26-19. - State minimum fire safety standards. 
The state minimum fire safety standards shall have statewide effect and shall not require adoption by the county. The county is authorized to enforce these standards on all buildings and structures except one-family and two-family dwellings and those structures listed in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13. 
(Code 2000, § 10-101) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a). 
Sec. 26-20. - Volunteer fire department protection chiefs council. 
(a)  The county is served with countywide fire protection by a coordinated system of 15 independent community fire departments. The 15 departments are as follows: 

 
(b)  In order to provide the most efficient use of available resources, the county fire protection chiefs council has been created with the following regulations: 
(1)  To promote the development of an effective, affordable county volunteer fire protection system. 
(2)  To improve effectiveness within limitations of existing departments and equipment through coordination, mutual assistance, joint training, planning and standardization of firefighting techniques and procedures. 
(3)  To encourage and assist in development of new volunteer companies/departments, where needed, to achieve a minimum of ISO (Insurance Services Office Inc.) category nine fire protection coverage of all of the county. 
(4)  To prepare and defend budget submissions to the board of commissioners for the volunteer companies/departments. 
(5)  To promote fire prevention and fire safety education throughout the county. 
(c)  The council will be composed of the chiefs of each volunteer fire company/department in the county and such other qualified concerned county residents as approved by a majority of the chiefs. A chairperson will be elected by and serve at the pleasure of the council. 
(d)  Regular meetings of the county fire protection chiefs council will be held the fourth Monday of each month at 7:00 p.m. at the following location: 1640 Mission Road, Madison, GA 30650. This place and time may be changed at the request of the fire protection chiefs council or by the board of commissioners. Special meetings may be held at the call of the chairperson or at the request of two or more fire company/department chiefs. 
(e)  Each department is equipped with a fireknocker and all the necessary support equipment. In addition, all departments should have a tanker and engine trucks and the fire protection council's objective is for each department to have a tanker truck and possibly an additional fireknocker. 
(f)  All fire calls are dispatched through the Madison-Morgan communication system with all departments having radio contact capabilities. Standard procedure calls for the dispatch of three departments to all structure fires. Once on the scene, the fire chief may call for additional departments to respond if needed. 
(Code 2000, § 10-102) 
Secs. 26-21—26-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-44. - Fire district established. 
(a)  There shall be one fire district within the county, which fire district shall encompass the entire area of the county. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall affect the title or right to or in any real or personal property or monies owned now or in the future by any volunteer fire department located within the county. 
(Code 2000, § 10-103) 
Sec. 26-45. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person or entity shall light, kindle or maintain a bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire, which fire measures one-half acre or less, to be lighted, kindled or maintained on any parcel of land within the unincorporated areas of the county without the applicant satisfying all of the following conditions: 
(1)  Obtaining a permit issued through the state forestry commission. The application for such permit should include, at a minimum, the following information: 
a.  The location and owner of the subject real property; 
b.  The name of the person or persons who will be responsible for the supervision and control of the fire; 
c.  A list of the items which are being burned; and 
d.  The beginning and completion times of the burn. 
(2)  No fire may be burned during nighttime hours. 
(3)  No fire may be burned closer than 500 feet to any building, structure or any other improvement to the subject real property. 
(4)  Until the fire has been completely extinguished, the landowner or his or her authorized agent must directly supervise the fire and be present at the scene of the fire throughout its burning. 
(5)  The following items may not be burned: 
a.  Tires; 
b.  Any item which may emit gaseous vapors or odors; 
c.  Any item the odors of which are likely to be injurious to public health, safety and welfare; 
d.  Any hazardous materials as the same are defined by state and/or federal laws, statutes and regulations. 
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the burning of nontreated wood. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section notwithstanding, organizations which are primarily organized for religious purposes, volunteer fire departments, organizations which are primarily organized for the training and education of children (such as the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts) may obtain the permit required in subsection (a) of this section without complying with the requirements that no fire may be burned during nighttime hours and no fire may be burned closer than 500 feet to any building, structure or any other improvement to the subject real property. 
(c)  No person or entity shall light, kindle or maintain a bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire, which fire measures more than one-half acre, to be lighted, kindled or maintained on any parcel of land within the unincorporated areas of the county. However, controlled burns (i.e., burns closely supervised and lighted for a specific purpose) may be permitted as an acceptable agricultural practice on farmlands and woodlands upon the applicant satisfying all of the following conditions: 
(1)  Obtaining a burn permit from the state forestry commission. 
(2)  Notifying the state forestry commission of the name, address, and telephone number of the person or persons responsible for the burn, the permit number from the forestry commission, the location of the burn, and the estimated beginning and completion times of the burn. 
(3)  No fire may be burned during nighttime hours and/or closer than 500 feet to any building, structure or any other improvement to the subject real property. 
(4)  Until the fire has been completely extinguished, the landowner or his or her authorized agent must directly supervise the fire and be present at the scene of the fire throughout its burning. 
(5)  Promptly reporting to the state highway patrol any burn within one-half mile of the nearest right-of-way of a state highway. 
(6)  Completely encircling the burn area with plowed fire lanes and/or natural boundaries, such as highways or creeks. 
(7)  If burn control becomes difficult, the permitted party must immediately request assistance from the state forestry commission. The forestry commission will then determine if county fire apparatus and resources are needed and request assistance accordingly. 
(8)  The following items may not be burned: 
a.  Tires; 
b.  Construction-type materials and/or building materials or related items; 
c.  Any item which may emit gaseous vapors or odors; 
d.  Any item the odors of which are likely to be injurious to public health, safety and welfare; 
e.  Any hazardous materials as the same are defined by state and/or federal laws, statutes and regulations. 
(Code 2000, § 31-112(1)—(3)) 
Sec. 26-46. - Issuance and duration of permit. 
(a)  No permit may be given under this article unless the applicant can demonstrate to the reasonable satisfaction of the state forestry commission or its designate all of the following: 
(1)  Consent of the record property owner. 
(2)  Proof of ability to fully control and extinguish the fire. 
(3)  No prohibited substances will be burned. 
(4)  Granting the permit will not be injurious to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(5)  That the permit will not be issued on a no burn date declared either by the state forestry commission or the county fire coordinator. Because local weather conditions can change rapidly and a burn day can be classified to a no burn day, any permit can be immediately revoked. 
(b)  All permits under this section are issued daily. Therefore, any restarting or rekindling of a previous fire requires a new permit which may or may not be granted. 
(Code 2000, § 31-112(4), (5)) 
Sec. 26-47. - Revocation of permit; penalty. 
(a)  If it is discovered at any point after a permit to burn has been issued that one or more of the items listed in subsection (b) of this section exist, the same shall constitute sufficient reason to immediately revoke the permit to burn, and any representative from either the county fire coordinator or the state forestry commission will have full authority to extinguish the fire, or direct the individual in charge of the fire to extinguish the fire. 
(b)  Reasons for revoking a permit include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Materials being burned that are not allowed to be burned because of state and/or federal laws, statutes or regulations. 
(2)  The fire existing or burning in a manner as to endanger the health, welfare or safety of property, persons or motorists within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(3)  The declaration by a government entity of the day being a no burn day. 
When a permit is revoked, the applicant and the individual in charge of the burn will be advised why the fire must be extinguished and may be subject to the penalties stated in subsection (c) of this section if the fire is not promptly extinguished. 
(c)  Upon conviction, violators will be punished according to general penalties as described in section 1-9 of the General Provisions chapter of this Code. 
(Code 2000, § 31-112(6), (7)) 
Secs. 26-48, 26-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 

Sec. 26-50. - Purpose. 
Due to the extraordinary costs associated with the mitigation of a hazardous materials incident, Morgan County shall hereby bill the responsible party for recovering costs associated with the emergency response of the fire and rescue department, as well as any third-party contractor hired by the county to respond to such hazardous materials incidents. 
(Ord. No. 2016-001, § 1(exh. A), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 26-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous material incident means a release or spill of any material considered to be dangerous to the general public or the environment (as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency, Georgia Department of Natural Resources, and the Georgia State Fire Prevention Code). 
Responsible party means any manufacturer, owner, shipper or otherwise possessor of hazardous materials, who is responsible for the safe transport, storage and/or use of hazardous materials. 
(Ord. No. 2016-001, § 1(exh. A), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 26-52. - Policy. 
Morgan County recognizes the need for emergency hazardous materials response within the jurisdictional limits of Morgan County. Therefore, no person, agency or entity requiring an emergency hazardous materials response shall be denied those services due to a lack of insurance coverage or the inability to pay for those services. Morgan County provides emergency hazardous materials response only, and does not act as a cleanup contractor, and does not provide cleanup or disposal services. However, if Morgan County hires a contractor to clean up a hazardous material incident, it has the right to charge the responsible party for the costs charged by the contractor. Any applicable services rendered to a person, agency or entity shall be billed to that person, agency or entity. The emergency management director, with approval of the county manager, may waive reimbursement in instances where only minimal response services were required. Other emergency response agencies assisting the fire department may submit their list of expenses to the emergency management director for inclusion in the bill submitted to the responsible party. Neither Morgan County, nor its fire department, shall accept any liability for payment of such costs incurred by other emergency response agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2016-001, § 1(exh. A), 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 26-53. - Procedure. 
(a)  A detailed listing of hazardous materials response services provided to persons, entities, and/or agencies will be compiled by the emergency management director. This information will be forwarded to the Morgan County Finance Department, which shall be responsible for the billing. 
(b)  The responsible party shall reimburse Morgan County for its costs for subsistence supplies and for its costs to replace or repair all equipment, vehicles, instruments, clothing, supplies and other items damaged or lost in the mitigation of a hazardous materials incident. 
(c)  The responsible party shall be required to reimburse Morgan County for the actual cost of personnel needed in the response. 
(d)  The responsible party shall be required to reimburse Morgan County for the use of apparatus needed in the response based on the Federal Emergency Management Agency Schedule of Equipment for like or similar equipment. 
(e)  If Morgan County hired a third-party contractor to perform any hazardous material incident cleanup or remediation, the responsible party shall reimburse the county for the third-party contractor's charges. 
(f)  If a responsible party fails to fully reimburse Morgan County for any amounts owed pursuant to this section within 30 days of a demand for payment, the county may institute an action to recover such costs, in which instance, the responsible party shall be responsible for Morgan County's reasonable attorneys' fees and expenses of litigation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-001, § 1(exh. A), 8-16-2016) 
Chapter 30 - FOOD SERVICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of March 4, 2008, § 5, repealed the former chapter 30, in its entirety, and enacted a new chapter 30 as set out herein. The former chapter 30 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference— County boards of health authorized to adopt sanitation standards for food service establishments, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; county boards of health authorized to enforce laws, regulations and standards of the state regarding food service establishments, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-375; county board of health empowered to adopt and enforce rules and regulations appropriate to its functions and powers as long as such rules do not conflict with those enacted by department of human resources, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4; county board of health empowered to establish local rules and regulations applicable throughout county, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6. 

Sec. 30-1. - Adoption of state regulations. 
The board of commissioners hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the rules and regulations for food service, which were adopted by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. Ga. Admin. Code § 290-5-14 et. seq. 
(Ord. of 3-4-2008, § 5) 
Sec. 30-2. - Violations. 
Any violation of the regulations adopted herein and set forth by the department of human resources may be punishable as any other violation of the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 3-4-2008, § 5) 
Chapter 32 - HEALTH REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local governing authorities and boards of health authorized to adopt rules and regulations governing "tattoo studios," O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1 et seq. 

Sec. 32-1. - Adoption of board of health regulations. 
The board of commissioners hereby adopts and incorporates by reference the rules and regulations for "Body Tattoo/Body Piercing Establishments and Operators" as adopted by the Morgan County Board of Health on May 9, 2011 (effective June 8, 2011). 
(Ord. of 8-2-2011(1), § 4(exh. A)) 
Sec. 32-2. - Violations. 
Any violation of the regulations adopted herein, or of those rules and regulations set forth by the department of community health may be punishable as any other violation of the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 8-2-2011(1), § 4(exh. A)) 
Chapter 34 - HUMAN RESOURCES AND SERVICES 

Sec. 34-1. - Indigent burial expenses. 
If the estate of a deceased, indigent, Morgan County resident is insufficient to pay for the burial of the deceased, the county may pay up to $350.00 to the funeral home providing the funeral and/or burial services. Whether the deceased was indigent, and if so, the amount that the county will pay, shall be determined by the county manager. If the representative of the deceased's estate is dissatisfied with the county manager's determination, he or she may appeal that determination to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 24-101; Ord. of 2-1-2011, § 1(exh. A)) 
Chapter 38 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SHERIFF (RESERVED) 

Secs. 38-19—38-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JAIL 

Sec. 38-40. - Jail construction and staffing; fines. 
(a)  Subject to O.C.G.A. § 15-21-92, in every case in which any superior court, probate court, state court, magistrate court or any court within the county shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of the state, or any ordinance of the county, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(b)  Subject to O.C.G.A. § 15-21-92, at the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of the state or an ordinance of the county, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted, and in every case in which any superior court, probate court, magistrate court or any other court within the county shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be paid over as provided under subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  The sums required in this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund or O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 concerning the judges of the probate courts retirement fund of the state. 
(d)  The sums provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds and shall be paid over to the board of commissioners by the tenth day of the month following the month in which such sums are collected. Such sums paid over to the board of commissioners shall be deposited into a special account to be known as the county jail fund. 
(e)  Monies collected pursuant to this section and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended by the board of commissioners solely and exclusively for constructing, operating and staffing county jails, county correctional institutions and detention facilities of the county, or for the purpose of contracting for such facilities with other counties, the state, municipalities, or other political subdivisions as authorized by article IX, section III, paragraph I of the state constitution. The county jail fund and monies collected pursuant to this section are to be placed in the county jail fund and may be pledged as security for the payment of bonds issued for the construction of county jails, county correctional institutions and detention facilities of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 15-101) 
Chapter 42 - NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1—42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMISSIONS, DISTRICTS, AND OTHER REGIONAL AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 42-19. - Walton-Morgan forestry unit. 
Walton and Morgan counties have formed a Walton-Morgan unit of the state forestry commission. The Walton-Morgan forestry unit is charged with the duties of forest fire suppression, insect control, forest management, and forest fire prevention, as well as other duties in promoting forest conservation. 
(Code 2000, § 23-101) 
State Law reference— Authority for establishment of forestry protection unit comprised of one or more counties, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-85. 
Sec. 42-20. - Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(a)  The Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District is a subdivision of the state government, organized under provisions of the Soil and Water Conservation Districts Law enacted by the general assembly of the state. 
(b)  The supervisor or one of the members of the governing body of the soil and water conservation district shall formulate and submit to the state soil and water conservation commission a resource conservation program that provides a long-range guide for protecting and utilizing the natural resource of the district. 
(c)  The Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District certifies the need and supervises the installation of all conservation practices funded by the agricultural stabilization conservation service. 
(Code 2000, § 23-102) 
State Law reference— Soil and Water Conservation Districts Law, O.C.G.A. § 2-6-20 et seq. 
Secs. 42-21—42-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TIMBER HARVESTING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-40. - Driveways. 
Although not required to obtain a permit, any person or firm engaged in the cutting, removing or harvesting of standing timber in any unincorporated area of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state shall create and/or maintain a driveway in compliance with the provisions of chapter 62, pertaining to streets, sidewalks and other public property, so long as timber harvesting operations are ongoing. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 1(exh. A(23-103(3)))) 
Secs. 42-41—42-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOND OR LETTER OF CREDIT 

Sec. 42-66. - Required. 
Any person or firm engaged in the cutting, removing or harvesting of standing timber in any unincorporated area of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state shall deliver to the board of commissioners or its designated agent a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state, protecting the county against any damage caused by such person or firm in the amount of $5,000.00 or, at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the amount of $5,000.00 in lieu of such bond. 
(Code 2000, § 23-103; Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 1(exh. A(23-103(1)(A)))) 
Sec. 42-67. - Validity. 
The surety bond and/or irrevocable letter of credit required under this division shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is delivered. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 1(exh. A(23-103(1)(B)))) 
Secs. 42-68—42-89. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NOTICE 

Sec. 42-90. - Required. 
No person or firm shall begin to cut, remove or harvest standing timber in any unincorporated area of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state without first providing notice of such harvesting operations to the board of commissioners prior to cutting any such timber. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 1(exh. A(23-103(2)(A)))) 
Sec. 42-91. - Form of notice; contents. 
Prior written notice shall be required of any person or firm harvesting such timber for each separate tract to be harvested thereby, shall be in such form as prescribed by rule or regulation of the director of the state forestry commission, and shall consist of the following: 
(1)  A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
(2)  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5; 
(3)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 1(exh. A(23-103(2)(B)))) 
Sec. 42-92. - Submission. 
Notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via telefacsimile or such other means as approved by the county, or by mail. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 1(exh. A(23-103(2)(C)))) 
Sec. 42-93. - Failure to provide bond. 
The failure of any person or firm to provide the surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit required under division 2 of this article shall render the notice required in this division ineffective for any such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered to the board of commissioners a valid surety bond or irrevocable letter of credit. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 1(exh. A(23-103(2)(D)))) 
Sec. 42-94. - Effective. 
Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within such unincorporated area of the county upon receipt of the same by the board of commissioners or its designated agent and, if applicable, compliance with the requirements of division 2 of this article and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the board or its designated agent within three business days after such change. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 1(exh. A(23-103(2)(E)))) 
Secs. 42-95—42-119. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 42-120. - Penalty. 
Each violation of the requirements of this article shall be punishable according to the general penalty described by section 1-9. Each day any violation under this article continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-4-2002, § 1(exh. A(23-103(4)))) 
State Law reference— Local governing authority may require notice of timber harvesting and bond or letter of credit from harvesting entity, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24. 
Secs. 42-121—42-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER CONSERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 12-21-2010, § 2(exh. B), amended Art. IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. IV, §§ 42-155—42-160, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 2000, §§ 23-104(1)—23-104(6). 

DIVISION 1. - CONSTRUCTION/RENOVATION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 42-155. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but not a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010, § 2(exh. B)) 
Sec. 42-156. - Residential building construction. 
On or after April 1, 1992, no construction may be initiated within the county for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-, flushometer valve-, or flushometer tank-type toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010, § 2(exh. B)) 
Sec. 42-157. - Commercial building construction. 
There shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the county for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010, § 2(exh. B)) 
Sec. 42-158. - Residential/commercial construction. 
The requirements of this article shall apply to any residential or commercial construction, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers, or both. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010, § 2(exh. B)) 
Sec. 42-159. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 42-156—42-158 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this chapter were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Specifically designed as toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his or her agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in sections 42-156, 42-157 or 42-158 shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector. A fee of no less than $25.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010, § 2(exh. B)) 
DIVISION 2. - OUTDOOR WATERING RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 42-160. - Restrictions on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010, § 2(exh. B)) 
Sec. 42-161. - Exemptions. 
The following outdoor water uses shall be exempt from the requirements of section 42-160: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable county ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010, § 2(exh. B)) 
DIVISION 3. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 42-162. - Enforcement; penalties. 
(a)  The building inspector's office shall be the enforcement authority for violations of Division 1—Construction/Renovation Requirements (under the direction of the planning and development director), and the code enforcement office (under the direction of the planning and development director) shall be the enforcement authority for Division 2—Outdoor Watering Restrictions ordinance. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(b)  Any violation of this article is subject to the general penalties contained in section 1-9, and may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 12-21-2010, § 2(exh. B)) 
Secs. 42-163—42-194. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; counties required to adopt ordinances governing land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

Sec. 42-195. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of the ordinance from which this article was derived, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified Personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal Marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission means the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design Professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protection at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 42-197(c) of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 42-196(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Piedmont Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Code 2000, § 23-202; Ord. of 6-8-2004(2), § 2(exh. B(23-202)); Ord. of 2-2-2010, § 1(exh. A); Ord. No. 2018-001, 8-21-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3. 
Sec. 42-196. - Exemptions. 
The ordinance from which this article was derived shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968. 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 42.197(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1-7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Code 2000, § 23-203; Ord. of 6-8-2004(2), § 2(exh. B(23-203)); Ord. of 2-2-2010, § 1(exh. A); Ord. No. 2018-001, 8-21-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
Sec. 42-197. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by the ordinance from which this article was derived shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 42-197 (b) and (c) of the ordinance from which this article was derived. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of the ordinance from which this article was derived and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in section 42.197 (b) and (c) of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in C.15, 16 and 17, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  Best management practices. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 42.197 (b)(2) of the ordinance from which this article was derived; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970. And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a minor buffer impact as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 42.197 (b) and (c) of the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in the ordinance from which this article was derived or the terms of the permit. 
(Code 2000, § 23-204; Ord. of 6-8-2004(2), § 2(exh. B(23-204)); Ord. of 2-2-2010, § 1(exh. A); Ord. No. 2018-001, 8-21-2018) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6. 
Sec. 42-198. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, the ordinance from which this article was derived, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Morgan County without first obtaining a permit from the planning and development office to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the planning and development office and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 42-198 (c) of the ordinance from which this article was derived. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 42-197 (b) and (c) of the ordinance from which this article was derived will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 42-197 (c) (15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 42-198 (b)(6), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 42.197 (b) and (c) of the ordinance from which this article was derived, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into the ordinance from which this article was derived. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with the ordinance from which this article was derived, any variances required by section 42.197 (c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 42.198 (b)(6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of the ordinance from which this article was derived, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of the ordinance from which this article was derived. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 (f)(1). 
(Code 2000, § 23-205; Ord. of 6-8-2004(2), § 2(exh. B(23-205)); Ord. of 2-2-2010, § 1(exh. A); Ord. No. 2018-001, 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 42-199. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The planning and development office will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of the ordinance from which this article was derived, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The planning and development office shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in the ordinance from which this article was derived, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Code 2000, § 23-206; Ord. of 6-8-2004(2), § 2(exh. B(23-206)); Ord. of 2-2-2010, § 1(exh. A); Ord. No. 2018-001, 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 42-200. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in the ordinance from which this article was derived without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of the ordinance from which this article was derived, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of the ordinance from which this article was derived and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 42.198 (b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of the ordinance from which this article was derived, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to the ordinance from which this article was derived, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of the ordinance from which this article was derived, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of the ordinance from which this article was derived under county ordinances approved under the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Code 2000, § 23-207; Ord. of 6-8-2004(2), § 2(exh. B(23-207)); Ord. of 2-2-2010, § 1(exh. A); Ord. No. 2018-001, 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 42-201. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Code 2000, § 23-208; Ord. of 6-8-2004(2), § 2(exh. B(23-208)); Ord. of 2-2-2010, § 1(exh. A); Ord. No. 2018-001, 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 42-202. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Morgan County Board of Commissioners within 20 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Morgan County. 
(Ord. of 6-8-2004(2), § 2(exh. B(23-209)); Ord. of 2-2-2010, § 1(exh. A); Ord. No. 2018-001, 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 42-203. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. The ordinance from which this article was derived shall become effective on the 21 st day of August, 2018. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of the ordinance from which this article was derived. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of the ordinance from which this article was derived, nor the compliance with provisions of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in the ordinance from which this article was derived or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of the ordinance from which this article was derived shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 2-2-2010, § 1(exh. A); Ord. No. 2018-001, 8-21-2018) 
Chapter 46 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Counties have the power to enforce, prevent, and punish violations of the state nuisance abatement laws, in addition to any provisions of its own local enabling act, charter, or local ordinances or regulations for the abatement of nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building or a structure to be vacated. 
Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial or business uses or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
Excessive noise means any unnecessary or unusually loud noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others. 
Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined in this section, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license plate or plates, and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, ATVs, trucks, tractors, go-carts, campers and trailers. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of a dwelling, building or structure and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have interest of record in such dwelling, building or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians, and trustees. 
Private property means any real property within the county limits, which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public authority means any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the county relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county. 
Public officer means the county manager and the director of planning and development, who are authorized by law and this Code to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter, or any agent of such officer or officers, or any other officer or officers appointed by the board of commissioners for purposes of this chapter. 
Public property means the right-of-way of any street or highway, which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of travel; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any publicly owned park, playground, building, refuge, conservation or recreation area. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building or structure for repair or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
Scrap materials means all items that are no longer suitable for their original intended purposes because of wear, damage or defect. 
Vacant or vacant structure means a building's or structure's present use is discontinued in excess of 30 consecutive days. The overlapping of contract periods, uses, or occupancy will not void the classification of the structure as vacant, nor will it prevent the implementation of this chapter. 
(Code 2000, §§ 12-101(1), 35-102, 35-104; Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-101) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-22, 16-7-42, 41-2-8. 
Secs. 46-2—46-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCESSIVE NOISE 

Sec. 46-21. - Purpose. 
The making of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the unincorporated areas of the county; and the necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this article, is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this article are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the county, and its inhabitants. 
(Code 2000, § 33-101) 
Sec. 46-22. - Excessive noise prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 2000, § 33-102) 
Sec. 46-23. - Specific noises prohibited. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar or other vehicle on any public property of the county, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; and the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust. 
(2)  The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, tape player, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the area, room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, player, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this article. 
(3)  The playing, using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, compact disc player, tape player, digital audio player, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon any public property for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on any public property, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Except as otherwise allowed by law, the blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper county authorities. 
(7)  The discharge into the air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(9)  The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  The creation of any excessive noise on any public property adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed on such public property indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court zone. 
(11)  The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(12)  The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(13)  The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along streets and other public property upon carts, trays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public property except as otherwise allowed by law. 
(14)  The causing, permitting or continuing of any excessive, unnecessary or avoidable noise in the operation of a railroad except as otherwise allowed by law. 
(15)  The operation between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(16)  The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noises from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(Code 2000, § 33-103) 
Secs. 46-24—46-64. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County authority to remove and dispose of any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, or junked motor vehicles or parts when such are in a condition that constitute a health hazard or unsightly nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 

Sec. 46-65. - Abandoned, wrecked, etc., motor vehicles declared a public nuisance. 
The presence of any abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(11)) 
Sec. 46-66. - Abandonment prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing, or leaving of any motor vehicle of any kind which is in a wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked, or partially dismantled condition whether attended or not, upon any public right-of-way or public property without express permission from the board of commissioners, or on private property without permission from the owner of said property. A vehicle shall be considered abandoned if it remains in one place for a period exceeding 72 hours. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to any vehicle totally enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the county, and properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the county, or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways, or any vehicle retained by the owner for antique collection purposes. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(11); Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-114) 
Sec. 46-67. - Notification; request for hearing; removal of nuisance vehicle. 
(a)  Whenever it comes to the attention of the planning and development office that any motor vehicle declared a public nuisance exists in the county, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance vehicle exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his or her agent, notifying him or her of the existence of the nuisance vehicle and requesting its removal within ten days of such notification. 
(b)  Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the motor vehicle declared to be a nuisance and the owner and occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either or all of them shall be responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the county, the owner or occupant of the private property where the same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred. 
(c)  Any sworn officer of the court, including but not limited to the sheriff, a sheriff's deputy, the code enforcement officer, building inspector, or assistant building inspector, shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where it is located, at least ten days before the time of compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of the same is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the nuisance vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by registered mail to the owner or occupant of the private property at his or her last known address. 
(d)  The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this article, and the notice shall advise the owner that, upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the county or its designee shall undertake such removal with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner or occupant of the property. 
(e)  The persons to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized agents, may file a written request for hearing before the board of commissioners, or its designee within the ten-day period of compliance. 
(f)  The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be advised of the time and place of said hearing at least five days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the county and the persons to whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems necessary. 
(g)  If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the ten-day period of compliance, or in the event that a notice requesting the hearing is timely filed and a hearing is held, and the existence of the violation is affirmed by the board of commissioners, the sheriff, or his or her designee, shall have the right to take possession of the motor vehicle declared a nuisance and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or refuse to allow such person or persons to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(15)) 
Sec. 46-68. - Sale of removed motor vehicle. 
(a)  Within 48 hours of the removal of any motor vehicle removed pursuant to this article, the sheriff, or his or her designee, shall give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, and also to the owner or occupant of the private property from which the vehicle was removed, that said vehicle has been impounded and stored for violation of this article. The notice shall give the location of where the vehicle is stored, and the costs incurred by the county for removal. 
(b)  Upon removing a vehicle under the provisions of this article, the sheriff, or his or her designee, shall proceed to have the property sold in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 9-13-140 et seq. 
(c)  The notice of the sale shall state: 
(1)  The sale is of abandoned property in the possession of the county; 
(2)  A description of the vehicle, including make, model, license number and any other information which will accurately identify that vehicle; 
(3)  The terms of the sale; 
(4)  The date, time, and place of the sale; and 
(5)  Any other information required by state law. 
(d)  The vehicle shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. At the time of payment of the purchase price, the sheriff shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of which to be given to the purchaser, and the copy thereof to be filed with the tax commissioner. Should the sale for any reason be invalid, the county's liability shall be limited to the return of the purchase price. A credit shall be given to the property owner for any net monies received from any sale of said property by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this article may redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale or destruction thereof upon proof of ownership and payment to the county of said sum as it may determine and fix for the actual reasonable expense or removal, and any preliminary sale advertising expenses, all of said sums not to exceed $500.00 plus $10.00 per day storage for each vehicle redeemed. 
(f)  Upon the failure of the owner or occupant of property on which abandoned vehicles have been removed by the county to pay the unrecovered expenses by the county in such removal, a lien shall be placed upon the property for the amount of such expenses. 
(g)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to the general penalties described in section 1-9. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(15)) 
Secs. 46-69—46-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OUTDOOR STORAGE 

Sec. 46-90. - Enclosure required; exemption. 
(a)  Inventory items and manufacturing scrap materials and byproducts at all business and industrial locations shall be stored inside a fenced enclosure at the rear or to the side of the facility. Fencing shall be six feet in height and shall be constructed of materials which provide a nonvisible screen. Retail items and manufacturing products offered for sale to the general public or retailers are excluded from this subsection. 
(b)  Old appliances, scrap materials, building materials, parts to machinery and similar type items which are not legitimate inventory items must be stored inside an enclosed building. Such items must be stored in such a manner so as not to be visible to surrounding properties. Retail items and manufacturing products offered for sale to the general public or retailers are excluded from this subsection. 
(c)  Any of the items noted in subsections (a) and (b) of this section found to be stored other than as provided for in this section are hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Buildings or additions to buildings which are under construction with a valid building permit will be exempt from this requirement. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(12)) 
Secs. 46-91—46-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - UNFIT BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 

Sec. 46-115. - Purpose and authority. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by O.C.G.A. title 41, ch. 2, for the purpose of maintaining the health and cleanliness of the county, and to ensure safe and sanitary conditions in private premises in the county by establishing a method for enforcing minimum housing standards within the jurisdiction of the county. The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be necessary for reasons of the public health, safety and welfare. The county recognizes that dwellings, buildings, structures or conditions exist within the county that are unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business uses. 
(Code 2000, § 35-101) 
Sec. 46-116. - Findings and applicability. 
(a)  It is found and declared that there exist in the county dwellings, buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities, infestation, lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of this county, and that this county should exercise its police power to provide for the repair, closing or demolition of the aforesaid dwellings, buildings or structures in the manner provided in this article. 
(b)  All the provisions of this article, including methods and procedures, may also be applied to private property where an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary or unsafe conditions shall create an actual or potential public health hazard or general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental department, officer or inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 35-103) 
Sec. 46-117. - Unlawful to own, sell, rent or lease; definition of vacancy. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner, whether directly or through an agent, to own, sell, rent or lease to any person any unfit structure for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, eating, usage or occupancy of any kind, when said owner has been notified in accordance with this article that such structure is an unfit structure. This shall apply to any deteriorated structure, even if vacant. 
(Code 2000, § 35-104) 
Sec. 46-118. - Abatement procedures. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the director of planning and development by a public authority, or by a written complaint filed by anyone, charging that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use, or whenever it appears to the director of planning and development (on his or her own motion) that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, the director of planning and development shall, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the director of planning and development at a place within the county, fixed not less than ten days or more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint. The owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint, and the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the director of planning and development. 
(b)  If, after such notice and hearing, the director of planning and development determines that the dwelling, building, or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use, he or she shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of such dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial or business use or to vacate and close the dwelling, building or structure for human habitation; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of such dwelling, building or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner or parties in interest within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure. 
(c)  Any party in interest who takes exception to said order may seek an injunction against the enforcement of the order by presenting a petition therefor to the superior court within 15 days of service of the order, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13. In no event shall the director of planning and development require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value of such dwelling, building or structure when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this article. 
(d)  If the owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, and do not seek an injunction under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13, the director of planning and development may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished; and the director of planning and development may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with any order to remove or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the director of planning and development may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be removed or demolished. 
(f)  The amount of the cost of such vacating and closing or removal or demolition by the director of planning and development shall be a lien against the real property upon which cost was incurred. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of demolition by the county and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of such costs by the director of planning and development in the office of the county clerk on a lien docket maintained by such clerk for such purposes. If the dwelling, building or structure is removed or demolished by the director of planning and development, he or she shall sell any valuable materials of such dwellings, buildings or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the director of planning and development, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(g)  The county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings or structures only in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties in interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the county within 30 days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money equal to 25 percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the county the remaining balance due on such lien, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as prescribed in this subsection (g)(1). 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the county at the time of the sale, transfer or conveyance; and 
(3)  Should such lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after the passage of said three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection (g)(2) of this section, the county may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for alteration, repair, removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings, or structures in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358, and other applicable state statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any persons having any right, title or interest in or lien upon such property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq. 
(Code 2000, § 35-105) 
Sec. 46-119. - Determination of unfitness. 
The director of planning and development may determine that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he or she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents of the county; such conditions may include, without limiting the generality of the preceding conditions, the following: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; 
(7)  The interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle so that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity of the structural members falls outside of its base so as to create a hazardous condition to the occupants of the structure or the population of the surrounding area; 
(8)  Due to their unsafe condition, the supporting structure and/or nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls must be replaced; 
(9)  The floors or roofs have improperly distributed loads or oversized loads, or are so weakened as to be unsafe for their present or intended use; 
(10)  The structure has been damaged by wind, fire or other causes so as to imperil the safety or the health of the structure's occupants or of the people of the county; 
(11)  Conditions which may be detrimental to the public health, safety and/or welfare whether found in a structure or on the premises surrounding the structure, including but not limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations, abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles, or any structurally unsound fences or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation, or any condition which may cause lack of safe ingress or egress to the structure; 
(12)  The premises are vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with drug crimes. 
(Code 2000, § 35-106) 
Sec. 46-120. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including, among others granted herein, the power to: 
(1)  Investigate the dwelling conditions in the county in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use, or are vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  Administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive evidence; 
(3)  Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  Delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Code 2000, § 35-107) 
Sec. 46-121. - Service of complaints or orders. 
(a)  Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of such property, each owner and each party in interest; and the return of service signed by the public officer or an affidavit of service executed by any adult citizen of this state, reciting that a copy of such complaint or orders was served upon each person in possession of such property, each owner, and each party in interest personally, or by leaving such copy at the place of his or her residence, shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person in possession, owner and party in interest. 
(b)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside outside of the county, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such party or parties, by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of residence of such party, or such service may be made by any adult citizen; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such adult citizen, that such party or parties were served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or orders at such party's residence, shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state shall be served by publishing the complaint or orders for two successive weeks in the legal organ of the county, and by posting a copy of such complaint or orders in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, a copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or a person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served, and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident, he or she shall be served as provided in this section in such cases. If such minor or insane person or person laboring under disabilities has no guardian or personal representative or in the event such minor or insane person lives outside the county or is a nonresident, service shall be perfected by serving such minor or insane person personally or by leaving a copy at such minor's or insane person's place of residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person or persons; in the case of other persons who live outside of the county or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county, who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane persons or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the service of such complaint or orders upon such person shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (c) of this section, and service may be further perfected upon any person, firm or corporation holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(f)  A copy of such complaint or orders shall also be filed in the proper office or offices for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county, and such filing of the complaint or orders shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or orders or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the county. 
(Code 2000, § 35-108) 
Sec. 46-122. - Use of revenues, grants and donations to repair, close or demolish. 
The county may make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this article. 
(Code 2000, § 35-109) 
Sec. 46-123. - Deteriorated structures and premises as nuisances. 
(a)  All structures and/or the surrounding premises of the structures which are determined to be in violation of this article are hereby declared to be public nuisances. In those instances where there is an imminent threat to life or safety, the public officer shall be authorized to immediately post the structure as unsafe for human habitation. 
(b)  If such finding of the public officer is contested by the occupants of the structure, then the public officer shall request an immediate hearing before the judge of the magistrate court in order to secure an order requiring any occupants of the unsafe structures to vacate. The public officer shall then proceed as set forth in this article. 
(Code 2000, § 35-110) 
Sec. 46-124. - Conflict of laws. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce any provisions of the Charter or the local ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof. The powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. 
(Code 2000, § 35-111) 
ARTICLE VI. - FORECLOSURE REGISTRY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-002, § 1(exh. A), adopted Sept. 4, 2012, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 46-125—46-129, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 4-5-2011, §§ 1—3(exh. A). 

Sec. 46-125. - Purpose. 
Neighborhoods are facing significant threat of becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of properties that are abandoned, foreclosed or where ownership has been transferred after foreclosure. Improperly maintained and secured abandoned and/or foreclosed properties can become a hazard to the health and safety of persons who may come on or near the property and can adversely affect the aesthetic and economic attributes of communities. Difficulties also often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of abandoned and/or foreclosed real property. There is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the provisions in this article. 
This foreclosure registry will require creditors or mortgagees to provide the county with official information for contacting a party responsible for bringing abandoned and/or foreclosed real property into compliance with applicable provisions of Chapter 14—Buildings and Building Regulations, Chapter 42—Natural Resources, Chapter 46—Nuisances and Chapter 58—Solid Waste of the Code of Morgan County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, § 1(exh. A), 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 46-126. - Definitions. 
In addition to the definitions contained in sections 1-2 and 46-1, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in this state at which he or she is authorized to accept inquiries, notices on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner. Such agent must be authorized and empowered by the foreclosed real property owner to: 
(1)  To ensure security and maintenance; 
(2)  To comply with code enforcement orders issued by the county; 
(3)  To provide a trespass authorization upon request of an enforcement officer; 
(4)  To conduct inspections; 
(5)  To accept rental payments from tenants, if no management company is otherwise employed; and 
(6)  To serve as an agent authorized to receive any citation under this chapter and notice pertaining to any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this chapter, including service of process. 
Abandoned means real property that is vacant and is under a notice of default and/or notice of trustee's sale, pending tax commissioner lien sale and/or properties that have been subject of a previous foreclosure sale in which title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure and/or sale. 
County means Morgan County, Georgia. 
Creditor means a person or entity to whom a debt is owed or who has a right to require the fulfillment of an obligation or contract, wherein said debt or right is secured by a deed to secure debt, deed of trust or other instrument conveying a lien upon or security in title to real property. 
Days means consecutive calendar days. 
Enforcement officer means any law enforcement officer, building official, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by or working on behalf of the county. 
Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued and is held pursuant to a judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, deed to secure debt, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor. 
Form means the foreclosed or vacant property registration form created by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs registry. 
Real property means any improved or unimproved residential or commercial land or portion thereof identified by a map and parcel identification number, located in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
Registry official means the county's chief building inspector/director of planning and development. 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. 
Transferree means the person or entity to whom foreclosed real property is first transferred by a creditor after foreclosure. 
Vacant real property means real property that: 
(1)  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least 60 days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past 60 days; or 
(2)  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
Such term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, § 1(exh. A), 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 46-127. - Registry of foreclosed real property. 
Any creditor who obtains foreclosed real property by way of a foreclosure sale or proceeding shall, within 91 days of obtaining such property, pay to the county a registration fee for each foreclosed real property in accordance with the fee schedules set by the board of commissioners, not to exceed $100.00 per foreclosed real property, and register with the county by completing and turning in the form, providing the following information: 
(1)  Creditor's name, street address, mailing address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  Agent's name, street address, mailing address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The street address, including tax map and parcel identification number, of the foreclosed real property; 
(4)  The date on which the property was transferred, as stated on the instrument conveying the real property, whether that instrument has been recorded or not; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, § 1(exh. A), 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 46-128. - Registry of transferred foreclosed real property. 
Any creditor who has foreclosed on real property and then transfers said foreclosed real property to another person or entity shall, within 91 days of said transfer, pay to the county a registration fee for each transferred foreclosed real property in accordance with the fee schedules set by the board of commissioners, not to exceed $100.00, and register with the county at that time, by completing and turning in the form, providing the following information: 
(1)  Transferee's name, street address, mailing address, telephone number, facsimilie number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  Agent's name, street address, mailing address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The street address, including tax map and parcel identification number, of the foreclosed real property; 
(4)  The date on which the property was transferred, as stated on the instrument conveying the real property, whether that instrument has been recorded or not; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, § 1(exh. A), 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 46-129. - Exemption from registration requirements. 
No creditor or other owner of foreclosed real property shall be required to register such foreclosed real property under sections 46-127 or 46-128, nor shall such creditor or owner be required to pay any registration fee, if: 
(1)  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure under which the creditor or owner takes the property contains the information specified in paragraphs (1) through (5) of sections 46-127 or 46-128; 
(2)  The deed is filed with the clerk of superior court within 60 days of the transfer; and 
(3)  Proof of the following is provided to the office or officer in charge of the county foreclosed real property registry: 
a.  A filing date stamp or a receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
b.  A recorded copy of the entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, § 1(exh. A), 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 46-130. - Removal from registry. 
A vacant or foreclosed real property owner, or the agent of such owner, may apply to remove such vacant or foreclosed real property from the registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes vacant or foreclosed real property. Such application shall be made on forms provided by the county, and shall include the following: 
(1)  The reason the property is no longer vacant or foreclosed real property; 
(2)  The current owner's name, street address, mailing address, telephone number, facsimilie number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The street address, including tax map and parcel identification number, of the foreclosed real property; 
(4)  The date on which the property was no longer vacant or foreclosed real property; and 
(5)  If the reason for removal is the transfer of the property to a new owner who has inhabited the property or is actively engaged in improving the property pursuant to a valid building permit, then at such time as it becomes available, provide the recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the new owner. 
The registry official shall grant or deny such application within 30 days of receipt of a fully completed application, and if no such determination is made within 30 days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, § 1(exh. A), 9-4-2012) 
Sec. 46-131. - Administration, enforcement, appeals, violations and penalties. 
(a)  All creditors and transferees subject to registration or registered pursuant to this article shall: 
(1)  Comply with applicable provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Utilize the form as required; and 
(3)  Report any change in the required information set forth in sections 46-128(1)—(5) and 46-129 to the county within 30 days of the change, regardless of whether such information was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(b)  County may make foreclosure registry information accessible online. 
(c)  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(d)  Registry official is in charge of administering the provisions of this article, and as such has the sole authority and discretion to determine compliance, to grant or deny applications for removal from the registry, and to determine whether a creditor, transferee or owner is required to register property pursuant to this article. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit or limit the ability of other enforcement officers from issuing citations for violations of this article. 
(e)  Any person aggrieved of a decision by the registry official may appeal that decision to the Magistrate Court of Morgan County within 30 days of: 
(1)  The issuance of a citation for violating this article; or 
(2)  The date of the written decision denying the application or request. The person aggrieved shall have three additional days added to the 30 days if the written decision is mailed, rather than hand-delivered. 
(f)  Violation of this article shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002, § 1(exh. A), 9-4-2012) 
Secs. 46-132—46-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ENFORCEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— This article was formerly numbered as Article VI, and was renumbered by Ord. of 4-5-2011, § 1. 

Sec. 46-145. - Responsibility; right of entry; power of summons. 
Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of any sworn officer of the court, including, but not limited to, the sheriff, deputy sheriff, the code enforcement officer, building inspector, or assistant building inspector. Any person or persons authorized to enforce this chapter shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable times in order to inspect the property for violations of this chapter, subject to the conditions that to allow entry on private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this chapter must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon such officer having received a written complaint alleging a violation of this chapter. The magistrate court shall also be authorized to issue summons for hearings on alleged violations of this chapter upon written accusation of any person sui juris alleging such violation. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(16)) 
Sec. 46-146. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to the general penalty described in section 1-9. 
(b)  In addition, in the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained: 
(1)  The violator may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway, or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter said person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of the execution of sentence; 
(2)  The violator may be directed to pick up and remove from a public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the violator has deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of the sentence; and/or 
(3)  The court may publish the names of offenders convicted of violating this chapter. 
(c)  In the case of an improper garbage or waste disposal site, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  The county shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation. 
(e)  Each day that a violation of any section under this chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 2000, §§ 12-101(17), 33-104) 
State Law reference— Any person who shall erect or continue after notice to abate a nuisance which tends to annoy the community, injure the health of the citizens in general, or corrupt the public morals shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-6. 
Sec. 46-147. - Civil remedies; abatement. 
As an additional remedy, any person, firm, or corporation that violates any provision of this chapter causing discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order, mandamus, injunction or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful act or to correct or abate such violation. 
(Code 2000, §§ 12-101(7), 33-105) 
Sec. 46-148. - Cleaning property at expense of owner or occupant. 
(a)  Upon the first violation of any provisions of this chapter, the county manager, or a designated county official, shall issue a warning citation to the owner and/or occupant of the offending property, instructing the person cited to remedy the unlawful condition within 30 days from the date of the warning citation. If the person cited fails to so remedy the offending property within that 30-day time period, the county is authorized but not required to clean the offending property to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In order to do so, the county through its agents may: 
(1)  Remove any unlawful litter, junk, automobiles, weeds and/or grasses that exist thereon and bill the owner for the cost thereof. If the owner and/or occupant fails or refuses to pay bills for cleanup service within 30 days from the date of billing, then execution may be issued by the county against the property upon which such service is rendered for the amount of the cleanup service charge; and from and after the recording of such execution on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, such execution shall constitute a lien on the property which the service is rendered until the same shall have been fully paid and satisfied. Such executions may be enforced in the same manner and with the addition of interest and costs as provided by law for the enforcement of executions for ad valorem taxes for the county; or 
(2)  Contract with private individuals or entities to clean the offending property by removing the unlawful litter, junk, automobiles, weeds and/or grasses that exist thereon, allowing the private individuals or entities to collect their costs and expenses from either the cited owner and/or occupant directly or through the sale of any junk or scrap removed from the offending property. 
(b)  After an owner and/or occupant of property has been issued a warning citation instructing the person to remedy an unlawful condition under this chapter, and the owner and/or occupant has allowed or caused an unlawful condition to occur on the same property again, the county is authorized but not required to clean the offending property to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter in the manner set forth in subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section, but the county shall not be required to issue any warning citation, nor will the offending owner or occupant of property be entitled to 30 days to remedy the violation. 
(c)  Action by the county under this section shall not preclude criminal prosecution for a violation of any other section of this chapter, and the remedies authorized in this section are exclusive of any other criminal penalties and fines that may be assessed under this Code. 
(Code 2000, §§ 12-101(10)(b); Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-116) 
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Purchase or consumption of intoxicating beverages by minors prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful within the unincorporated areas of the county for any person under 21 years of age to purchase intoxicating beverages or for any person to consume said intoxicating beverages at any retail malt beverage and/or wine establishment within the unincorporated areas of the county except as otherwise allowed by law. 
(b)  The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as provided in section 1-9. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(c)  Violations of this section shall be prosecuted in the same manner as other misdemeanor violations of the Code in the magistrate court, or any other appropriate court. 
(Code 2000, § 31-101) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-9. 
Sec. 50-2. - Public intoxication prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the unincorporated areas of the county to be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his or her own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language. 
(b)  The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as provided in section 1-9. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(c)  Violations of this section shall be prosecuted in the same manner as other misdemeanor violations of the Code. 
(Code 2000, § 31-102) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 50-3. - Loitering regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he or she is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(c)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer unreasonably failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(d)  The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as provided in section 1-9. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(e)  Violations of this section shall be prosecuted in the same manner as other misdemeanor violations of the Code in the magistrate court or any other appropriate court. 
(Code 2000, § 31-104) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 50-4. - Damage to signs prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall remove, disfigure, deface, destroy or in any manner interfere with the use of public signs (i.e., a sign owned by a governmental entity). 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 per violation of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 31-106) 
Sec. 50-5. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if, within the unincorporated areas of the county, with the purpose of causing public danger, alarm, disorder, nuisance, or if his or her conduct is likely to cause public danger, alarm, disorder or nuisance, he or she willfully does any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another whereby that other is placed in danger of his or her life, limb or health; 
(2)  Commits an act in a violent and tumultuous manner toward another where the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(4)  If in a public place under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or drug in such condition as to be unable to exercise care for his or her own safety or the safety of others; 
(5)  Uses abusive or obscene language or makes an obscene gesture. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful assembly, picketing, public speaking, or other lawful means of expressing public opinion not in contravention of other laws. 
(c)  The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as provided in section 1-9. 
(Code 2000, § 31-107) 
State Law reference— County has joint jurisdiction with state regarding this offense, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-34, 16-11-39, 16-11-41. 
Sec. 50-6. - Interference with business enterprise of another. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon the premises of another, located within the unincorporated areas of the county, for the purpose of interfering, either directly or indirectly, with the business of said person or to interfere directly or indirectly with the business of any person. 
(b)  The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as provided in section 1-9. Any such violation shall constitute a separate offense each time committed. Such violations may be prosecuted in the magistrate court or any other appropriate court. 
(Code 2000, § 31-108) 
Sec. 50-7. - Report of treatment of wounds. 
All physicians and all hospital superintendents in the county are hereby required to report to the sheriff's department of the county all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from wounds inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind. Such report may be made in writing or by telephone, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the sheriff's department. All reports shall be made within 24 hours after treatment by a physician or after admission to the hospital. 
(Code 2000, § 31-110) 
State Law reference— Reports by physicians and other personnel of nonaccidental injuries to patients, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-9. 
Sec. 50-8. - Throwing of missiles prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to throw any stone, rock, or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Code 2000, § 31-111) 
Sec. 50-9. - Open container. 
(a)  As used in this section, "open container" means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from, or the seal of which has been broken. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and punishable as provided in this section for any person to possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage (including but not limited to beer, wine or liquor) while operating a vehicle within the unincorporated areas of Morgan County, Georgia, or while a passenger in or on a vehicle being operated within said unincorporated areas. 
(c)  An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger and is not located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk, or other locked non-passenger area of the vehicle. 
(d)  An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of a passenger of a vehicle if the container is in the physical control of the passenger. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A passenger of a vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to Georgia law or any other state; 
(2)  A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to Georgia law or any other state; or 
(3)  A passenger of a self-contained motor home which is in excess of 21 feet in length. 
(f)  Any person, operator of a vehicle, or passenger who violates this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or 30 days in jail, or both. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2007(2), § 1) 
Sec. 50-10. - Discharging firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a handgun, rifle, shotgun or any other type of firearm onto or across the property of another without the express written permission of the owner or other person in legal possession of such property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a handgun, rifle, shotgun or any other type of firearm, within an area of the unincorporated portions of the county which is within 250 feet of a residence, place of worship, business or public meeting place. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a handgun, rifle, shotgun or any other type of firearm in any residential subdivision where lots are five acres or less in area. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to discharge a handgun, rifle, shotgun or any other type of firearm within 150 feet of any public or private street in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, negligently or carelessly discharge a handgun, rifle, shotgun or any other type of firearm in such a manner as to be likely to cause bodily injury or death to persons or cause destruction of property. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a handgun, rifle, shotgun or any other type of firearm on any public boat ramp or public dock, or on any public land not designated for such activity. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a handgun, rifle, shotgun or any other type of firearm on Sunday, except in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105. 
(h)  Special activity permits may be granted as an exception to the provisions of this section by the sheriff's office. Applications for such permits must be submitted to the sheriff's office on the approved form provided by the sheriff's office. Such special activity permits are only available for the day(s) of the event. 
(i)  This section shall not apply when a handgun, rifle, shotgun or any other type of firearm is discharged by any person in defense of self or others in accordance O.C.G.A. § 16-3-21 or in defense of habitation in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-3-23. 
(j)  This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer while in the discharge of his official duties. 
(k)  This section shall not apply to the operation of approved hunting preserves or other shooting ranges. 
(l)  Nothing in this ordinance exempts any person from any state or federal laws relating to firearms. 
(Ord. of 12-4-2007(2), § 1) 
Secs. 50-11—50-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-001, § 1(exh. A), adopted May 19, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 50-11.1—50-11.8. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 50-21—50-28. 

Sec. 50-21. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to encourage alarm users and alarm companies to properly use and maintain alarm systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarms, which unduly divert emergency services from responding to actual emergencies. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 1(exh. A), 5-19-2015) 
Sec. 50-22. - Applicability. 
This article governs fire, medical and security alarm systems intended to summon emergency response from emergency medical, fire department or law enforcement and provides for civil penalties for malfunctions and violations. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 1(exh. A), 5-19-2015) 
Sec. 50-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm company means any entity that sells, leases, maintains, services, repairs, alters, replaces, moves, installs or monitors alarm systems in Morgan County. 
Alarm system means any system, device or mechanism intended to detect and signal the occurrence of activity requiring the immediate need for emergency services at the premises at which such device or set of devices is installed. 
Alarm user means any individual or entity, who owns or leases an alarm system or on whose premises an alarm system exists. 
Cancellation means the process whereby an alarm company terminates the need for an emergency response by notifying the emergency communications center after an alarm dispatch request. 
Duress alarm means a silent alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life-threatening situation or crime in progress requiring law enforcement response. 
Emergency response means sheriff's department, fire rescue or emergency medical services response. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system to summon emergency personnel which occurs as a result of mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his/her employees or agents, unless the request for response was cancelled by the alarm user or his/her agent before the sheriff's department, fire rescue or emergency medical services arrives at the alarm site. An alarm is false within the meaning of this article when, sheriff's department, fire rescue, or emergency medical services personnel find no evidence indicating a need for an emergency response, such as: unauthorized entry, robbery, other such crime was committed, attempted, or occurred in or on the premises, which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system; or a fire having occurred which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system; or a medical emergency. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm, which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by violent conditions of nature, nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user or alarm system. In addition, an alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the user's alarm company, or designee, to test the system and the alarm company upon receiving such permission does not request emergency dispatch. 
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user. 
Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting the sheriff's department, fire rescue or emergency medical services for dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this section, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting emergency dispatch. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 1(exh. A), 5-19-2015) 
Sec. 50-24. - Responsibilities of an alarm user. 
An alarm user shall: 
(1)  Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms; 
(2)  Respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within 30 minutes upon notification of the need to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system; to provide right of entry to the premises, or to provide alternative security for the premises; and 
(3)  Ensure that an alarm is not manually activated by the alarm user or any other person for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 1(exh. A), 5-19-2015) 
Sec. 50-25. - Responsibilities of an alarm company. 
(a)  All alarm companies shall: 
(1)  Obtain and maintain required state and local license(s) and/or permits; 
(2)  Maintain current contact information, which shall be provided to the emergency communications center at the time of a request for emergency response; and 
(3)  Prior to activation of an alarm system, provide verbal and written instructions explaining the proper operation of the alarm system to the alarm user and provide written information on how to obtain service from the alarm company. 
(b)  All alarm companies performing monitoring services shall: 
(1)  Attempt to verify, by calling the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting emergency dispatch. Telephone verification shall require, at a minimum, that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify him/herself to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid, except in the case of a panic or robbery-in-progress alarm, or in cases where a crime or fire-in-progress has been verified by video and/or audible means; and maintain required state and local license(s) and/or permits; 
(2)  Communicate a cancellation to the emergency communications center as soon as possible following a determination that response is unnecessary; and 
(3)  Communicate any available information about the location of the alarm. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 1(exh. A), 5-19-2015) 
Sec. 50-26. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be a violation of this article for an alarm user to: 
(1)  Activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning an emergency response when no such response is needed because there has been no crime (attempted or committed), no fire, or no medical emergency; 
(2)  Install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than ten minutes; 
(3)  Install, maintain, or use an automatic dial protection device that reports, or causes to be reported, any recorded message to the emergency communications center; or 
(4)  Allow the occurrence of excessive false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 1(exh. A), 5-19-2015) 
Sec. 50-27. - Enforcement. 
Any violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be civil in nature, shall not constitute a criminal infraction, and shall be punished solely under the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Civil penalties for excessive false alarms . It is hereby found and determined that two or more false alarms during a calendar year is excessive, constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be a violation of this article. Civil penalties for false alarms within any calendar year shall be assessed against an alarm user as follows: 
a.  For the first false alarm in a calendar year, a notice shall be issued to the alarm user, indicating the need to prevent any further false alarms; 
b.  For the second false alarm in a calendar year, a warning shall be issued to the alarm user; 
c.  For the third false alarm in a calendar year, the alarm user shall be charged a $100.00 civil penalty; 
d.  For the fourth false alarm in a calendar year, the alarm user shall be charged a $200.00 civil penalty. 
e.  For the fifth false alarm in a calendar year, the alarm user shall be charged a $300.00 civil penalty. 
f.  For the sixth and all successive false alarms in a calendar year, the alarm user shall be charged a $500.00 civil penalty. 
(2)  Payment . Civil penalties under this article shall be paid within 30 days from the date contained on the notice to the alarm user of the penalty, regardless of the date of actual receipt by the alarm user. 
(3)  Late fee. The failure of an alarm user to make payment of any civil penalties assessed under this article within 30 days from the date contained on the notice shall result in the imposition of a 50 percent late fee, except that the combined penalty and late fee for any single violation shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(4)  Failure to pay. Following the imposition of any late fees pursuant to this section, Morgan County reserves the right to forward any alarm user's outstanding penalties and late fees to a collection agency should an alarm user fail to make payment within 90 days from the date of the notice of the late fee. Collection fees may be added by the collection agency to the balance owed to the extent allowed by law. In addition, execution may be issued by the county against the property that is the location of the false alarms in the amount of any civil penalties and fines, and such execution shall be recorded upon the general execution docket in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Morgan County, Georgia, and such execution shall constitute a lien on the property, until the same shall have been fully paid and satisfied. Such executions may be enforced in the same manner and with the addition of interest and costs as provided by law for the enforcement of executions for ad valorem taxes for the county. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 1(exh. A), 5-19-2015) 
Sec. 50-28. - Appeals. 
(a)  Board of commissioners to hear appeals. The board of commissioners shall have the power, as further defined in this article, to hear all appeals of decisions and interpretations of the official as outlined in this article. 
(b)  Appeals . 
(1)  Assessment of civil penalties imposed as a result of a violation of this article may be appealed by delivering a written notice of appeal within 14 days of the date contained on the notification of the assessment of such civil penalties. 
(2)  Such written notice of appeal must be actually received by the Director of Planning and Development of Morgan County within this time period, and the failure to deliver such notice within this time period shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalties or other enforcement decisions. 
(3)  Any such written notice of appeal should indicate whether the alarm user desires a hearing. If the alarm user desires a hearing and so indicates in his/her notice of appeal, the alarm user shall be afforded an opportunity for an evidentiary hearing under judicial forms of procedure. Within ten business days of receipt of a notice of appeal requesting a hearing, the county shall notify the alarm user in writing of the date, time and location of the hearing. 
(4)  If the alarm user does not request a hearing, the county shall notify the alarm user of the decision of the board of commissioners in writing within ten business days of the date the decision is rendered. 
(c)  Appeal hearings. For any notice of appeal requesting a hearing, filed in accordance with this article, a record shall be kept, which shall include: 
(1)  The notice of assessment of civil penalty; 
(2)  A record of the oral testimony plus all other evidence received or considered except that oral proceedings or any part thereof shall be transcribed only upon request; and 
(3)  The written decision of the board of commissioners, to be mailed to the alarm user within ten business days of the hearing. 
(d)  Appeals to superior court. An aggrieved alarm user may appeal the decision of the board of commissioners under this article regarding civil penalties for excessive false alarms by appealing to the Superior Court of Morgan County if said appeal is filed within 30 days of the rendering of the decision by the Morgan County Board of Commissioners, and served upon the board pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 9-11-4 within five days of filing. A decision is deemed "rendered" by the board on the date that the board renders its decision, as indicated by the date contained on the decision, not on the date that the minutes reflecting such decision are approved by the board. An appeal from a decision of the board of commissioners under this article is the exclusive remedy for anyone aggrieved by a decision of the board. 
(Ord. No. 2015-001, § 1(exh. A), 5-19-2015) 
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Garbage and solid waste collection and disposal are authorized as a home rule power of the counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous materials or hazardous waste means waste, in any amount, which is defined, characterized or designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal or state law. The term "hazardous waste" shall include motor oil, gasoline, paint, paint cans and items containing Freon, chlorofluorocarbons or other form that may pose an unreasonable risk to health, safety, property and the environment. 
Household garbage means all refuse or trash which is of a size no larger than one foot wide by two feet long and is refuse or trash of a type that is not an appliance or furniture. 
Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined in this section, which does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license plate or plates, and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. 
Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or other discarded material of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in this section. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, ATVs, trucks, tractors, go-carts, campers and trailers. 
Person means any entity, person, firm, partnership, corporation or unincorporated association. 
Private property means any real property within the county limits, which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property means the right-of-way of any street or highway, which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of travel; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any publicly owned park, playground, building, refuge, conservation or recreation area. 
Road or street shall be mutually inclusive and shall likewise be deemed to include any alley, lane, court, and other thoroughfare, however described or designated. 
Scrap tires means all tires that are no longer suitable for their original intended purposes because of wear, damage or defect. 
Tire means a hoop of iron, rubber or plastic which is generally designed for encircling the wheel of a motor vehicle and which is neither attached to the motor vehicle nor a part of the motor vehicle as original equipment. 
Waste means all discarded substances and materials whatsoever exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance in any weight or volume, biomedical waste, hazardous waste as defined in this section, a hazardous substance as defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-92, or any such substance or material dumped for commercial purposes. The term "waste" includes, without limitation: bottles; boxes; containers; papers; tobacco products; tires; appliances; mechanical equipment or parts; building or construction material; tools; machinery; wood; motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts; vessels; aircraft equipment; waste oil; batteries; antifreeze; sludge from wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and air contaminants from any source from any source or facility, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or governmental operations, including household, commercial, construction and demolition waste, or industrial solid waste which is nonhazardous, nonmedical, and in a form classified as solid waste by the state department of natural resources. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(1); Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-101) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-22, 16-7-42. 
Sec. 58-2. - Evidence of violations. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(8)) 
Secs. 58-3—58-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DISPOSAL AND TRANSPORTING 

Sec. 58-23. - Waste disposal site. 
(a)  Residents of the county may dispose of household garbage at one of the numerous waste disposal sites located throughout the county for the purpose of collecting such. 
(b)  All items of refuse or trash other than household garbage must be taken to the county transfer station during the hours it is open to the public. 
(c)  No item of garbage of any kind may be placed on top of, adjacent to, or near said waste disposal sites. All items of household garbage must be placed wholly inside said waste disposal sites. 
(d)  Only residents of the county are permitted to make use of waste disposal sites, or dump or place garbage or debris of any kind within the county. 
(e)  Any person charged with violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to the penalties described in section 1-9. 
(Code 2000, § 12-102) 
Sec. 58-24. - Entry prohibited. 
(a)  Unless so employed or authorized by the county manager, no person shall place any part of his or her person or use any tool to remove or attempt to remove any object or item from any waste disposal site in the county. 
(b)  Any person charged with violating this section shall be charged a fine of at least $25.00 if convicted. 
(Code 2000, § 12-103) 
Sec. 58-25. - Garbage storage areas to be kept clean. 
(a)  The proprietary owner, tenant, or occupant of any premises, and the proprietor and person in charge of every business, commercial, institutional, and industrial establishment, shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposition of garbage, litter, waste, scrap tires and refuse on the premises used, occupied or under the control of such person and shall be required to keep the driveways, yards, parking areas, loading or unloading areas and lots adjacent thereto or under the control thereof reasonably clean at all times. 
(b)  Every proprietary owner, occupant, and lessee of a house, business, or building shall be jointly and severally required to maintain garbage storage areas in a clean condition and to ensure that all garbage is properly containerized. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(2)(a); Ord. of 9-10-2002, §§ 34-106, 34-108) 
Sec. 58-26. - Containers required. 
Every proprietary owner, occupant, tenant and person using or occupying any commercial, institutional or industrial building or property in the county shall be obligated, jointly and severally, to provide litter containers of such size, number, and type as may be specified by the county manager or his or her designee to be reasonably required to hold litter generated by operations on the premises. Specifically, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the requirement for such containers shall apply to shopping centers, supermarkets, convenience stores, fast food and other type restaurants, service stations and similar establishments and shall likewise apply to commercial establishments, garages, schools, and churches. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(2)(b); Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-107) 
Sec. 58-27. - Construction sites. 
Within the county, all property owners and prime contractors in charge of a construction site, jointly and severally, are required to furnish litter containers for construction litter. All litter from construction and related activities shall be containerized and shall be picked up and placed in containers at the end of each workday. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(2)(c); Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-110) 
Sec. 58-28. - Litter and waste disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the sweeping, dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of household garbage, litter, waste, scrap tires, dead animals, discarded items or other debris at any place in the county, including, without limitation, any public or private property or in any waters in this county unless such litter or waste originates in this county and: 
(1)  The property is designated and permitted by the state and/or by the county board of commissioners or its duly designated agent for disposal of litter and waste, and the person is authorized to use said property; and 
(2)  The litter and waste is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; however, any litter or waste placed into such a receptacle or container installed on such property must not be allowed to accumulate for any unreasonable period of time, and in no event shall it be allowed to accumulate to the point of overflowing the container or receptacle or to a point where the container or receptacle may not be closed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, place, store, park or broadcast any waste, junk, metal, brickbats, stones, plaster, lumber, trash, garbage, litter, paper or similar rubbish or junk, unless authorized to do so by a duly issued permit, in or on any: 
(1)  Public highway, road, street, alley, sidewalk, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers of areas lawfully provided for such dumpings; 
(2)  Freshwater lake, river, canal, or stream or creek; or 
(3)  Public or private property unless such dumping will not adversely affect the public health and is not in violation of any other local, state, or federal law, rule, or regulation. 
(Code 2000, §§ 12-101(2)(d), (e); Ord. of 9-10-2002, §§ 34-102, 34-103) 
Sec. 58-29. - Tire disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or put any tire or tires within the confines of the county landfill with the intent of disposing of or abandoning the same. 
(b)  It shall be lawful for persons to store a reasonable number of tires on their property. Said number shall not exceed ten tires in addition to tires attached to or located inside the trunks of vehicles. 
(c)  Tires shall be disposed of at either a state recycling facility, state tire carriers, or the county transfer station. 
(d)  Any person found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to the penalties described in section 1-9. Each tire so disposed, and each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Code 2000, §§ 12-101(13), 12-104, 31-103) 
Sec. 58-30. - Packing, repacking, and loading areas to be kept clean. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on the streets, roads, or sidewalks in the county any crates, boxes or any similar containers other than when loading, unloading, packing or unpacking merchandise. 
(b)  Work areas, including, but not limited to, loading and unloading areas, shall be provided with containers for the deposit of litter created by packing or repacking operations and the owner of the premises and the occupant thereof shall, jointly and severally, maintain surveillance to ensure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn without first obtaining a permit from the state forestry commission. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to unreasonably interfere with or make illegal any bona fide agricultural operations. 
(Code 2000, §§ 12-101(2)(f), (g); Ord. of 9-10-2002, §§ 34-104, 34-109) 
Sec. 58-31. - Transportation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any garbage, trash, refuse, or other cargo upon the public thoroughfares in the county if the same is of a character or substance which is likely to leak, freely flow or spill, blow or escape from the motor vehicle onto the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Any litter or waste hauled on a moving vehicle in the county shall be covered or secured by containers, tarpaulin, or other device in such fashion as to effectively prevent it from leaking, freely flowing or spilling, blowing or escaping onto the public rights-of-way. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit the necessary spreading of any substance in public road maintenance or unreasonably interfere with bona fide agricultural operations. 
(d)  The duties and responsibilities herein imposed shall be applicable alike to the owner of the motor vehicle and operator thereof. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(3); Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-105) 
Secs. 58-32—58-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOX DUMPSTERS, COMPACTORS, AND RECYCLING 

Sec. 58-51. - Authorized waste; site maintenance; permitted use. 
(a)  All box dumpster sites or compactor sites shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for garbage and litter disposal. 
(b)  Persons using box dumpster or compactor sites shall deposit all authorized garbage and refuse in the container or receptacle. 
(c)  Only household garbage may be deposited in the container or receptacle. 
(d)  All other refuse or trash must be taken to the county transfer station. 
(e)  Only residents of the county are permitted to make use of dumpsters or dump or place garbage or debris of any kind within the county. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(4)) 
Sec. 58-52. - Prohibited waste; prohibited acts. 
(a)  No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in any such container or receptacle. 
(b)  No person shall set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle. 
(c)  No dead animals shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle. 
(d)  No person shall deposit large, noncompactable articles in such containers or receptacles such as appliances, bedsprings, mattresses, tires, air conditioning units, construction material, tree limbs, lawn trimmings, furniture, or similar items. 
(e)  No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacles. 
(f)  No person shall place or scatter litter or waste in or around such containers or receptacles. 
(g)  No one shall deposit any hazardous materials in or around such containers or sites. 
(h)  No person shall enter into said receptacle or container, place any part of his or her person within such receptacle or container or use any tool to remove or attempt to remove any object or item from any such receptacle within the county. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(4)) 
Sec. 58-53. - Use of recycling container. 
It shall be unlawful for any individual to located or place, or cause to be located or placed, a non-paper product or substance or any kind of nonpaper waste or unauthorized waste into a recycling container which is so labeled or marked. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(14)) 
Secs. 58-54—58-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER AND WASTE 

Sec. 58-80. - Prohibited accumulation. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of any premises in the county shall allow litter or waste to accumulate thereon. The owner, occupant and lessee of all property, jointly and severally, are required to remove all litter and place the same in proper containers. Vacant lots, borders, parking lots, embankments, fences, walls and sidewalks shall be kept free from litter. Parking lots, shopping centers, convenience stores, drive-in restaurants and all other commercial and industrial enterprises shall see to it that their respective properties are kept litter-free. 
(b)  No owner or occupant of any property shall allow the accumulation on his or her premises of garbage or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(5); Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-111) 
Sec. 58-81. - Wrecked, dilapidated, and inoperative items. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of land to have on private property litter, dilapidated furniture, appliances, machinery, equipment, building materials, or other items, including but not limited to automobiles, which are either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled, or inoperative condition, unless such items are wholly contained in buildings that lawfully exist on the property. A motor vehicle without a valid and current tag shall be presumed to be junk. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-112) 
Sec. 58-82. - Prohibited burning. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of any such property shall bury or burn litter or waste without prior authorization and permission from the applicable regulatory agency, including but not limited to the Environmental Protection Agency, environmental protection division and/or the state forestry service. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any containers used for the storage or dumping of litter or waste. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state law. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(5)(a), (c)) 
Sec. 58-83. - Separate violation. 
The conduct described in this article shall constitute a separate violation of this article for each day the garbage or waste material remains on such premises. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(5)(d)) 
Secs. 58-84—58-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADVERTISEMENTS 

Sec. 58-110. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place in or on any vehicle in the county any commercially oriented handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard, or other literature except with the permission, express or implied, of the owner or occupant of said vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place on public property within the county any handbill, circular, pamphlet, postcard, poster, or other literature except with the permission, express or implied, of the board. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(6)(a), (b)) 
Sec. 58-111. - Bond required. 
Any person desiring to place any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard or other literature on public property within the county shall first post a $100.00 cash bond with the clerk of the county along with obtaining permission from the board to distribute said materials. The bond shall be returned upon request, provided said literature and materials are removed within a reasonable time after the event which it promotes. This section shall not prohibit a merchant from placing such literature within his or her commercial establishment or on his or her storefront. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(6)(c)) 
Secs. 58-112—58-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - YARD WASTES 

Sec. 58-136. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
County solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
County solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of county solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to county solid waste landfills. 
County solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of county solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludge or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill or transfer stations. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-115(1)) 
Sec. 58-137. - Excess weeds and grasses prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of land to have on private property weeds and grasses in excess of 20 inches in height. Heavily wooded lots where equipment cannot maneuver on the lot because of density are exempt from this section. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-113) 
Sec. 58-138. - Placement and disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with other county solid waste within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any county solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-115(2)) 
Sec. 58-139. - Sorting; storing; composting; collecting. 
(a)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled, or chipped, or composted, or used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. 
(b)  Any yard trimmings to be collected by any other entity other than the property owner shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(c)  The board of commissioners hereby adopts and recommends the following hierarchy for handling yard trimmings: 
(1)  Naturalized, low-maintenance landscaping requiring little or no cutting; 
(2)  Grass cycling by mowing it high and letting it lie; 
(3)  Stacking branches into small brush piles for use as wildlife habitats and for gradual decomposition into the soil; 
(4)  Composting on the site where the material was grown, followed by incorporation of the finished compost into the soil at that site; 
(5)  Chipping woody material on the site where such material was generated; 
(6)  Collecting yard trimmings and transporting them to another site to be chipped or composted for later use; and 
(7)  Chipping woody material for later use as fiber fuel. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(9); Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-115(3)) 
Secs. 58-140—58-161. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 58-162. - Responsibility; right of entry; power of summons. 
Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of any sworn officer of the court, including, but not limited to, the sheriff, deputy sheriff, the code enforcement officer, building inspector, or assistant building inspector. Any person or persons authorized to enforce this chapter shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable times in order to inspect the property for violations of this chapter, subject to the conditions that to allow entry on private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this chapter must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon such officer having received a written complaint alleging a violation of this chapter. The magistrate court shall also be authorized to issue summons for hearings on alleged violations of this chapter upon written accusation of any person sui juris alleging such violation. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(16)) 
Sec. 58-163. - Cleaning property at expense of owner or occupant. 
(a)  Upon the first violation of any section of this chapter, the county manager, or a designated county official, shall issue a warning citation to the owner and/or occupant of the offending property, instructing the person cited to remedy the unlawful condition within 30 days from the date of the warning citation. 
(b)  If the person cited fails to so remedy the offending property within that 30-day time period, the county is authorized but not required to clean the offending property to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In order to do so, the county, through its agents, may: 
(1)  Remove any unlawful litter, junk, automobiles, weeds and/or grasses that exist thereon and bill the owner for the cost thereof. If the owner and/or occupant fails or refuses to pay bills for cleanup service within 30 days from the date of billing, then execution may be issued by the county against the property upon which such service is rendered for the amount of the cleanup service charge; and from and after the recording of such execution on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of the superior court of the county, such execution shall constitute a lien on the property which the service is rendered until the same shall have been fully paid and satisfied. Such executions may be enforced in the same manner and with the addition of interest and costs as provided by law for the enforcement of executions for ad valorem taxes for the county; or 
(2)  Contract with private individuals or entities to clean the offending property by removing the unlawful litter, junk, automobiles, weeds and/or grasses that exist thereon, allowing the private individuals or entities to collect their costs and expenses from either the cited owner and/or occupant directly or through the sale of any junk or scrap removed from the offending property. 
(c)  After an owner and/or occupant of property has been issued a warning citation instructing the person to remedy an unlawful condition under this chapter, and the owner and/or occupant has allowed or caused an unlawful condition to occur on the same property again, the county is authorized but not required to clean the offending property to bring it into compliance within the provisions of this chapter in the manner set forth in subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section, but the county shall not be required to issue any warning citation, nor will the offending owner or occupant of property entitled to 30 days to remedy the violation. 
(d)  Action by the county under this section shall not preclude criminal prosecution for a violation of any section of this chapter, and the remedies authorized in this section are exclusive of any other criminal penalties and fines that may be assessed under this chapter. 
(Code 2000, §§ 12-101(10)(b), (15); Ord. of 9-10-2002, § 34-116) 
Sec. 58-164. - Civil remedies; abatement. 
In the event that any person, firm, or corporation violates any provision of this chapter, the county attorney or other appropriate authority of the county may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful act or to correct or abate such violation. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(7)) 
Sec. 58-165. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any portion of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished according to the general penalty described in section 1-9. 
(b)  In addition, in the sound discretion of a court in which conviction is obtained: 
(1)  The violator may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway, or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter said person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of the execution of sentence; 
(2)  The violator may be directed to pick up and remove from a public park, private right-of-way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the violator has deposited thereon by anyone prior the date of execution of sentence; and/or 
(3)  The court may publish the names of offenders convicted of violating this chapter. 
(c)  In the case of an improper garbage or waste disposal site, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  The county shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation. 
(Code 2000, § 12-101(17)) 
Chapter 62 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County has home rule powers regarding the construction and maintenance of streets, sidewalks, and curbs, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); general powers and duties of county regarding responsibility for a county road system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENTS AND EASEMENTS 

Sec. 62-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Encroachment means any natural or manmade feature that gradually intrudes on the county right-of-way and advances beyond private property. This includes placement of posters, signs, and advertisements in violation of O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1 which are considered encroachments if placed within the county right-of-way. 
Mailbox means any freestanding or detached structure, container, or receptacle for the delivery of United States Postal Service Mail or other documents including, but not limited to, newspapers. 
Masonry means brick, stone, concrete, and all other substances or materials having like properties of weight and/or immovability. 
Obstruction means any natural or manmade feature that is on the county right-of-way and could cause injury or limit sight distance to public travelers on the county right-of-way. Obstructions include but are not limited to any masonry structure, entranceway, sign, post, vehicle, tree, or bush exceeding standards as stated in county regulations. 
(Code 2000, § 21-101(1)) 
Sec. 62-20. - Location of mailboxes. 
Mailboxes shall be located so as to comply with the rules and regulations of the United States Postmaster General. On the county roadways without a curb, mailboxes shall be set back no less than eight feet from the nearest edge of the roadway so as to allow the mail carrier to pull the postal delivery vehicle completely off the travel lanes of the county roadway to deliver mail. Where shoulder width does allow for such distance, the mailbox shall be set back the maximum distance possible from the county roadway. Under no circumstances may the location of the mailbox interfere with the safe use of a county roadway by the traveling public. Any mailbox which fails to conform to the location requirements as provided in this section shall be unlawful and deemed a public nuisance. 
(Code 2000, § 21-101(2)) 
Sec. 62-21. - Construction and composition of mailboxes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to construct and/or maintain a mailbox within the county right-of-way which fails to meet the construction specifications enumerated in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  In order to safeguard the health and welfare of the traveling public and to ensure uniform standards of function and beautification of the county highway system, mailboxes shall be constructed as follows: 
(1)  The support structure or post of the mailbox shall not be constructed with masonry material or of any other material which will not readily yield upon impact with a vehicle. 
(2)  The encasement or housing for the mailbox itself shall not be made of masonry material or of any other material that will not readily yield upon impact with a vehicle. 
(3)  All posts shall have a maximum width of four inches by four inches or, if round, the post shall have no greater than a four-inch diameter. If a metal post is used to support the mailbox, such post shall be hollow. 
(Code 2000, § 21-101(3)) 
Sec. 62-22. - Obstructions and encroachments. 
No obstructions or encroachments may be allowed on county road rights-of-way that endanger the public, limit sight distance, cause nuisance to maintenance of road rights-of-way or adversely affect the beautification of the county. No obstructions or encroachments, including but not limited to trees and/or trunks of bushes, greater than four inches in diameter, shall be allowed within the county road rights-of-way. 
(Code 2000, § 21-101(4)) 
Sec. 62-23. - Utility easement. 
Any person or entity desiring to utilize county road rights-of-way for placement of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers or other signs or equipment, facilities or appliances of any utility in, on, along, over or under the public road right-of-way of the county must first obtain any required federal, state, and utility permits. Once the same has been obtained and proof thereof furnished to the board of commissioners, the applicant must obtain a permit from the board of commissioners which meets right-of-way policies for installing lines as required by the development regulations as well as meet all other county ordinances and requirements including, but not limited to, soil erosion and sedimentation control, compaction of disturbed soil, driveway repair, land disturbance permits and utility easements. Cutting of improperly located cable by county work crew is the responsibility of the person or entity owning or maintaining the cable. 
(Code 2000, § 21-101(5)) 
Sec. 62-24. - Other easements. 
Any person or entity desiring to utilize county road rights-of-way for placement of any items other than utility easements, as stated in section 62-23, must first obtain a permit from the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 21-101(6)) 
Sec. 62-25. - Utility obstruction. 
Whenever the board of commissioners shall reasonably determine that any pipe, main, conduit, cable, wire, pole, tower, or other signal or equipment, facilities or appliances of any utility in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the county should be removed or relocated, because it has become an obstruction or interference with the use and/or safe operation of a county road, or will become an obstruction or interference with the use and/or safe operation of a proposed county road, a written notice shall be directed to the utility company, giving at least 60 days' notice to the utility to make such change as is necessary for removal or relocations as may be necessary in the county's reasonable discretion. If the utility does not thereafter begin removal within a reasonable time sufficient to allow for engineering and other procedures reasonably necessary for the removal and relocation of the utility facility, the board of commissioners may give the utility a final notice directing that such removal shall commence not later than ten days from receipt of such final notice. If such removal has not begun within that ten days or if such removal has begun and the relocation has not been completed within 45 days thereof, the board of commissioners may remove or relocate the same with its own employees, or by contracted labor, tools, equipment, supervision, or other necessary services and materials and whatever else is necessary to accomplish the removal or relocation, and the expense thereof shall be charged to the utility. Said expense shall be certified to the county attorney, who shall have the authority to proceed with suit against the utility for same if payment or arrangements to make payments are not made within 60 days after demand by said county attorney. Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to derive any utility, relocated from a location in which it owned a property interest, of comparison for such property interest. 
(Code 2000, § 21-101(7)) 
Sec. 62-26. - Road boring. 
No road of any kind may be cut or bored without first obtaining a permit from the board of commissioners. Upon application together with a $25.00 permit fee and issuance of a road boring permit, an on-site inspection is required by the road superintendent not less than 72 hours prior to commencing work. Upon application and approval, borings must be a minimum of three feet below the ditch line and must utilize steel casings which extend to the ditch line. All permits must also meet state permit specifications on all county roads where state funds are involved. 
(Code 2000, § 21-101(8)) 
Sec. 62-27. - Indemnification agreement. 
Prior to the commencement of any work and issuance of any permits pursuant to this article, the person or entity desiring to utilize county road rights-of-way shall file with the board of commissioners an indemnification agreement, indemnifying the county against any and all claims and liability arising out of that person or entity's utilization of such county road right-of-way. The form of the indemnification agreement shall be designated by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 21-101(9)) 
Sec. 62-28. - Penalty. 
Any violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable according to the general penalty described in section 1-9. Each day any violation under this article continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 2000, § 21-101(10)) 
Sec. 62-29. - Remedial nature; no warranty. 
This article and all inspections conducted and permits issued under this article are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through roadway and right-of-way integrity and safety to life and property from hazards attributable to obstacles or encroachments in road rights-of-way, and by regulating installation and construction of any structure or obstacle within road rights-of-way. The inspection or permitting of any structure or obstacle under the requirements of this article shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition thereof or its adequacy. Neither the board of commissioners nor any county official or county employee thereof shall be liable for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy of such structure or obstacle, nor any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Code 2000, § 21-101(10)) 
Secs. 62-30—62-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION OF DRIVEWAYS AND THOROUGHFARES 

Sec. 62-55. - Permits. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity to construct a driveway, road, street, or thoroughfare upon or adjacent to any public road within the unincorporated areas of the county so as to interesect with and/or gain access to said public road, unless such person or entity first obtains a roadway access permit to construct such driveway, road, street or thoroughfare. However, qualified timber harvesters, as set forth in chapter 42, article III and section 62-110, are not required to apply for permits. 
(b)  Application. Any person or entity wishing to construct a driveway, road, street, or thoroughfare accessing any major public road within the unincorporated areas of the county shall make an application to the planning and development office and pay a fee with said application as established from time to time by the board of commissioners with the initial fee being $20.00. The planning and development office will review and consider the application and will instruct the applicant of the requirements necessary to permit construction of access to the said public road using the following standards and guidelines: 
(1)  Driveways shall not intersect public roads at an angle less than 60 degrees; 
(2)  All waters from driveways must enter onto the shoulders of public roads and into the ditch. No water shall enter onto the public road surface or pavement; 
(3)  At the ditch line, the driveway must be lower in elevation than the public roadbed; 
(4)  The finished driveway surface where it abuts the public road must be no higher in elevation than the roadbed; 
(5)  As far as practicable, all driveways must be located and constructed so as to maximize sight distance by those traversing the driveway or the public road; 
(6)  On all subdivisions which front on an existing public road, no more than one driveway shall be allowed for every 300 feet of public road frontage regardless of the number of lots along such road frontage, and all such subdivisions must comply with the development regulations of the county; 
(7)  In and around the first 50 feet of all driveway culverts, the slope of the land shall be at a grade of no more than 3 to 1 so as to enable the county to better maintain the culvert area; 
(8)  All culvert pipe shall be made only of the following substances: corrugated steel, concrete, or corrugated polyethylene smooth lined to American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) 294 standards; and 
(9)  Each access shall be constructed in a manner which will not damage the public roadway or hinder use of the public roadway. 
(c)  Inspection. 
(1)  The proposed location of any driveway, road, street, or thoroughfare to be constructed which will provide access to the public road system of the unincorporated areas of the county shall be subject to inspection prior to issuance of a roadway access permit. 
(2)  The appropriate official as designated by the board of commissioners shall consider any plans or other evidence deemed necessary to inform the board of commissioners of the intended construction of any such access. Any permit issued by the planning and development office to construct any driveway, road, street or thoroughfare will include specifications for grade, gravel, size and length of pipe or other construction specifications so as to provide for the orderly management of the public roads within the county and their connection to private ways for access. 
(Code 2000, § 21-102(1)) 
Sec. 62-56. - Construction of access. 
Any driveway, road, street or thoroughfare must allow for all water to flow into roadway ditches and not onto county roads. The applicant must make repairs to the proposed driveway to ensure safety of the county road in all weather conditions. 
(Code 2000, § 21-102(2)) 
Sec. 62-57. - Location of driveways. 
On subdivided lots which access one or more of the public roads of the unincorporated areas of the county, the driveway shall be placed as far as possible from existing road intersections to maximize sight distance. No driveway shall intersect a public road at an angle less than 60 degrees. 
(Code 2000, § 21-102(3)) 
Sec. 62-58. - Indemnification agreement. 
Prior to the commencement of any work and issuance of any permits pursuant to this article, the person or entity desiring to construct access to county roadways shall file with the planning and development office an indemnification agreement, indemnifying the county against any and all claims and liability arising out of that person or entity's construction of access to such county roadway. Additionally, the person or entity shall agree to repair or reimburse the county for necessary repairs caused by such person or entity's damage to such county roadway. The form of the indemnification agreement shall be designated by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 21-102(4)) 
Sec. 62-59. - Timber harvesting. 
Any person or firm engaged in the cutting, removing or harvesting of standing timber in any unincorporated area of the county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state who fully complies with chapter 42, article III, while not required to obtain a permit to construct a driveway to conduct timber harvesting operations, is required to comply with all other terms of this article, including the obligation to construct and/or maintain a driveway in compliance with the provisions set forth in section 62-56 so long as timber harvesting operations are ongoing. 
(Code 2000, § 21-102(5)) 
Editor's note— The 2000 Code contained language after this provision stating that "persons constructing, reconstructing or improving any commercial driveway, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 32-6-130, are required to obtain a permit from the Georgia Department of Transportation prior to beginning such work." See O.C.G.A. § 32-6-131. 
Sec. 62-60. - Violations and fines. 
(a)  Any person or entity violating any section of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not less than $100.00 for each violation thereof. Each day such a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall any person or entity be fined more than $1,000.00 for the construction of any one driveway, road, street, or thoroughfare. Violations of this article shall be investigated and enforced by the roads and bridges department and the planning and development office. Violations may be heard by the chief magistrate of the county or the superior court of the county. 
(b)  Any permit issued pursuant to this article to construct any driveway, road, street or thoroughfare to access a public road in the unincorporated areas of the county shall be subject to the provisions of such permit, and a failure to comply with the terms and/or conditions of that permit shall be sufficient basis and grounds for the board of commissioners to revoke said permit and/or cite said person or entity for violation of this article. Where any driveway to be constructed is part of a building permit project, such driveway should be properly installed prior to pouring a foundation for said building project. Any person or entity violating this provision shall likewise be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 for each violation thereof. Each day such violations exist shall constitute a separate offense. In no event shall any person or entity be fined more than $1,000.00 for the construction of any one such driveway. Noncompliance that results in right-of-way damage or creates safety hazards will require reimbursement to the county for damages at the landowner's cost. 
(Code 2000, § 21-102(6)) 
Secs. 62-61—62-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INJURY TO OR OBSTRUCTION OF COUNTY ROADWAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1. 

Sec. 62-85. - Prohibitions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, encroach upon, solicit the sale of any merchandise on, or injure materially any part of any public road in the unincorporated areas of the county. For purposes of this article, the term "obstruct" shall include, without limitation, the causing of any buildup of rock, gravel, mud, dirt, chemicals, or other materials by continued ingress or egress of vehicles or of any natural waters dammed or redirected by diversion to an extent which presents a hazard to the traveling public. 
(Code 2000, § 21-103(1)) 
Sec. 62-86. - Reimbursement; fines; restitution. 
(a)  Reimbursement. Any person who unlawfully obstructs, encroaches upon, or injures any such public road shall be responsible for reimbursing the county for the costs of removal of any obstructions or encroachments and the costs of repairs to the public road incurred by the county, including any costs associated with traffic management; provided, however, that such costs shall be limited to those costs which are directly incurred from such damages. Costs incurred for traffic management may include, but not be limited to, costs incurred for flagging, signing, or provision of detours, provided that these activities are directly caused by the obstruction, encroachment, or injury to the public road system. 
(b)  Fine. In addition to reimbursement, any person who unlawfully obstructs, encroaches upon, or injures any such public road shall be fined in accordance with the schedule set by the board of commissioners or courts per obstruction/encroachment, per day. Each day any violation under this article continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(c)  Restitution. In addition to any other sentence authorized by law, the magistrate or superior court may order a person or entity convicted of violating this article to make such restitution for the offense. 
(Code 2000, § 21-103(2)) 
Secs. 62-87—62-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRUCK ROUTES AND TRUCK TRAFFIC[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2013-005, § 1(exh. A), adopted Aug. 6, 2013, amended Art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. V, §§ 62-110—62-113, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of 5-5-2009, § 1. Ord. of 5-5-2009, § 1, previously amended Art. V in its entirety. For prior history, see the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 62-110. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County roads means all roads, streets and roadways owned by the county and operated and maintained for the travel and convenience of the public. This definition shall include all bridges, culverts, ditches, drainage structures, rights-of-way, sidewalks, and appurtenances and improvements to the county roads. 
Non-truck route means one of the following county roads that are not a truck route as defined by this section: 

 
Project means any parcel of land that product is delivered to or removed from by means of a truck. 
Restricted road means all county roads other than truck routes and non-truck routes. 
Through truck means a truck traveling through the county that is not making a stop or delivery within the county. 
Truck means a vehicle that is designed or operated for the transportation of property, including raw materials, that meets one or more of the following criteria: has more than six wheels; exceeds 36,000 pounds in gross vehicle weight; or has an overall length of more than 30 feet. A vehicle designed and used solely to carry passengers is not a "truck" under this definition. 
Truck route means state highways, federal highways, the Dwight D. Eisenhower System of Interstate and Defense Highways and the following county streets/roads: 

 
(Ord. No. 2013-005, § 1(exh. A), 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 62-111. - Truck traffic. 
(a)  Truck routes mandatory. All through trucks are required to travel upon truck routes. All other trucks are required to travel upon truck routes, except in any of the following limited circumstances: 
(1)  Local pickups and deliveries . If the terminal, parking lot, repair garage, headquarters, or place of pickup or delivery of the truck is not on a truck route, then the vehicle may travel on non-truck routes only by the shortest (least mileage), most direct route between such places and the nearest truck route. The shortest route between such places and the nearest truck route may be specifically designated by the county to prevent truck traffic on county roads that are deemed inadequate for such travel. Trucks shall not use any restricted roads, unless the origination or destination of the truck is on a restricted road, in which case, the truck shall travel by the shortest, most direct route between the nearest truck route then the nearest non-truck route to or from the origination/destination. 
(2)  Non-truck route special use permit . If a non-truck route special use permit is obtained from Morgan County (section 62-113), the truck may travel on those non-truck routes and restricted roads specifically identified in the permit for the duration of the permit. 
(3)  Agricultural products and equipment . Trucks hauling farm animals, farm materials, farm equipment, farm machinery, farm supplies, or farm products to or from a location in the county shall not be required to use a truck route, but shall be required to use a non-truck route, unless the origination or destination of the truck is on a restricted road, in which case, the truck shall travel by the shortest, most direct route between the nearest truck route or non-truck route to or from the origination/destination. Delivery slips, bills of lading, invoices, receipts, or other documentation may be presented by truck drivers as evidence that certain materials, equipment, machinery or supplies that are not used exclusively for farm or agricultural purposes are in fact for farm or agricultural purposes. 
(4)  Forest products . Upon posting the bond required by section 42-66 and upon providing the notice required by sections 42-90 and 42-91, a truck hauling forest products to or from a location within the county shall not be required to use a truck route, but shall be required to use a non-truck route, unless the origination or destination of the truck is on a restricted road, in which case, the truck shall travel by the shortest, most direct route between the nearest truck route or non-truck route to or from the origination/destination. 
(b)  Interstate pickups and deliveries. All trucks picking up or delivering a majority of their load within one mile of an interchange with Interstate 20 shall use said interstate instead of county roads, except for those trucks listed above in subsections (a)(2)—(4). 
(c)  Proof of destination . Drivers of trucks shall be prepared to show law enforcement officers the log book, weight slips, delivery slips, bills of lading, and other written evidence of destination and point of origin to justify any presence of the truck on a county road other than a truck route. 
(d)  Bridges. Notwithstanding any provision of this section, no truck or vehicle of any kind shall be operated over a county bridge with a posted limit less than the total gross weight of the truck or vehicle and its load. 
(e)  Temporary closures. If any designated route, or portion thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, trucks shall use such other temporary route as may be designated by the county. 
(f)  Emergency closures . When the county road superintendent or his or her designated agent determines that an emergency situation has arisen wherein trucks are damaging or destroying streets or avenues which are not designed or constructed to withstand heavy truck traffic, the road superintendent is authorized to prohibit truck traffic to alleviate the situation. Such prohibition shall be defined and official signs erected designating the maximum gross weight of vehicles to include load thereon and/or maximum length. Within 30 days after taking such action, the road superintendent shall report the same to the board of commissioners for confirmation by Code amendment and/or resolution. 
(g)  Penalties for violation . Violation of any part of this section shall be punishable by a fine up to $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment of up to 60 days. Violation of subsection (a) shall subject the violating operator of a truck or restricted motor vehicle, to the following penalties: 
(1)  1st offense: $125.00; 
(2)  2nd offense within 24 months: $500.00; 
(3)  3rd offense within 24 months: $1,000.00; 
(4)  Additional offenses within 24 months: $1,000.00 and up to 60 days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 2013-005, § 1(exh. A), 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 62-112. - Maximum weights and dimensions. 
(a)  Gross weight . No vehicle with a total gross weight in excess of 80,000 pounds shall be operated on any street or road maintained by the county. The county may lower the gross vehicle weight of trucks on non-truck routes and restricted roads unless such vehicles are exempted by O.C.G.A § 32-6-26. 
(b)  Weight per wheel/axle . No wheel on any vehicle operated on any street or road maintained by the county equipped with low pressure pneumatic tires shall carry a load which exceeds 10,000 pounds or any axle load which exceeds 20,000 pounds. An axle load shall be defined as the total load on all wheels the centers of which may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart. If the driver of any vehicle can comply with the requirements of this section by shifting or equalizing the load on all wheels or axles and does so when requested by the proper authority, said driver shall not be found in violation of this section. 
(c)  State permit . All motor vehicles in excess of weight limitation as prescribed by the state department of transportation, which apply to state routes, are prohibited from using any street in the county except when applicable state department of transportation permits have been secured by vehicles which are in excess of the provisions contained in the state law before said vehicles will be allowed to travel on the streets and highways of the county. 
(d)  Length/width . No vehicle using any public street within the county shall exceed a total outside width, including load thereon, of 96 inches, not including mirrors and accessories attached thereto; no vehicle unladen or with load shall exceed a height of 13 feet, six inches; no vehicle or combination of vehicles shall exceed a total length of 55 feet; single trip movements for necessary purposes of materials, objects or vehicles of dimensions which exceed the limits provided in this subsection and which are of such nature that they cannot be readily dismantled or separated may be permitted, but only when applicable state department of transportation permits have been secured. The state law provides that load of poles; logs, lumber, structural steel, piping and timber may exceed the length fixed without requiring special permit. Vehicle combinations, the power unit of which is designed to be used primarily as self-contained united (i.e., dump truck), shall not be subject to the 55-foot length limitations when pulling a trailer or another vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2013-005, § 1(exh. A), 8-6-2013) 
Sec. 62-113. - Non-truck route special use permit. 
(a)  Permit . The owner or operator of trucks or restricted motor vehicles, may apply for a permit for a specific project, allowing for limited travel on certain designated non-truck routes and restricted roads. 
(b)  Application . An application for non-truck route special use permit may be made upon a form provided by the county. In addition to any information required in the application, an applicant must provide a highlighted map of the requested route, which may be rejected or accepted in whole, or in part, or modified. The fee for such a permit is as set forth in the county's schedule of fees, and must be paid prior to consideration of any application. 
(c)  Bond or letter of credit. Any person or firm engaged in the transportation of product by means of a vehicle meeting the definition of truck on any non-truck route or restricted road in the unincorporated area of the county shall deliver to the board of commissioners or its designated agent a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state, protecting the county against any damage caused by such person or firm in the amount of $5,000.00 or, at the option of the person or firm, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the amount of $5,000.00 in lieu of such bond. Bonds or letter of credit may be kept on file with the county for the duration of the bond or letter of credit. 
(d)  Indemnification agreement . Prior to the commencement of any work and issuance of any permits pursuant to this section the person or firm desiring to travel non-truck route or restricted roads in the unincorporated areas of the county shall file with the board of commissioners an indemnification agreement, indemnifying the county against any and all claims and liability arising out of that person or firm's use of such county roadway. Additionally, the person or entity shall agree to repair or reimburse the county for necessary repairs caused by such person or firm's damage to such county roadway. The form of the indemnification agreement shall be designated by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Standards for approval . Upon receipt of a complete application, the board of commissioners, or its designee, may grant or deny the application in its sole discretion based upon whether granting or denying the application is in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Morgan County. 
(f)  Road inspections . For a project that generates more than five trips to or from the destination located on any non-truck route or restricted road in the unincorporated area of the county shall require the following: 
(1)  Inspection of the requested route prior to the special use permit being approved. 
(2)  Inspection of the approved route daily to ensure damage to route is not occurring. 
(3)  Inspection of the approved route after project is complete to release the bond or letter of credit. 
(g)  Permit requirements . In addition to any other restrictions set forth in the application, upon the granting of an application, a permit holder must comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  All vehicles, loaded and unloaded, must stay on the route approved by the county or its designee. 
(2)  All vehicles must obey all traffic laws and all other provisions of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  All drivers must have valid driver's licenses and insurance. 
(4)  All drivers must carry a copy of the approved special use permit and route map in the vehicle at all times. 
(5)  All drivers must have a bill of lading or other proof stating the destination and weight of the load. 
(6)  All loads must be covered and loaded to prevent debris from falling from truck. 
(h)  Duration . A permit issued under this subsection is valid for 30 days from issuance, or until all travel on non-truck routes pursuant to the permit is complete, whichever is shorter. Permits may not be renewed. 
(i)  Penalties for violation . Any violation of this section shall be punishable pursuant to sections 1-9 and 1-10. Any non-approved deviation from the routes specified in the non-truck route special use permit shall subject the violator to the penalties set forth in section 62-111(g). In addition to any fine or imprisonment for violation of this section, the violation of any provision of this section, or the failure of the permit holder or anyone on its behalf to adhere to all requirements of the permit, may result in the revocation of the permit by the county. 
(j)  Damage to roads . If any permit holder damages county roads due to its activities under this section, whether in compliance with or in violation of, such permit holder shall be liable to county for the actual damage to county roads caused by permit holder, as well as consequential damages. If permit holder does not correct said damages upon notification, the special use permit will be revoked and a claim will be made against the bond or letter of credit to offset the cost for repairs. 
(k)  Revocation . The Morgan County Board of Commissioners, or its designee, may revoke any permit issued under this section based upon any of the following: 
(1)  The violation of any provisions of this section; 
(2)  The failure to comply with any requirements of this section; 
(3)  The violation of any other ordinances, regulations, or laws; or 
(4)  For any actions or inactions by permit holder deemed in the sole discretion of the county, or its designee, to be harmful to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Morgan County. 
Revocation shall become effective upon the sending of written notice by the county to the permit holder. The decision to revoke a permit under this subsection rests solely in the discretion of the county or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 2013-005, § 1(exh. A), 8-6-2013) 
Secs. 62-114—62-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY 

Sec. 62-135. - Maintenance, repair and servicing of motor vehicles. 
(a)  All maintenance, repairs and servicing of vehicles owned by the board of commissioners shall be brought to the maintenance shop for such work. Unless there is an emergency situation, at least 48 hours' notice should be given to the shop supervisor or his or her designated agent. 
(b)  Exceptions may only be made to the requirements of this section with the approval of the shop supervisor or the county manager. 
(c)  Payment of all bills for the maintenance, servicing and repair of vehicles owned by the board of commissioners shall be the sole responsibility of the person bringing said vehicle to an entity or business other than the maintenance shop unless other arrangements have been made satisfactory to the shop supervisor. 
(Code 2000, § 7-701) 
Chapter 66 - TAXATION, REVENUES, AND FINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power of county to levy and collect taxes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(a) and(b)(1); statutory regulation of ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXATION 

Sec. 66-19. - Ad valorem taxes. 
(a)  Levied. There is hereby set and levied to meet the ordinary current expenses of the county an annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the county, and there is hereby set and levied for the payment of principal and interest on general obligation bonds an annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the county. Such levies shall be shown separately on all tax bills. 
(b)  Assessment and fair market value. All property subject to county ad valorem taxation shall be assessed at 40 percent of its fair market value. The basis for fair market value shall be 100 percent of the fair market value determined for the property by the county for county ad valorem tax purposes. 
(c)  Appeal of assessment. Any taxpayer as allowed by law may appeal from an assessment by the county board of tax assessors to the county board of equalization as to matters of taxability, uniformity of assessment, and value. The taxpayer or the county board of tax assessors may appeal to the superior court from a decision of the county board of equalization as allowed by law. 
(d)  Due date; delinquent taxes. 
(1)  Due date. Ad valorem taxes shall become due on December 20 each year and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid after said due date. Tax bills showing the assessed valuations, amount of taxes due, tax due dates, and information as to delinquency dates and penalties shall be sent to all taxpayers at least 60 days prior to the due date, but failure to send a tax bill shall not invalidate any tax. 
(2)  Delinquent taxes. Delinquent taxes shall bear an interest rate of 12 percent per annum from the due date, together with interest as specified by law. 
Editor's note— See O.C.G.A. § 48-2-44 for taxes exempt from the 12 percent penalty. 
(e)  Failure to pay tax. 
(1)  The tax commissioner shall forthwith issue an execution against any person who has defaulted in the payment of any ad valorem tax to be paid. The execution thus issued shall be a lien on all the property of such person, both real and personal, and shall be placed in the hands of the county officer responsible for collection by levy and sale. 
(2)  When any finance officer or other person authorized to collect the taxes due the county can find no property of the defendant on which to levy a tax execution, he or she shall make an entry to that effect on the execution and may then issue summons of garnishment without making affidavit or giving bond against any person who he or she believes is indebted to the defendant or who he or she believes has property, money, or effects of the defendant in his or her hands. The summons of garnishment shall be served by the finance officer, other tax collector, sheriff, or any constable of the county in which the garnishee resides at least 15 days before the sitting of the superior court or county court and shall be returned to such appropriate court. 
(3)  The finance officer or other person authorized to collect taxes shall enter on the execution the name of the person garnished and shall return the execution to the court. The subsequent proceedings on the garnishment shall be the same as on garnishments in cases when judgment has been obtained. 
(f)  Against whom charged. Taxes are to be charged against the owner of the property, if known, or against the specific property itself if the owner is not known. Life tenants and those who enjoy the use of the property are chargeable with the tax thereon. 
(g)  Exempted property. The following property shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation: all property declared exempt under the statutory laws of the state and the state constitution. 
(Code 2000, § 4-101) 
Editor's note— See O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-41, 48-5-41.1 for a complete list of exempted property. See O.C.G.A. §§ 48-5-354—48-5-356 for additional special exempt property. 
Sec. 66-20. - Local option sales tax. 
A one percent local sales tax and use tax is hereby levied in and for the county by the board of commissioners in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-8-82. 
(Code 2000, § 4-102) 
Sec. 66-21. - License fees and taxes. 
(a)  The board of commissioners is authorized and empowered to levy, assess and collect license fees and taxes from all persons, firms, and corporations doing business in the unincorporated areas of the county, except those businesses regulated by the public service commission and those corporations organized under O.C.G.A. title 46 ch. 3. 
(b)  The board is further authorized and empowered to classify all such businesses and business enterprises and to assess different fees and taxes against different classes of business being conducted in the public welfare, health and security of the people of the county. 
(c)  The board is further authorized and empowered to regulate and exercise police powers over any businesses operated or conducted within the unincorporated areas of the county, except those businesses regulated by the public service commission and those corporations organized under O.C.G.A. title 46 ch. 3. 
(d)  The board is further authorized and empowered to prescribe and enforce such rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the above-stated powers. Violation of any such rules or regulations adopted by the board shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable, upon conviction thereof, as prescribed by the general laws of the state. 
(Code 2000, § 4-103) 
Sec. 66-22. - Depository financial institutions business license tax. 
(a)  Generally. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of one-quarter percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. 
(b)  Definition. The term "gross receipts" means gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 and the term "depository financial institutions" shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(c)  Filing of return. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(a), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. 
(d)  Minimum tax. The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be $1,000.00. 
(Code 2000, § 4-104) 
Sec. 66-23. - Gross premiums tax on insurance. 
(a)  Rate of levy on life, accident, and sickness insurers. There is hereby set and levied for the year 1984, and for each calendar year thereafter, upon each company authorized to write life, accident, and sickness insurance and which is doing business within the county, an annual tax equal to one percent of the annual gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year from policies insuring persons residing within the county. The term "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, shall have the same meaning as that used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The tax levied by this subsection is in addition to any license fee imposed by this Code. 
(b)  Rate of levy on all other insurers. There is hereby set and levied for the calendar year 1984, and for each calendar year thereafter, upon each insurance company not taxed under the provisions of subsection (a) of this section and which is doing business within the county, an annual tax equal to 2 1/2 percent of the annual gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year from policies insuring persons residing within the county. The tax levied by this subsection is in addition to any license fee imposed by this Code. 
(c)  Due date and required report. The gross direct premiums tax levied herein shall be due and payable upon the effective date of this Code and between October 10 and October 15 in each calendar year. Payment shall be made to the county clerk and shall be accompanied by a report showing the names and addresses of the agents representing the insurance company in the county, the classes of insurance written, the premiums received for each class, and such other reasonable information as may be required. The required report shall be made on forms prescribed by the county clerk and made out over affidavit of an officer of the company. Payments shall be deemed delinquent if not received within 45 calendar days from the due date. 
(d)  False information. It is hereby declared to be a violation of this section for any person, firm, corporation, or agents thereof to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any report required to be filed under this section. 
(e)  Confidentiality of information. Except as otherwise required by law, all reports required to be filed under this section shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be used solely by the officers of the county responsible for the administration of this section. 
(f)  Enforcement. The taxes levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of this county. 
(Code 2000, § 4-105) 
State Law reference— County taxes on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; county taxes on insurance companies other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Sec. 66-24. - Tax on life insurance businesses. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1, each person, agency, firm, or company engaged in a life insurance business in the county shall be required to pay a tax to be collected by the state in the manner specified by said statute. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8, no license fee shall be imposed upon such businesses by the county. 
(Code 2000, § 32-203) 
Sec. 66-25. - Excise tax on furnishings of hotel-motel rooms. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases shall, for the purposes of this section and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
County means the unincorporated area of Morgan County, Georgia. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club, or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the unincorporated area of the county, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose the tax provided in this section. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this section. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this section. 
(b)  Imposition and rate of tax. There shall be paid a tax of five percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the unincorporated areas of the county. The tax imposed by this section shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after July 1, 1987, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. 
(c)  Collection of tax by operator; receipt to occupant; rules for collection schedules. Every operator maintaining a place of business in the unincorporated areas of the county, as provided in this section and renting guestrooms in said areas of the county, not exempted under subsection (d) of this section, shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant. 
(d)  Exemptions. No tax shall be imposed under this section: 
(1)  Upon a permanent resident of the county; 
(2)  Upon rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees traveling on official business; 
(3)  Upon rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty. 
(e)  Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the county shall immediately register with the board of commissioners, or other designated agent, on a form provided by said commissioners. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date this section becomes effective and the tax is imposed as set forth in subsection (b) of this section, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof, regardless of registration. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his or her place or places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the board of commissioners may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, or by an officer. The board of commissioners shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(f)  Determination, returns and payments. 
(1)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable to the board of commissioners or its designated agent monthly on or before the 20th day of every month after each respective monthly period as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the board of commissioners or its designated agent showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed to retain three percent of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under state law. 
(g)  Deficiency determinations. 
(1)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the board of commissioners or its designated agent is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any person, the board may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within its possession or that may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(2)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes. 
(3)  Notice of determination; service of. The board of commissioners or its designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of its determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his or her address as it appears in the records of the board of commissioners. Service by mail is complete when mailed by certified mail to addressee's last address furnished to the county. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(h)  Determination if no return made. 
(1)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the board of commissioners or its designated agents shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the board of commissioners. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection (g)(3) of this section. 
(2)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(i)  Administration of section. 
(1)  Authority of the clerk of the board of commissioners. The clerk or his or her assistant shall administer and enforce the provisions of this section for the collection of the tax imposed by this section. 
(2)  Records required from operators, etc., form. Every operator renting guestrooms in the county to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the clerk may require. 
(3)  Examination of authorized records; audits. The clerk or any person authorized in writing by the clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(4)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this section, the clerk may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the clerk when required by the clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the clerk may require. 
(j)  Collection of tax. 
(1)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the board of commissioners may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the county to collect the amount delinquent together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other fees incident thereto. 
(2)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this section sells his or her business or quits the business, his or her successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such tax. 
(3)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required, he or she shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(4)  Tax credit, or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county under this section, it may be offset by the clerk of the board of commissioners. If the operator or person determines that he or she has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the clerk of the board of commissioners, the operator will have three years from the date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the board of commissioners, the excess amount paid the county may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid, or his or her administrators or executors. 
(k)  Expenditure of tax proceeds. All tax proceeds collected under this section shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Code 2000, § 4-106; Ord. of 1-6-2009(2)) 
State Law reference— County authorized to impose, levy, and collect excise tax for any person or entity furnishing of lodging or accommodations to the public, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
Sec. 66-26. - Public utility franchise tax. 
A public utility franchise tax shall be levied upon utility companies. 
(Code 2000, § 4-109) 
Sec. 66-27. - E-911 charge. 
(a)  Charge imposed. The board of commissioners does hereby impose a monthly E-911 charge upon each exchange access facility subscribed to by telephone subscribers whose exchange to access lines are in areas served by the county E-911 service. 
(b)  Amount of charge. The amount of such charge shall be $1.50 per month per exchange access facility provided by the telephone. This charge became effective on the first day of the first month following passage of 120 days from the original enactment of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 4-110) 
Editor's note— Also see section 22-40 et seq. of this Code regarding terms and descriptions for county emergency management system. 
Sec. 66-28. - Sale and transfer of tax executions; exceptions. 
(a)  No tax executions issued regarding the following properties and/or persons shall be eligible for sale to third parties: 
(1)  Tax executions on properties on which the taxes are less than 121 days past due. 
(2)  Tax executions on property owned, in whole or in part, by an individual who is 65 years of age or older who has such an exemption on his or her tax bill. 
(3)  Tax executions on property owned, in whole or in part, by a veteran of the United States Armed Forces who has such an exemption on his or her tax bill. 
(4)  Tax executions on property owned, in whole or in part, by a handicapped or disabled person who has such an exemption on his or her tax bill. 
(5)  Tax executions on property for which partial payments are being made on a periodic basis whether or not the owner of the property is making these payments pursuant to a bankruptcy court approved plan. 
(b)  No tax execution shall be sold for any sum less than the total amount of taxes then owing, including all penalties and interest. 
(c)  No tax execution shall be sold to any tax official. 
(d)  No tax execution shall be sold except to an individual who is a resident of the state, or to a corporation which is domesticated in the state and properly registered with the secretary of state. 
(e)  The tax commissioner shall use this section for the completion of a list of properties eligible for exclusion from transfer of execution. 
(Code 2000, § 4-111) 
Sec. 66-29. - Occupation tax. 
(a)  Tax required for business dealings in the unincorporated areas of the county. For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether with a location in said county or, in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state, exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; registration of payment of such tax shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the taxpayer's place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the unincorporated areas of the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the unincorporated areas of the county, such business tax registration shall be shown to the county tax commissioner, to the director of planning and development or designee, or to any officer of the county sheriff's department upon request. 
(b)  Construction of terms; definitions. 
(1)  Wherever the term "county" is used in this section, it shall be construed to mean the unincorporated areas of Morgan County, Georgia. 
(2)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection (b)(2), unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue-raising purposes. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes nonprofit organizations and state, federal or local governments or instrumentalities thereof. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the county as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(c)  Administrative and regulatory fees. 
(1)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $40.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(2)  Regulatory fees shall be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. 
(d)  T ax levied; restrictions. 
(1)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated areas of the county, based upon the following criteria: 
a.  The number of employees of the business or practitioner who are employed in the business or practitioner's dominant line of business in the county. An employee who works for the same business or practitioner in more than one county or municipal corporation shall be counted as being employed in the county if the county is the local government entity in which the employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
b.  The number of employees of a business or practitioner includes all fulltime positions and all fulltime position equivalents as set forth in subsection (d)(1)c of this section: 
c.  An employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a fulltime position. The average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to determine the number of full-time position equivalents. 
(2)  Occupation tax schedule: 
a.  The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation will be developed and updated from time to time by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
b.  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
c.  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers or real estate agents whose offices, or real estate companies the offices of which, are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(e)  Tax levied on businesses with no location in the state. 
(1)  An occupation tax shall be levied on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the county and the business or practitioner: 
a.  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the unincorporated areas of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
b.  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(2)  The rate of taxation for businesses taxed under this section is the same as in subsection (d) of this section. For the purposes of computing the occupation tax on a business described in subsection (a) of this section, the number of employees of the business employed in the county shall be computed based on the number of employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the unincorporated areas of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients. 
(f)  Reduction for businesses commenced after July 1. When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax that would have been imposed for the entire year. 
(g)  More than one place or line of business. Where a business is operated at more than one fixed location in the unincorporated areas of the county, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. Such business is required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(h)  Professional as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(22). Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(22) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(2)  A fee of $100.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by February 15 of each year. If no election is timely made, the occupation tax shall be imposed as set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(i)  Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state or instrumentalities of the United States shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(j)  Purpose and scope of tax. The occupation tax levied in this section is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. This section does not apply to state or local authorities or nonprofit organizations. 
(k)  Filing of signed return required. The owner, proprietor, manager, or secretary of any business subject to the occupation tax for the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before February 15 of the current calendar year, file with the tax commissioner, on a form furnished by the tax commissioner, a signed return setting forth each location at which business is conducted in the county, the line or lines of business that the business conducts at each such location, and the number of employees of the business or practitioner, computed according to the above guidelines, for each line of business at each location. Where a business or practitioner has commenced operation of a business after January 1 of the current year, the aforesaid return shall be filed on or before the date of commencement of such business. 
(l)  Effect of failure to file return. Any person required by subsection (k) of this section to file an occupation tax return who fails to file such return on or before the date required shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00. 
(m)  Inspections of books and records; penalty for underreporting. In any case, the county board of commissioners, through its officers, agents, employees, or representative, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made, and upon demand such books or records shall be made available for inspection by a representative of the county board of commissioners within 30 days. Failure to make such books or records available within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept in the county for examination. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, the amount of the deficiency shall be treated as a delinquent amount and shall be subject to the penalties and procedures for delinquent occupation tax amounts provided in subsections (o)—(r) of this section. 
(n)  Returns confidential. Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, or as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent, or clerk of the county board of commissioners, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required hereunder. All contents of said return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the county using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the county shall be classed as "employees." Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the publication by county officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States, and other local governments. 
(o)  When tax due and payable; tax registration; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(1)  Each occupation tax for the calendar year and succeeding calendar years thereafter shall be payable December 31 of each year and shall, if not paid by January 31 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in subsection (p) of this section. In the event that any person commences business on any date after January 1 in any year, the tax shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business. 
(2)  The tax registration provided for in this section shall be issued by the planning and development office upon receipt of all amounts due for the occupation tax. Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(3)  There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided in this section. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the unincorporated areas of the county any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00. Each day that business is transacted or solicited without having obtained a registration shall be considered a separate violation. Said penalty shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(p)  Penalty for delinquency in payment of occupation tax; interest on delinquent occupation tax; other remedies. 
(1)  Should any occupation tax imposed by this section remain due and unpaid after January 31 of the year or which said tax was imposed, the person liable for the tax shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. 
(2)  Any occupation tax which is not paid on or before January 31 of the year for which the tax was imposed shall bear interest from said January 31 on the unpaid amount at the rate of 12 percent per annum. 
(3)  In addition to the remedies of this subsection, the county tax commissioner may proceed to collect delinquent occupation taxes in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(q)  Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required in this section, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the county hereunder permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be ipso facto revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the board of commissioners for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this section is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the county in accordance with the provisions of subsection (m) of this section. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(r)  Lien taken for delinquency of tax. 
(1)  In addition to the other remedies provided in this section for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the planning and development office, upon any tax or installment of said tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the amount of said tax against the persons, entity, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the county of the person, partnership, or corporation liable for said tax, all as provided by the laws of the county and the state. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installation thereof becomes delinquent. 
(2)  The execution shall be levied by the head of the planning and development office, upon the property of the defendant located in the county, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the laws of the county and the state, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. 
(3)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the head of the planning and development office, against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(s)  Liability of officers and agents. All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this section, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. 
(t)  County officials; subpoena and arrest powers. The board of commissioners' duly designated officers and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(u)  Businesses licensed by state. Each person or business subject to the occupation tax which is also licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in its place of business and shall keep the state license there at all times while the state license remains valid. 
(v)  Business not covered. The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this section but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46 ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls and are governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(w)  Tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. An occupation tax shall not apply where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(x)  Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. This section does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. Any parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed which provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(y)  Enforcement of provisions. It is hereby made the duty of the board of commissioners, or their designee, to see that the provisions of this section relating to occupation taxes are observed. 
(z)  Provisions to remain in full force and effect until charged by board of commissioners. This section shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the board of commissioners. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax levied in this section shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(aa)  Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. The board of commissioners shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this section. 
(bb)  Requirement of public hearing in years of increasing revenue. In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the board of commissioners shall hold one or more public hearings as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(cc)  Option to establish exemption or reduction in tax. The board of commissioners may, by subsequent ordinance or resolution, provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 4-112) 
Secs. 66-30—66-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— County governing authority may regulate peddling and fix the cost of licensing peddling, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1(a)(9). 

Sec. 66-45. - License required. 
Each peddler and itinerant merchant, as such terms are defined in section 66-46, who does business within the unincorporated areas of the county shall be required to obtain a license from the planning and development office in the manner specified in this article. 
(Code 2000, § 32-201(1)) 
Sec. 66-46. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Itinerant merchant means any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee, or employee, whether a resident of this county or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, and merchandise within the county, and who in furtherance of such purpose hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, boat or public room in any hotel, lodginghouse, apartment, or shop within the county for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. 
Peddler includes any person, whether a resident of this county or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden produce, farm products or provisions who offers and exposes the same for sale, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance. 
(Code 2000, § 32-201(2)) 
Sec. 66-47. - Exemptions. 
This section shall not be applicable to traveling salesmen or nonresident merchants as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43 ch. 46, nor to newsboys, nor to bona fide merchants who merely deliver goods in the regular course of business, nor to bona fide charitable, religious or philanthropic organizations. 
(Code 2000, § 32-201(3)) 
Sec. 66-48. - Application. 
Application for a license under this section shall be made as provided in chapter 18, article III, titled "Towing Services," section 18-63, titled "Application for a license," except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  The fingerprints of the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business; 
(2)  The place or places in the county where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business, and the length of time during which it is proposed that said business shall be conducted; 
(3)  The place or places, other than the permanent place of business of the applicant, where the applicant within the six months before the date of said application conducted a transient business, stating the nature thereof and giving the post office and street address of any building or office in which such business was conducted; 
(4)  A statement of the nature, character, and quality of the goods, wares, or merchandise to be sold or offered for sale by the applicant in the county; the invoice value and quality of such goods, wares, and merchandise; where the goods or property to be sold are manufactured or produced; and where such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed; 
(5)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers, and copies of all said advertising whether by handbills, circulars, newspaper advertising, or otherwise, shall be attached to said application as exhibits thereto; and 
(6)  Whether or not the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant's business have been convicted of a crime, misdemeanor, or the violation of any ordinance, the nature of such offense, and the punishment assessed therefor. 
(Code 2000, § 32-201(4)) 
Sec. 66-49. - Service of process. 
Before any license is issued to an applicant under this article, the applicant must file with the planning and development office either the name and permanent address of the applicant's agent for service of process or an instrument nominating and appointing the planning and development office, in the absence of another agent, as the applicant's true and lawful agent with full power and authority to acknowledge service of notice of process for and on behalf of the applicant in respect to any matters connected with or arising out of the business transacted under the license. The applicant must consent and agree that service of any notice or process may be made upon said agent, planning and development office, and when so made will be taken and held to be as valid as if personally served upon the applicant according to the law of this or any other state, and must waive all claim or right of error by reason of such acknowledgement of service or manner of service. Immediately upon service of process upon the planning and development office, the planning and development office must send to the licensee at his or her last known address by registered or certified mail a copy of the process. 
(Code 2000, § 32-201(5)) 
Sec. 66-50. - Fee established. 
The business license fee for each peddler or itinerant merchant doing business in the county shall be set by a resolution of the county commission from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the county clerk. The fee shall be due on the first day of any year or on the day any sale is made. 
(Code 2000, § 32-201(6)) 
Sec. 66-51. - Duty to exhibit. 
All persons obtaining a license under the provisions of this article shall be required to exhibit such license at the request of any citizen. 
(Code 2000, § 32-201(7)) 
Sec. 66-52. - Loud noises and speaking devices. 
No licensee under this article, nor anyone in his or her behalf, shall shout, make any outcry, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any other sound device including any loudspeaking radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks, or other public places of the county or upon any private premises in the county where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced therefrom capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or other public places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares, or merchandise which such licensee proposes to sell. 
(Code 2000, § 32-201(8)) 
Secs. 66-53—66-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUDGET 

Sec. 66-70. - Expenditures generally. 
(a)  No expenditures in any fund shall be legal or proper unless appropriations adequate to meet that expenditure have been made in the budget. 
(b)  No expenditure of county funds from whatever source may be made for a nonpublic purpose. 
(Code 2000, § 4-209) 
Sec. 66-71. - Audits required. 
The board of commissioners shall provide for and cause to be made an annual audit of the financial affairs and transactions of all funds and activities of the local government for each fiscal year of the local government. 
(Code 2000, § 4-211) 
Sec. 66-72. - Conduct of audits. 
The audits shall be conducted in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. Each audit shall also contain a statement of any agreement or arrangement under which the county has assumed any actual or potential liability for the obligations of any governmental or private agency, authority, or instrumentality. Such statement shall include the purpose of the agreement or arrangement, shall identify the agency, authority, or instrumentality upon whose obligations the county is or may become liable, and shall state the amount of actual liability and the maximum amount of potential liability of the county under the agreement or arrangement. The board of commissioners may contract with the state auditor. 
(Code 2000, § 4-212) 
Sec. 66-73. - Contents of audit reports. 
All annual audit reports of the county shall contain at least the following: 
(1)  Financial statements prepared in conformity with generally accepted governmental accounting principles, setting forth the financial condition and results of operation of each fund and activity of the county and such financial statements shall be the representation of the county; and 
(2)  The opinion of the performing auditor with respect to the financial statement; in addition to an explanation of any qualification or disclaimers contained in the opinion, such opinion shall also disclose, in accordance with generally accepted audit standards, any apparent material violation of state or local law discovered during the audit. 
(Code 2000, § 4-213) 
Sec. 66-74. - Forwarding audits to state auditor. 
Each annual audit report of the county shall be completed and a copy of the report forwarded to the state auditor within 180 days after the close of the county's fiscal year. 
(Code 2000, § 4-214) 
Sec. 66-75. - Public inspection of audits. 
A copy of the report and of any comments made by the state auditor shall be maintained as a public record for public inspection during the regular working hours at the county commissioner's office. 
(Code 2000, § 4-215) 
Sec. 66-76. - Annual report; submitted to the department of community affairs. 
The board of commissioners shall submit an annual report of local government finances to the department of community affairs. The report shall include the revenues, expenditures, assets, and debts of all funds and agencies of the county, and other such information as may be reasonably requested by the department. Each local independent authority shall submit an annual report of indebtedness to the department of community affairs. Such report shall include the revenues, expenditures, assets, and debts of all funds of the local independent authority and shall describe any actions taken by such local independent authority to incur indebtedness. The local government finance report and the local independent authority indebtedness report shall be filed on forms promulgated by the department and shall be submitted within the requested time periods established by the department. 
(Code 2000, § 4-216) 
Sec. 66-77. - Capital program. 
(a)  A five-year capital program may be submitted to the board of commissioners at the same time that the budget and budget message are introduced for approval. Such capital program shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents; 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken for the five fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements; 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operation and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. 
(b)  The information set forth in subsection (a) of this section may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in the process of construction or acquisition. 
(Code 2000, § 4-217) 
Sec. 66-78. - Transfer of appropriations. 
(a)  The county manager may, at any time during the fiscal year, transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department or office, and the board of commissioners may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department or office to another, except that no appropriation for debt service or capital improvements may be reduced or transferred during any fiscal year, and under no circumstances may the expenditures exceed the total of the budget. 
(b)  No transfer within a departmental budget affecting the salary appropriation, whether increase or decrease, shall be accomplished without approval of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  No appropriation transfer from a sinking fund or debt retirement fund shall be made until all legal obligations and requirements of such funds have been satisfied. 
(Code 2000, § 4-218) 
Sec. 66-79. - Emergency appropriations. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the board of commissioners may make emergency appropriations after the adoption of a budget, for a purpose which was not foreseen at the time of the adoption thereof, or for which adequate provision was not made therein. Such an appropriation shall be made only to meet a public emergency affecting life, health, safety, property, or the public peace, and shall be made only out of actual unappropriated revenues or surplus. If there is no surplus, then temporary borrowing in notes may be made, provided that any such borrowed amounts are included as an appropriation in the next succeeding year's budget. 
(Code 2000, § 4-219) 
Sec. 66-80. - Lapse of appropriations. 
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the next succeeding year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
Editor's note— The 2000 Code contained the following note after this section: Each annual budget should be able to exist for 24 months, so that any bills arriving after the close of the fiscal year can be paid out of such budget. 
(Code 2000, § 4-220) 
Secs. 66-81—66-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 66-100. - Purpose and responsibility. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article, to be known as "the financial management article of Morgan County," is to provide for a system of financial administration, accounting, fiscal and budgetary control which conforms to generally accepted accounting practices. 
(b)  Responsibility. The day-to-day responsibility for the proper execution of the provisions of this article shall be with the county manager, although the final responsibility is expressly given to the board of commissioners. 
(Code 2000, § 4-301) 
Sec. 66-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accrual basis means the basis of accounting under which revenues are recorded when earned or when levies are made, and expenditures are recorded as soon as they result in liabilities, notwithstanding that the receipt of the revenue or payment of the expenditure may take place, in whole or in part, in another accounting period. 
Appropriation means an authorization granted by the board of commissioners to make expenditures or to incur obligations for specific purposes. 
Appropriation balance means the unencumbered balance of appropriation or allotment, and unexpended balance of appropriation or allotment. 
Assets means property of all kinds of a government, including both current assets and fixed assets. 
Audit means the examination of records, documents, reports, systems of internal control, accounting and financial procedures, and other evidence for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)  To ascertain the statements prepared from the accounts fairly present the financial position and results of financial operations of the constituent funds and balanced account groups of the governmental unit, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applicable to counties and on a basis consistent with that of the preceding year; 
(2)  To determine the legality, and mathematical accuracy of a governmental unit's financial transactions; 
(3)  To ascertain whether all financial transactions have been properly recorded; and 
(4)  To ascertain the stewardship of public officials who handle and are responsible for the financial resources of the county. 
Budget means a plan of financial operation embodying an estimate of proposed expenditures for a given time and proposed means of financing them. The annual budget refers to a period of one year. 
Budgetary control means the control or management of the county in accordance with an approved budget, and keeping expenditures within the limitations of available appropriations or revenues. 
Cash basis means the system of accounting under which revenues are accounted for only when received in cash, and expenditures are accounted for only when paid. 
Contingent account means an appropriation to provide for unforeseen expenditures. 
Debt service means the amount of money necessary annually to pay the interest on the outstanding debt and the principal of maturing bonded debt not payable from a sinking fund, and to provide a fund for the redemption of bonds payable from a sinking fund. 
Delinquent taxes means taxes remaining unpaid on and after the date on which a penalty for nonpayment is attached. Even though the penalty may be abated or canceled, the unpaid balances continue to be delinquent taxes until abated, canceled, or converted into tax liens. 
Encumbrances means obligations in the form of purchase orders, contracts or salary commitments which are chargeable to an appropriation and for which a part of the appropriation is reserved. 
Fund means a sum of money or other resources (gross or net) set aside for the purpose of carrying on specific activities or to attain certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions, or limitations. A fund is a distinct financial and legal entity. 
Internal audit means an audit made by persons on the staff of the governmental unit whose accounts are being audited primarily for the purpose of internal control. An internal audit is usually a continuous audit. 
Liabilities means debts owed. 
Millage is a term used to express the property tax rate. The term "millage" is derived from the term "mill" which is one-tenth of a cent. Thus, ten mills equal $0.01 or one percent. 
(1)  $0.001 = 1 mill or 1/10 cent 
(2)  $0.010 = 10 mills or 1 cent = 1% 
(3)  $0.100 = 100 mills or 10 cents = 10% 
Millage is determined by dividing the total amount of money to be raised by the total assessed value of the county. 
Taxes receivable means the uncollected portion of taxes which the county has levied. 
Trust funds means amounts received or appropriated and held in trust in accordance with an agreement or legislative act, which may be expended only in accordance with the terms of such trust or act. 
(Code 2000, § 4-302) 
Sec. 66-102. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year shall begin on July 1 and shall end on June 30. 
(Code 2000, § 4-303) 
Sec. 66-103. - Budget. 
(a)  Adoption. An annual budget will be adopted by the board of commissioners prior to the first day of the fiscal year. However, if for good and sufficient reasons the budget cannot be adopted by the first day for the fiscal year, the budget shall be adopted not later than 60 days subsequent thereto. If the budget is not adopted prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, a resolution authorizing the continuation of necessary and essential expenditures to operate the county shall be adopted prior to any actual expenditure. The proposed budget shall be prepared by the county manager and transmitted to the board for its review a minimum of 30 days before the required date of adoption. The budget shall also be balanced. 
(b)  Budget commission. 
(1)  All members of the board of commissioners and the county manager shall constitute a budget commission. 
(2)  The budget commission will receive departmental, officer's and agency budget requests for the next fiscal year. These requests must be prepared and transmitted to the budget commission by April 1 of each year. The format of the submission will be as prescribed by the budget commission. 
(3)  Subsequent to receipt of the budget requests and prior to May 1, the budget commission will hold departmental budget hearings. There will be one hearing for each requesting department, office or agency. At this hearing, the request will be through an oral or written statement explaining operational plans and changes from current or previous years' experience. Records will be kept of this hearing. The purpose of the hearing will be to develop an understanding between the participants as to the reasoning behind the budget requests. To this end, courteous and informal questions, answers and discussions will be encouraged. 
(4)  The schedule of these hearings should be published. Adequate provision for citizens' comments on the budget will be provided at a specific time. Citizens may attend departmental hearings but comment and discussion will be limited to the budget commission and the requesting body at this time. 
(5)  After departmental hearings have been held, the county manager will prepare and transmit the proposed budget to the board of commissioners. The proposed budget will be published in summary form and a public hearing providing for oral and written statements from interested citizens will be held by the full board of commissioners prior to adoption. This hearing must be advertised at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
(6)  The board of commissioners will reserve to themselves final decision on the budget and its provisions. However, the enactment of the budget must be consistent with subsection (a) of this section. 
(7)  Adoption of the budget shall be accomplished by the approval of a budget resolution which specifies the anticipated revenues by appropriate categories and the appropriated expenditures for each department, office or agency covered by the budget. Amendments to the budget shall be by resolution. 
(c)  Statement of revenues. The county manager shall present the statement of the anticipated revenues on the basis of ordinary and reasonable revenues which can be expected for the fiscal year. Property tax revenue shall be based on the anticipated tax digest, less a stated discount for delinquent taxes based on experience for the three prior years, plus a stated amount of delinquent taxes, including penalties and interest, to be collected in the fiscal year based on the experience for the three prior years. 
(d)  Equipment requests; capital construction projects. Requests for acquisition of equipment with anticipated life of more than three years or anticipated cost of more than $5,000.00 must be made and justified within operating budgets. Proposals for capital construction projects must be made and justified separately from operating budgets. 
(e)  Budget required. Any agency, authority or entity requesting part of its operating funds from the county, as precondition of approval, will be required to submit a budget showing the relationship of county funds to relevant line items of the recipient's budget and agree to submit to audit by outside independent auditors approved or provided by the county. Submission of a budget by constitutional officers and audit of the budget does not submit any constitutional officer's budget allocation to county control or direction. The audit report shall examine the actual use of county funds as compared to the uses as proposed by the requesting agency or entity. Where the county's participation is less than $5,000.00 the board of commissioners may agree to substitute internal audit by county personnel for outside auditors. 
(f)  Appropriations. No expenditures shall be legal or proper unless appropriations adequate to meet that expenditure have been made in the budget. 
(g)  Expenditures. No expenditure of county funds from whatever source may be made for a nonpublic purpose. 
(h)  Appropriation increases. Any increase in appropriation in a departmental expense category, whether accomplished through change in anticipated revenues or through a transfer of appropriations among departments or nondepartmental expense, shall require the approval by resolution of the board of commissioners. The transfer of appropriations among the various line items of a departmental budget or nondepartmental expense shall require only the approval of the county manager. However, no transfer within a departmental budget affecting the salary appropriation, whether increase or decrease, shall be accomplished without approval of the board of commissioners. This subsection is inapplicable to constitutional officers. 
(i)  Appropriation transfers. No appropriation transfer from a sinking fund or debt retirement fund shall be made until all legal obligations and requirements of such funds have been satisfied. 
(j)  Unobligated appropriations. All appropriations which are not obligated at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse and shall become a part of the planned and unencumbered surplus which may be appropriated for the next fiscal year. 
(Code 2000, § 4-304; Ord. of 11-1-2005, § 1) 
Secs. 66-104—66-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ACCOUNTING 

Sec. 66-120. - Accounts. 
(a)  The following funds may be established and shall be used as necessary to provide the proper accounting of all financial activities of this county: 
(1)  General fund: to account for the general government operations and all financial transactions not properly accounted for in another fund. 
(2)  Special revenue funds: to account for the proceeds of special revenue sources, other than special assessment, or to finance specified activities as required by law or administrative regulation. 
(3)  Debt service funds: to account for the payment of interest and principal on longterm debt other than special assessment and revenue bonds. 
(4)  Fixed assets and capital projects: to account for the receipt and disbursement of monies, including bond funds, used for acquisition of equipment or capital facilities other than those financed by special assessment and enterprise funds. 
(5)  Enterprise utility funds: to account for the financing of services to the general public where all or most of the costs involved are paid in the form of charges by users of such services. 
(6)  Trust and agency funds: to account for assets held by a governmental unit as trustee or agent for individuals, private organizations, and other governmental units. 
(7)  Intergovernmental service funds: to account for the financing of special activities and services performed by a designated organizational unit within the same governmental jurisdiction. 
(8)  Special assessment funds: to account for special assessments levied to finance public improvements or services deemed to benefit the properties against which the assessments are levied. 
(b)  A complete self-balancing group of accounts shall be established and maintained for each fund used. This group of accounts shall include all general ledger accounts and subsidiary records necessary to reflect compliance with legal provisions, and to set forth the financial position and the results of financial operations of the fund. In order to reflect the true fiscal position of each account and to prove compliance with legal provisions each fund should be self-balancing. This means that the double-entry system of bookkeeping should be used. For each account debited, there is an offsetting credit and vice-versa. The total of the credits and debits must equal each other. The double-entry system provides a basis for checking the accuracy of the information recorded to the accounts. 
(c)  Additional accounts, as follows, may be maintained: 
(1)  A fixed assets account for the purpose of accounting for those assets which: 
a.  Are of a tangible nature; 
b.  Have a life longer than three years; and 
c.  Have a value greater than $5,000.00. 
Fixed assets shall be removed from the account when disposed of. In order to be recorded as a fixed asset, the item must meet these three criteria. 
(2)  A general longterm debt account for the purpose of accounting for longterm debt which is supported by general revenues, and for recording and fairly representing the liability for longterm debt at any time from date of issuance until the debt is retired. 
(d)  To the extent possible, the modified accrual basis of accounting shall be used so that expenditures, other than accrued interest on longterm debt, are recorded at the time liabilities are incurred and revenues are recorded when cash is received, except for material or available revenues which shall be accrued to reflect properly the taxes levied and the revenues earned. All receipts and disbursements shall be posted promptly and at least on a monthly basis. To the extent possible, all interfund transfers shall be cleared by the end of the fiscal year. 
(e)  Comprehensive annual financial report. 
(1)  Financial statements and reports showing the current conditions of budgetary accounts shall be prepared and presented to the board of commissioners at least every three months. Not later than three months after the close of the fiscal year, a comprehensive annual financial report covering all funds and financial operations shall be prepared and published. 
(2)  A summary of this report, containing at least a statement of revenues and expenditures as of the close of the preceding fiscal year and the combined balance sheet for all funds and account groups, will be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
(f)  All the funds, accounts and financial transactions of the county shall be subjected to an annual audit by an independent certified public accountant who is to be selected by the board. The audit shall be conducted according to the standards set forth in the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants publication titled Audits of State and Local Governmental Units. 
(Code 2000, § 4-401; Ord. of 11-1-2005, § 2) 
Secs. 66-121—66-139. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 66-140. - Purchasing. 
(a)  The board of commissioners hereby designates the county manager as the chief purchasing officer (CPO). The limit of the CPO's authority to approve purchases shall be $10,000.00. In addition to the CPO, the chairman of the board of commissioners shall also have the authority to approve purchases not to exceed $10,000.00. The CPO may appoint a subordinate purchasing officer with authority to approve purchases not to exceed $500.00. The CPO may also designate a purchasing clerk with no approval authority within the limitations of budget appropriations. All such purchases by the CPO, chairman, or CPO's designate must be included within line items in the county's general fund budget, or if such purchases are from SPLOST funds, all such purchases must be included in a line item set forth in a SPLOST account worksheet to be created by the board on an annual basis. 
(b)  The chief purchasing officer and the subordinate purchasing officer shall have the authority and it shall be their duty: 
(1)  To purchase or contract for, within the limitations of the law and in accordance with the regulations adopted by the board of commissioners, all supplies, materials, equipment, and contractual services which have been requisitioned and authorized by any department or agency which derives the major portion of its financial support from the county. 
(2)  To purchase or procure for the county materials, supplies, equipment, and contractual services from the lowest responsible bidder meeting the specifications. 
(3)  To sell or dispose of any county property which has become unusable or obsolete in accordance with this section, state law, and any rules, regulations, or other resolutions adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  All purchases in excess of the approval authority of the chief purchasing officer must be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  The chief purchasing officer must informally seek three bids on all purchases in excess of $5,000.00. Failing to secure three bids, the CPO must be able to show that he or she made a good faith effort to obtain the same. The chief purchasing officer may utilize state contract purchasing in lieu of bid procedures or an additional bidder. 
(e)  Sole source purchases may be accomplished when the vendor of goods or provider of services is: 
(1)  Another unit of government, educational institution, or a division of county government; 
(2)  A professional firm or individual engaged in the practice of law, accounting, medicine, engineering, planning or consulting; 
(3)  The only source of an item that has been determined to be specifically suited to the needs of the county. In this event, the state purchasing office may be used to obtain spot bids. 
(f)  The chief purchasing officer is directed to prepare any written policies as may be necessary for the implementation of this section. 
(Code 2000, § 4-501; Ord. of 10-2-2007, § 1; Ord. No. 2012-001, § 1(exh. A), 5-1-2012) 
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local powers of county regarding uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371 et seq. 

Sec. 70-1. - Uniform rules of the road. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. Pursuant to chapter 6, title 40 of O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1—40-6-395 (except for O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-393 and 40-6-394), chapter 2, title 40 of O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A. § 40-2-20) and chapter 5, title 40 of O.C.G.A. (O.C.G.A. § 40-5-20), the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this county with like effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(b)  Penalties. Unless otherwise provided herein, any person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished according to the general penalty described in section 1-9. 
(Code 2000, § 11-101) 
Sec. 70-2. - Speed zones. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183 concerning local authorities' power to alter lawful speed limits, subsections (b) and (c) of this section regulating speed limits within the county are hereby established and adopted based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law. Signs of these speed limits are to be erected by the county. 
(b)  On-System. 
(1)  State Route 12 (U.S. 278) from the Walton County line (M.L. 0.00) to the west city limit of Rutledge (M.L. 1.65), 0.71 mile west of Nunnally Street (M.L. 2.36), a distance of 1.65 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(2)  State Route 12 (U.S. 278) from the east city limit of Rutledge (M.L. 3.53), 0.46 mile east of Centennial Drive (M.L. 3.07), to the west city limit of Madison (M.L. 9.95), 0.42 mile west of State Route 83 (M.L. 10.37), a distance of 6.42 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(3)  State Route 12 (U.S. 278) from the east city limit of Madison (M.L. 13.09) to State Route 24 (M.L. 13.46), a distance of 0.37 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
(4)  State Route 12 from State Route 24 (M.L. 13.46) to the Green County line (M.L. 20.01), a distance of 6.55 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(5)  State Route 24 (U.S. 441) from the Putnam County line (M.L. 0.00) to the south city limit of Madison (M.L. 7.64), 0.42 mile south of Pierce Dairy Road (M.L. 8.06), a distance of 7.64 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(6)  State Route 24 runs common with State Route 12 from State Route 24 (M.L. 10.51) to State Route 12 (M.L. 12.71), a distance of 2.20 miles. 
(7)  State Route 24 from State Route 12 (U.S. 278) (M.L. 12.71) to the Oconee County line (M.L. 20.58), a distance of 7.87 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(8)  State Route 24 bypass from the east city limit of Madison (M.L. 1.02) to County Road # 252-Bethany Church Road (M.L. 1.63), a distance of 0.61 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
(9)  State Route 24 bypass from County Road #252-Bethany Church Road (M.L. 1.63) to the Madison city limit (M.L. 3.02), a distance of 1.39 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(10)  State Route 24 bypass from the Madison city limit (M.L. 3.71) to State Route 12 (M.L. 4.23), a distance of 0.52 mile to be zoned 55 mph. 
(11)  State Route 83 from the Jasper County line (M.L. 0.00) to the south city limit of Madison (M.L. 9.16), 0.78 mile south of Industrial Boulevard, a distance of 9.16 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(12)  State Route 83 from the north city limit of Madison (M.L. 13.84), 0.13 mile north of March Street, to the south city limit of Bostwick (M.L. 22.56), 0.59 mile south of County Road #244 (Apalachee Road), a distance of 8.72 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(13)  State Route 83 from the Bostwick city limit (M.L. 22.56) to a point 0.05 mile south of County Road #244-Apalachee Road (M.L. 23.10), a distance of 0.54 mile to be zoned 55 mph. 
(14)  State Route 83 from a point 0.05 mile south of County Road #244-Apalachee Road (M.L. 23.10) to a point 0.05 mile south of County Road #245-Wellington Road (M.L. 23.32), a distance of 0.22 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
(15)  State Route 83 from a point 0.05 mile south of County Road #245-Wellington Road (M.L. 23.32) to a point 0.05 mile north of City Street #627-2nd Street (M.L. 23.71), a distance of 0.39 mile to be zoned 35 mph. 
(16)  State Route 83 from a point 0.05 mile north of City Street #627-2nd Street (M.L. 23.71) to County Road #189-High Shoals Road (M.L. 24.34), a distance of 0.63 mile to be zoned 45 mph. 
(17)  State Route 83 from County Road #189-High Shoals Road (M.L. 24.34) to the Bostwick city limit (M.L. 24.58), a distance of 0.24 mile to be zoned 55 mph. 
(18)  State Route 83 from the north city limit of Bostwick (M.L. 24.58), 0.24 mile north of County Road #189-High Shoals Road, to the Walton County line (M.L. 26.31), a distance of 1.73 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(19)  State Route 186 from the Walton County line (M.L. 0.00) to the Oconee County line (M.L. 0.65), a distance of 0.65 mile to be zoned 55 mph. 
(20)  State Route 402 (I-20) from the Walton County line (M.L. 0.00) to the Madison city limit (M.L. 10.06), 0.31 mile east of County Road #254, a distance of 10.06 miles to be zoned 70 mph. 
(21)  State Route 402 (I-20) from the Madison city limit to the Greene County line (M.L. 24.48), a distance of 10.58 miles to be zoned 70 mph. 
(c)  Off-System. 
(1)  County Road #240-Newborn Road from the Rutledge city limit to I-20, a distance of 1.63 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(2)  County Road #241-Parks Mill Road from the Buckhead city limit, 0.1 mile west of Shore Road, to County Road #146-Parks Mill Road, a distance of 4.42 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(3)  County Road #242-Sandy Creek Road from County Road #243-Fairplay Road to State Route 83, a distance of 4.75 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(4)  County Road #243-Fairplay Road from the Bostwick city limit, 0.00 miles south of Nunn Lane, to County Road #240-Prospect Road, a distance of 4.46 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(5)  County Road #246-Brownwood Road from State Route 12 to County Road #79-Knight Road, a distance of 5.12 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(6)  County Road #251-Seven Islands Road from the Buckhead city limit, 0.4 mile south of Park Hill Road, to State Route 24, a distance of 7.65 miles to be zoned 55 mph. 
(7)  County Road 66 Dixie Highway from the east city limits of Rutledge to the west city limits of Madison, a distance of 6.7 miles, to be zoned 45 mph. 
(8)  County Road 66 Dixie Highway from the west city limits of Rutledge to State Route 12 (U.S. 278), a distance of 1.7 miles to be zoned 45 mph. 
(Code 2000, § 11-102; Ord. of 12-6-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 70-3. - Speed limits within Hard Labor Creek State Park. 
(a)  Fifty-five mile per hour (55 mph) zone. County Road No. 44 (Old Mill Road) from County Road No. 240 to the north limit of Hard Labor Creek State Park limit. 
(b)  Forty-five mile per hour (45 mph) zone. 
(1)  County Road No. 240 (Rutledge to Fairplay Road) from County Road No. 42, a distance of 0.90 mile, to County Road No. 247 (Knox Chapel Road) from a point 0.5 mile south of the north limit of Hard Labor Creek State Park. 
(2)  County Road No. 41 (Lake Rutledge Road) from County Road No. 240, a distance of 0.45 mile, to County Road No. 42. 
(3)  County Road No. 247 (Knox Chapel Road) from Shop Maintenance Road, a distance of 0.45 mile, to the Morgan/Walton County line. 
(c)  Thirty-five mile per hour (35 mph) zone. 
(1)  County Road No. 240 (Rutledge to Fairplay Road) from County Road No. 247 (Knox Chapel Road), a distance of 0.8 mile, a point 0.5 mile south of the north limit of Hard Labor Creek State Park. 
(2)  County Road No. 42 from County Road No. 41, a distance of 0.4 mile, to County Road No. 240. 
(3)  County Road No. 247 (Knox Chapel Road) from County Road No. 240, a distance of 0.9 mile, to Park Maintenance Road. 
(d)  Twenty-five mile per hour (25 mph) zone. All other county roads inside Hard Labor Creek State Park. 
(Code 2000, § 11-103) 
Sec. 70-4. - Public road signs. 
(1)  No person shall remove, disfigure, destroy or in any manner interfere with the public's use of public road signs. 
(2)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the schedule set by the board of commissioners or judge. 
(Code 2000, § 11-104) 
Chapter 71 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 71-1—71-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - THEFT OF UTILITIES 

Sec. 71-50. - Purpose. 
Illegally obtaining electricity, gas and water by various means, resulting in a loss of revenue to utilities creates a dangerous situation that can result in the loss of life or property. This section shall be cumulative of O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25, and is enacted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § l6-7-25(c). 
(Ord. of 11-2-2010, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 71-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Utility means any company, electric membership corporation or cooperative, municipality, or political subdivision engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water or other utility service. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2010, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 71-52. - Theft of utilities prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Cut, remove or in any manner make ineffective any seal, locking band or lock on an electric, gas, water or other utility meter; 
(2)  Restore utility service by any means after service has been terminated, or to obtain electricity, gas, water or other utility service without making the proper deposit with a utility or receiving proper authorization from a utility; 
(3)  Obtain electricity, gas, water or other utility service by use of jumper wires, or by any other means which bypass a metering device either partially or completely; 
(4)  Damage or tamper in any manner with any part of a metering device belonging to a utility; 
(5)  Change or alter the normal installed position of a metering device in any fashion which causes the normal accurate recording of utility service received to be altered and inaccurate; 
(6)  Obtain electricity, gas or water or other utility service by use of a metering device which is not authorized by a utility; 
(7)  Interfere with the automatic registration, recording and transmission of electricity, gas or water consumption or other utility service when readings are recorded and/or transmitted electronically; 
(8)  Fraudulently obtain, or attempt to obtain, service from a utility by using a false name or identification; 
(9)  Fraudulently obtain, or attempt to obtain, service from a utility by placing the account in the name of someone else after the service has been disconnected for nonpayment or theft of service while the person in whose name the service was in when disconnected is still living at the location of the service; or 
(10)  Receive electrical power, gas service or water service or other utility service without proper authorization from a utility. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2010, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 71-53. - Violations; penalties. 
Alleged violations of this section shall be tried in the magistrate court of Morgan County. Any person found guilty of violating this article shall be fined a sum not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on each count. Each day that the violation continues is a separate count. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2010, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 71-54. - Restitution. 
In addition to any penalties for violation of this article, any person found guilty of violating any portion of this article will be required to make full restitution to the utility for the cost of the services obtained in violation of this article, for damage to equipment of a utility and for all associated costs of the investigation. In calculating the amount of restitution to be paid, the court is authorized to consider the following evidence: 
(1)  The cost of the service received as a result of violating this section shall be computed by the utility; 
(2)  The cost of any damage to utility equipment shall be based on the actual costs. Costs may be computed and updated annually; and 
(3)  Investigative and any associated costs will be computed and updated annually by the utility. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2010, § 1(exh. A)) 
Sec. 71-55. - Presumption. 
Any person in possession of any premises, whether as owner, occupant, or tenant, who is found to have an electric, gas or water meter or other utility service meter which has been tampered with or altered in violation of this article or found to be receiving electricity, gas or water or other utility service as a result of any of the methods described above shall be presumed to have knowingly violated the terms of this section. Such receipt of electricity, gas or water shall be deemed prima facie evidence of an intent to defraud or deprive the utility of recovering proper charges for payment for such service. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2010, § 1(exh. A)) 
Chapter 74 - WATER AND SEWERS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER (RESERVED) 

Secs. 74-19—74-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County board of health empowered to adopt and enforce rules and regulations appropriate to its functions and to prevent and suppress disease and conditions deleterious to the health of its citizens, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4; county board of health has the power and duty to adopt regulations providing standards and requirements governing on-site sewage management systems within the incorporated and unincorporated area of the county, O.C.G.A. §§ 31-3-5, 31-3-5.1. 

Sec. 74-40. - County health department regulations. 
(a)  Rules and regulations on individual sewage disposal systems from the health department are to be found in the statewide rules of the department of public health, division of physical health. 
(b)  These rules are pursuant to the authority vested in the state board of health and the department of public health under 1964 Ga. Laws, pages 499, 507 and O.C.G.A. §§ 31-5-1—31-5-10. 
(Code 2000, § 20-201) 
Sec. 74-41. - On-site sewage management. 
(a)  The regulations promulgated by the environmental health section of the state department of human resources in the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems are hereby adopted as the on-site sewage management regulations for the county. 
(b)  The procedure for enforcement of this section shall be the procedure as set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60—15-10-66, as hereinafter amended. The maximum punishment to be imposed for a violation of this section shall be $500.00 or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Jurisdiction over violation of this section shall be in the magistrate court of the county. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "inspection warrant" means a warrant authorizing a search or inspection of private property where such a search or inspection is one that is necessary for the enforcement of this section. 
(1)  The sanitarian or the sheriff may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this section. Such warrant shall authorize the sanitarian or the sheriff to conduct a search or inspection of property, either with or without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected. 
(2)  Inspection warrants shall be issued only by a magistrate judge from the magistrate court, a superior court judge of the Ocmulgee Judicial Circuit, or the state court judge. 
(3)  The issuing judge may only issue the warrant when the judge is satisfied that the following conditions are met: 
a.  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property; and 
b.  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized under this section. 
(4)  The inspection warrant shall be validly issued only if it meets the following requirements: 
a.  The affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant is attached to the warrant; 
b.  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property of which the warrant authorizes an inspection; 
c.  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal; and 
d.  The warrant refers to the statutory or regulatory provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Code 2000, § 20-202) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 2000 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 2000 Code, as updated through ordinances adopted as of September 12, 2006, which are included herein. Sections of the 2000 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES—RESOLUTIONS 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 2000 Code, as updated through ordinances adopted as of September 12, 2006, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 2000 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede September 12, 2006, but which were never included in the 2000 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since September 12, 2006, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 

 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Special Acts and Local Laws and within this Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 