CODE OF ORDINANCES OF FLOYD COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
LOCAL LAWS AND GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE COUNTY 
____________ 
Adopted: Sept. 27, 1988 
Effective: Sept. 27, 1988 
____________ 
Published in 1988 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

CURRENT  OFFICIALS  of  FLOYD COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Rhonda Wallace - Chairman  Scotty Hancock - Vice Chairman  Wright Bagby  Allison Watters  Larry Maxey  Commissioners 
____________ 
Jamie McCord  County Manager 
____________ 
Wade Hoyt, III  County Attorney 
____________ 
Erin Elrod  County Clerk 
OFFICIALS  of  FLOYD COUNTY, GEORGIA  AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
C. T. Blankenship  Chairman 
____________ 
Howard Smith  Joe Rob Mathis  Charles Parker  Anne Rigas  Anne Rigas  Commissioners 
____________ 
Richard L. McCullough  County Manager 
____________ 
Sue Broome  County Clerk 
____________ 
Jerry L. Minge  County Attorney 
PREFACE 
Part I, State Laws of Local Application, constitutes a complete recodification of Division I of the 1979 Code, as supplemented through November 23, 1983, and acts and ordinances amendatory thereof. Part II, Code of Ordinances, constitutes a complete recodification of Division II of the 1979 Code, as supplemented through November 23, 1983, and ordinances of a general and permanent nature subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. 
The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1979 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent act and ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code of Ordinances have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. 
Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant general laws of the state have been included. A table listing the general law citations and setting forth their locations within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of three component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the part number, the figure before the second dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the second dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 2-2 is numbered 2-2-1 and the fifth section of Chapter 2-4 is 2-4-5. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 2-8-4 and 2-8-5 is desired to by added, such new sections would be numbered 2-8-4.1, 2-8-4.2 and 2-8-4.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 2-6 and 2-7, it will be designated as Chapter 2-6.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters in the Code of Ordinances is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory acts or ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of B. Meade White, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. p0;The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Jerry L. Minge, County Attorney and Mr. Richard L. McCullough, County Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for Floyd County, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
The Board of Commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia, Ordains: 
Section 1.  The Code entitled the "Floyd County Code," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Part I, Chapters 1-1 through 1-7, and Part II, Chapters 2-1 through 2-19, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2.  All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 15, 1988, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3.  The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4.  Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, or as otherwise provided by the laws of the state. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5.  Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the legislative body to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6.  Ordinances adopted after March 15, 1988, that amend or refer to acts or ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7.  This ordinance shall become effective September 27, 1988. 
Passed and adopted by the [Board of Commissioners] this 27th day of September, 1988. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - STATE LAWS OF LOCAL APPLICATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Throughout this part, all references to the county governing authority are changed to "board of commissioners." See O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20. In addition, references to the judiciary are changed to reference the successor court, the probate court. Words in brackets [ ] have been added for clarification. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and style has been made uniform. 

Chapter 1-1 - GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1-1. - Nepotism. 
(a)  (1)  No person who has a relative within the prohibitive degrees as defined herein working for Floyd County, Georgia, may apply for and/or accept a job of employment with the county manager's office, county clerk's office and/or county personnel office. Any person who is employed by the county at the time of the passage of this change and/or amendment shall be unaffected by said amendment as to termination of employment for violation. However, he or she will be affected in that after the effective date of this amendment, no one within the prohibitive degree will be allowed to transfer into the county manager's office, county clerk's office and/or county personnel office if that person has any other relative within the prohibitive degree working for Floyd County, Georgia. 
(2)  No other employee who is related by blood or marriage within the extended family of any employee of Floyd County, Georgia, shall be eligible to and/or for employment by the county in the same department where said employee works. 
(3)  Extended family shall be defined as follows: husband, wife, children, parents, brothers, sisters and parents-in-law. 
(b)  (1)  No person who has a relative within the prohibitive degrees as defined herein working for Floyd County, Georgia, may apply for and/or accept a job of employment with the county manager's office, county clerk's office and/or county personnel office. Any person who is employed by the county at the time of the passage of this change and/or amendment shall be unaffected by said amendment as to termination of employment for violation. However, he or she will be affected in that after the effective date of this amendment, no one within the prohibitive degree will be allowed to transfer into the county manager's office, county clerk's office and/or county personnel office if that person has any other relative within the prohibitive degree working for Floyd County, Georgia. 
(2)  No other employee who is related by blood or marriage within the extended family of any employee of Floyd County, Georgia, shall be eligible to and/or for employment by the county in the same department where said employee works. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to any elected official of Floyd County, Georgia, nor shall it apply to any employee who is related by blood or marriage within the extended family as computed herein in subsection 1-1-1(a)(3) to any elected official within said employee's department if said employee was regularly employed within the department prior to the elected official legally assuming the duties and responsibilities of said office. 
(c)  No member of the board of commissioners shall employ or vote to employ, or pay or vote to pay, any such ineligible person. No county warden or warden of the correctional institution, county manager or superintendent or clerk shall employ or authorize the employment of any such ineligible person, or continue or authorize the continuance of any such ineligible person in employment. 
(d)  Any member of the board of commissioners of said county and/or county manager and/or superintendent and/or clerk of the board who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this Act [this section and section 1-6-2] shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as prescribed by section 1065 of the criminal code [Penal Code 1910], [O.C.G.A. section 17-10-3], and shall furthermore be guilty of malpractice in office. Any county warden, or the warden of the correctional institution, who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of the Act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as prescribed by section 1065 of the criminal code [Penal Code 1910], [O.C.G.A. section 17-10-3], and shall be removed from office. 
(Ga. L. 1931, p. 467, §§ 1, 2, 3, 5; Ord. of 10-25-77; Amend. of 9-8-98(1), § 1; Amend. of 3-23-99(1), § 1; Ord. No. 2000-002A, § 1, 6-27-00) 
Editor's note— The ordinance adopted on October 25, 1977, is also found at 1978 Ga. L. p. 4711. 
Cross reference— Nepotism limitation, § 1-2-9. 
State Law reference— Establishment, etc. of correctional institutions, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-53. 
Chapter 1-2 - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 1-2-1. - Continuation in existence; transitional election and term provisions; residence qualifications for posts; election and terms of successors. 
(a)  The board of commissioners of Floyd County composed of five (5) members shall continue as the governing authority of Floyd County. Members for Posts 1 and 2 shall reside in Floyd County inside the corporate limits of the City of Rome. Members for Posts 3, 4, and 5 shall reside in Floyd County but outside the corporate limits of the City of Rome. Any person offering for election as a member of the board shall designate the post for which such person is offering at the time of so offering and shall not offer for election for more than one (1) post on the board. 
(b)  Members of the board shall be elected on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November next preceding the expiration of the term of office for the respective post on the board of commissioners and shall take office on the first day of January following their election. 
(c)  Subject to clearance by the Attorney General of the United States, the terms of the members of the board, which were made concurrent in accordance with an Act approved April 6, 1992, (Ga. L. 1992, p. 5466), shall become staggered terms in the following manner: 
(1)  The members elected to Posts 2 and 3 in 1994 shall complete the four-year terms for which they were elected. Their successors shall be elected in 1998 to serve for terms of two years and until their successors are elected and qualified, and subsequently, all members shall be elected for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(2)  The members who were elected to Posts 1, 4, and 5 in 1994 shall complete the four-year terms for which they were elected. Their successors shall be elected in 1998 to serve for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified, and subsequently, all members shall be elected for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)  To qualify for election as a member of the board, a person must be a resident of Floyd County for at least one (1) year, and such residency must be as follows: any person seeking to qualify for election to Posts 1 or 2 must reside within the corporate limits of the City of Rome and must have resided accordingly for at least one (1) year immediately prior to being qualified, and any person seeking to qualify for election to Posts 3, 4, or 5 must reside outside of the corporate limits of the City of Rome and must have resided accordingly for at least one (1) year immediately prior to being qualified. 
(Ga. L. 1917, p. 351, § 4; Ga. L. 1981, Act No. 13, p. 3023, § 1; Ga. L. 1992, p. 5466, § 1; Ga. L. 1993, p. 4580, § 1; Ga. L. 1994, p. 4074, § 1; Ga. L. 1997, p. 3678, § 1) 
Editor's note— The provisions of subsection (c) are derived from the 1992 act, which was approved at referendum and obtained Attorney General Clearance. The 1993 and 1994 acts added a subsection (c), which subsection has been redesignated as subsection (d), as a subsection (c) already exists. 
Sec. 1-2-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ga. Laws 2000 Session, p. 3506, § 1, repealed Section 5 of an Act approved July 28, 1917 (Ga. L. 1917, p. 351), codified herein as § 1-2-2. Section 1-2-2 pertained to vacancies and derived from Ga. L. 1917, p. 351, § 5, and Ga. L. 1981, p. 3023, § 1. 
Sec. 1-2-3. - Regular meeting times and dates. 
The board of commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia shall meet not less often than once during each calendar month on such date and at such time as may be established by resolution of such board from time to time. 
(Ord. of 3-1-77; Ord. of 1-26-93, § 1) 
Editor's note— The ordinances listed in the left-hand column below are found in the Georgia Session Laws at the location listed opposite them in the right hand column below: 

 
Sec. 1-2-4. - Special meetings. 
Said board may hold special meetings at any reasonable time or times and from time to time at the call of the chairman of said board or vice-chairman of said board, and any business may be transacted at such special meetings which may be transacted at regular meetings of such board; and such special meetings shall be open and public. 
(Ga. L. 1957, p. 2240, § 2) 
Sec. 1-2-5. - Compensation. 
Each member of the board of commissioners of Floyd County shall be entitled to a salary of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per month. In addition thereto the chairman of the board shall receive an expense allowance of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per month, the vice-chairman of the board shall receive an expense allowance of two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00) per month, and each of the other three (3) members of the board shall receive an expense allowance of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month. No member of the board shall be entitled to receive any other sum or sums whatever than those specified in this section unless it is necessary for the board or a committee of the board to go out of the county on official business for the county, and then they shall be paid their actual expenses after having rendered sworn itemized statements for the expenses incurred on such trip. Salary and expenses authorized by this section shall be paid from the funds of Floyd County. 
(Ga. L. 1931, p. 467, § 1; Ga. L. 1953, p. 2073, § 1; Ga. L. 1961, p. 2290; Ga. L. 1965, p. 2329; Ga. L. 1967, p. 2975; Ga. L. 1974, p. 3745; Ga. L. 1981, p. 3023, § 1(5A); Ga. L. 1981, p. 3023, § 1; Ga. L. 1984, p. 4374, § 1) 
Sec. 1-2-6. - Limitation on powers of board— Appointments of persons related. 
No person shall be elected or appointed to any office or position of service to the county by the board of commissioners, or any one (1) of them, who is related to them, or any one (1) of them, within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity. 
(Ga. L. 1917, p. 351, § 6(1); Ga. L. 1965, p. 2407) 
Cross reference— Nepotism limitations, § 1-1-1. 
Sec. 1-2-7. - Same—Board contracts. 
No contract for work of any kind shall be made except in public meetings of the board and by a majority vote of the board, and not more than ninety (90) percent of the contract price of any contract work shall be paid on the work before completion, and all such payments shall be made on a sworn statement of the contractor in writing as to the amount of work actually completed, which statement shall be filed and kept by the clerk of the board. Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, the commissioners so violating same shall be punished as prescribed in Code Section 27-2506 of the Code of Georgia of 1933 [O.C.G.A. section 17-10-3]; provided, however, that any commissioner may justify himself by showing that he did not vote for such violation. 
(Ga. L. 1917, p. 351, § 6(2); Ga. L. 1920, p. 529; Ga. L. 1957, p. 3332; Ga. L. 1962, p. 3152; Ga. L. 1965, p. 2407) 
Sec. 1-2-8. - Providing employee insurance authorized. 
(a)  The commissioners of Floyd County are hereby authorized to provide any type of group insurance, including life insurance, hospitalization, and similar insurance coverage for all regular county employees. 
(b)  In connection therewith, the county authorities may enter into contracts with any insurance company qualified under the laws of Georgia to write any type of insurance. 
(c)  Participation by county employees in such group insurance shall be voluntary, and no employee shall be required to participate therein or make contributions thereto, unless such employee shall desire to participate. 
(d)  The premiums on all such policies of group insurance shall be paid by such Floyd County employees electing to participate in such group insurance, the amount of their premiums to be deducted from their pay, and by Floyd County out of its treasury, in such an amount as shall be determined by the commissioners of Floyd County, which payment by Floyd County shall be deemed made for services rendered to such county and for the welfare and protection of such employees. 
(e)  The contribution by Floyd County shall not be deducted from the salary or other compensation of such employees, as fixed by the commissioners of Floyd County on any established classification or pay scale for employees of Floyd County. 
(f)  The commissioners of Floyd County are hereby authorized and empowered to levy taxes for the purpose of making such payments. 
(Ga. L. 1960, p. 2966) 
Chapter 1-3 - COUNTY OFFICERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Departments created by ordinance, 2-2-20 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-3-1. - County manager—Office created; appointment; term; qualifications. 
(a)  There is created the office of county manager of Floyd County. The county manager shall be appointed in the manner provided for by the board of commissioners to serve at the pleasure of said board. No member of the board shall be appointed county manager during the term of office for which he is elected or for a period of one (1) year thereafter. 
(b)  The county manager shall be chosen by the board solely upon the basis of his administrative qualifications with specific reference to his actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of his office as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ga. L. 1983, p. 4525, § 1(6B, C)) 
State Law reference— Office authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22. 
Sec. 1-3-2. - Same—Responsibilities and duties. 
The county manager shall be the administrative head of the county government. He shall be responsible to the board for the proper and efficient administration of all affairs of the county except as otherwise provided by law. It shall be his duty: 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided by law, to make recommendations to the board of commissioners relating to the appointment of future heads of all departments of the county and to remove such officers and employees, with the exception of the county attorney, the county auditor, and the county physician; provided, however, that nothing in this paragraph shall prohibit the appointment of future heads of the departments of the county by the board of commissioners in the absence of a recommendation by the county manager. 
(2)  To see that all laws and ordinances of the county are enforced; 
(3)  To exercise control over all departments or divisions of the county which the board has heretofore exercised or that may hereafter be created; 
(4)  To prepare and submit to the board of commissioners an annual budget; 
(5)  To keep the board of commissioners fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of said county; 
(6)  To supervise and direct the official conduct of all appointive county officers and department heads except as may be herein otherwise provided; 
(7)  To attend all meetings of the board with the right to take part in the discussion, provided he shall have no vote before the board; 
(8)  To supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person for work done for Floyd County and to supervise and regulate all purchases of materials and supplies for Floyd County within such limitations and under such rules and regulations as may be imposed by the board of commissioners; 
(9)  The county manager shall be vested with the authority to countersign with the chairman or, in his absence from the county, the vice-chairman, all payroll checks for employees of Floyd County; and 
(10)  To perform such other administrative duties as shall be established by the board of commissioners. 
(Ga. L. 1983, p. 4525, § 1(6D); Ga. L. 1993, p. 5457, § 1) 
Sec. 1-3-3. - Same—Reports. 
The board of commissioners shall have the right to require the county manager to appear before them [it] at any time and make such reports, oral or written, as they deem [it deems] necessary. 
(Ga. L. 1983, p. 4525, § 1(6E)) 
Sec. 1-3-4. - Same—Bond; oath. 
(a)  Bond. The county manager shall be required to execute and deliver a good and sufficient bond payable to Floyd County to be approved by the board of commissioners and conditioned upon the faithful performance of his duties. The amount of said bond shall be determined by the board of commissioners. Said bond shall be delivered to the board within five (5) days of the county manager assuming his duties and upon receipt shall be filed by the chairman of the board in the office of the clerk of superior court of Floyd County. 
(b)  Oath. Before entering upon his duties, the county manager shall take and subscribe an oath for the faithful performance of his duties under this Act, which oath shall be duly entered upon the minutes of the board of commissioners. 
(Ga. L. 1983, p. 4525, § 1(6F, G)) 
Sec. 1-3-5. - Same—Suspension or removal from office. 
The county manager may be suspended or removed at the pleasure of the board of commissioners by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(Ga. L. 1983, p. 4525, § 1(6H)) 
Sec. 1-3-6. - Finance director/comptroller office established. 
In order to more clearly define the responsibilities and duties of the chief financial officer of the county, there is established the office of finance director/comptroller. The finance director/comptroller shall have the duty and authority to inspect and audit books, papers and records of each of the officers of the county, whether elected or otherwise, and to require each such officer to account for all fees, commissions, costs, allowances, funds, monies and other emoluments accruing to his office due to said county and for other operating expenses incurred for his office. He shall also have the duties as the finance director/comptroller of the county to review any and all financial records in reference to said county; including, but not limited to, the accurate, orderly, coordinated and prompt account for and collection of the fees, commissions, costs, allowances, funds, monies and other financial matters accruing to said offices of the county and belonging to said county, and further the payment of the operating expenses of said offices, said county, by and through said board of commissioners. The finance director/comptroller is responsible to and answerable to the county manager and shall work under his direction and control. 
(Amend. of 7-28-98(1), § 1; Ord. No. 2006-001A, § 1, 3-28-06) 
Secs. 1-3-7—1-3-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX COMMISSIONER[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Note in the 1979 Code provided that the 1950 Act, as amended, from which this article is derived was approved originally by referendum. 
State Law reference— Salary, Const. 1983, Art. IX, § 1, ¶ 3; minimum salary, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183. 

Sec. 1-3-20. - Offices of tax receiver and tax collector abolished. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that upon the expiration of the present terms of present tax receiver and present tax collector, in and for the County of Floyd, said offices shall be and they are hereby abolished, provided the voters of said county shall approve as hereinafter provided. 
(Ga. L. 1950, p. 2749, § 1) 
State Law reference— Consolidation of office of tax receiver and tax collector and creation of office of tax commissioner authorized, Const. 1983, Art. IX, § 1, ¶ 3(c). 
Sec. 1-3-21. - Office of tax commissioner created. 
The office of tax commissioner of Floyd County, Georgia is hereby created in lieu of said offices, and the rights, duties, and liabilities of said office of tax commissioner of Floyd County, Georgia, shall be the same as the rights, duties and liabilities of tax receiver and tax collector of said county, that all laws applicable to said offices shall be applicable to the tax commissioner, so far as the same can apply. 
(Ga. L. 1950, p. 2749, § 2) 
Cross reference— Revenue and taxation, §§ 1-6-1 et seq., 2-9-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3-22. - Courthouse office; days and hours open. 
Said tax commissioner shall have an office in the courthouse, which office he shall keep open, on the days and hours, and be ready to attend to his duties, as the board of county commissioners may designate. 
(Ga. L. 1950, p. 2749, § 3) 
Sec. 1-3-23. - Prior taxes to be collected. 
All taxes now due and payable, and all tax fi. fas. heretofore issued by tax collector of Floyd County, Georgia, shall have full force and effect, and be collectible as issued. 
(Ga. L. 1950, p. 2749, § 4) 
Sec. 1-3-24. - Fees to be paid to county. 
All fees, commissions, and other compensation now allowed to the tax receiver and tax collector of Floyd County, Georgia, from both state and county, and special taxes of any and all nature, shall be collected by the tax commissioner and paid into the county depository of said county, same meaning the county treasury in whatever way the finances may be legally handled; and the same shall be accounted for by the fiscal agents of said county, whether it be the board of commissioners or some other officer or agent, the same as he or they account for all other funds belonging to said county. And all such fees, commissions, and other compensation so collected by the tax commissioner shall be paid by him into the legal depository and treasury of Floyd County, Georgia. 
(Ga. L. 1950, p. 2749, § 5) 
Sec. 1-3-25. - Term; election; vacancy. 
The term of office of said tax commissioner of Floyd County shall be four (4) years, and the first election of county tax commissioner of Floyd County shall be held at the same time and place as other county officers are now elected at the general election for county officers in the year 1952, and quadrenially thereafter, and the person so elected shall enter upon the duties of the office hereby created on January 1, 1953. If a vacancy should occur, the office shall be filled in the same manner as vacancies are now filled in the office of the tax collector. 
(Ga. L. 1950, p. 2749, § 6) 
Sec. 1-3-26. - Oath; bond. 
Before entering upon the duties of his office the said county tax commissioner shall take the oath now prescribed by law for county tax receiver and county tax collector, and shall give bond, the amount of said bond to be fixed by the board of commissioners of said county, the amount of said bond and the acceptance of it to be agreed to by the county commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia. The cost of said bond is to be paid by the county commissioners out of the general funds of said county. The purpose of this Act is to put into effect in Floyd County, Georgia, the constitution of this state as contained in article eleven, section one, paragraph six. 
(Ga. L. 1950, p. 2749, § 8) 
Editor's note— Art. XI, ¶ 6 was carried forward into the 1976 Constitution as Art. IX, § 1, ¶ 6. This section, providing for uniformity of county government was not carried forward into the 1983 Constitution. 
Sec. 1-3-27. - Employees. 
The county tax commissioner shall be authorized to employ to serve at the pleasure of said county tax commissioner and to perform such duties as may be assigned by him, one (1) chief deputy at a salary to be fixed at the discretion of the county tax commissioner but not to exceed seventy-five (75) percent of the annual salary of the county tax commissioner. Said salary of the chief deputy shall be payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Floyd County. 
(Ga. L. 1950, p. 2749, §§ 9, 9A, Ga. L. 1955, p. 2980; Ga. L. 1957, p. 2236; Ga. L. 1958, p. 2318; Ga. L. 1961, p. 2267; Ga. L. 1964, p. 2855, § 2; Ga. L. 1965, p. 2330, §§ 2, 3; 1967, p. 2561, § 2; Ga. L. 1976, p. 2917; Ga. L. 1979, p. 4359) 
Sec. 1-3-28. - Authority for board to assist in special circumstances. 
If a change occurs in the work load in the office of the county tax commissioner, or other circumstances warrant it, the county tax commissioner may apply to the county board of commissioners for relief. The said county board of commissioners shall have the authority to grant such relief, and shall [have] the authority to eliminate such relief as has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(Ga. L. 1950, p. 2749, § 9B; Ga. L. 1965, p. 2330, § 4) 
Chapter 1-4 - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AUTHORITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Recreation authority, § 2-13-2 et seq.; airport commission, § 2-3-30 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 1-4-1—1-4-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ROME-FLOYD COUNTY DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 1-4-20. - Created; members; powers. 
Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph V of the Constitution of the State of Georgia [Const. 1983, Art. IX, § 6, ¶¶ 1, 2] is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
"(A)  In addition to the purposes for which revenue anticipation obligations may be issued by counties, municipal corporations and political subdivisions, as provided in said Article VII, Section VII, Paragraph V of the Constitution of the State of Georgia [Const. 1983, Art. IX, § 6, ¶ 1, 2], the Rome-Floyd County Development Authority, hereinafter created, be and is hereby authorized to issue revenue obligations to provide funds to be used by said authority in assisting, promoting, establishing and developing new industries, and assisting, promoting and expanding existing industry, agriculture, trade and commerce within the territorial limits of Floyd County, Georgia, as hereinafter provided. Said purposes are hereby found, determined and declared to be for the benefit of the citizens and residents of said county and to be an essential governmental function in relieving unemployment, improving the economy, limiting poor relief assistance, developing natural resources, and otherwise promoting the general welfare. 
(B)  In furtherance of the purposes for which such issuance of revenue anticipation obligations is authorized there is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the `Rome-Floyd County Development Authority,' which shall be deemed to be a creature of the State of Georgia, an instrumentality of the County of Floyd, and a public corporation. The name of said authority may be changed from time to time by an act of the general assembly. The said authority is created for the purposes of assisting, promoting, establishing and developing new industry, and assisting, promoting and expanding existing industry, agriculture, trade and commerce within the territorial limits of Floyd County, Georgia, both within and without the limits of municipalities therein, for the public good and general welfare of said county and its citizens. The scope and jurisdiction of the authority is restricted to the territorial limits of Floyd County, Georgia. The authority shall not be operated for profit, is an institution of purely public charity, and is an industrial development agency qualified to receive loans and other assistance from the Industrial Development Commission of the State of Georgia, or other governmental agencies. 
(C)  In carrying out the foregoing objectives, the authority shall be deemed to be engaging in such functions of government, activities and transactions as the County of Floyd, the City of Rome, and the City of Cave Spring are by law authorized to undertake. 
(D)  The said authority shall consist of seven (7) members, one (1) of whom shall be the chairman of the city commission of the City of Rome; one (1) of whom shall be the chairman of the board of commissioners of Floyd County; one (1) of whom shall be the president of the Chamber of Commerce of Rome and Floyd County, or its successor; one (1) of whom shall be the chairman of the Industrial Development Committee of the Chamber of Commerce of Rome and Floyd County, or its successor; and three (3) of whom shall be appointed by the other four (4) members first above mentioned. 
(1)  The terms of office of the members who are the chairman of the city commission of the City of Rome, the chairman of the board of commissioners of Floyd County, the president of the Chamber of Commerce of Rome and Floyd County, or its successor, and the chairman of the Industrial Development Committee of the Chamber of Commerce of Rome and Floyd County, or its successor, shall run concurrently with their respective tenures of such offices in said bodies, and their respective successors in such offices shall succeed them as members of the said authority. 
(2)  The three (3) members initially appointed by the other four (4) members first mentioned shall be appointed for terms expiring December 31, 1963, December 31, 1964, and December 31, 1965, respectively; and thereafter their respective successors shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. In the event of the death or resignation of either one of said appointed members, his successor shall be appointed by the remaining members for the balance of the unexpired term. No vacancy shall impair the power of the authority to act. 
(3)  Prior to taking office the members shall subscribe to the following oath, to wit: `I do solemnly swear that I will fully and fairly perform the duties as a member of the Rome-Floyd County Development Authority, So Help Me God.' 
(4)  The members of the said authority shall be entitled to no compensation. 
(E)  As used herein, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(1)  The word `authority' shall mean the `Rome-Floyd County Development Authority,' created hereby. 
(2)  The word `project' shall be deemed to mean and include property, real and/or personal, acquired or held by the authority for the assistance, promotion, establishment or development of a new industry or industries, or the assistance, promotion or expansion of existing industry, trade or commerce in Floyd County, or any combination thereof; the acquisition of any such property for any such purpose or purposes; the improvement of any such property or properties; and/or the construction, installation and/or expansion of one (1) or more buildings, plants, and/or articles of equipment for the purpose of using, selling, donating, leasing and/or renting such land, properties, improvements, structures or equipment to public or private persons, firms, corporations and/or associations for such purposes. 
(3)  The term `cost of project' shall embrace: the cost of lands, buildings, improvements, machinery, equipment, properties, easements, rights, franchises, materials, labor and services acquired and/or contracted for; the cost of financing charges and/or of interest prior to and during construction; architectural, accounting, engineering, inspection, fiscal and/or legal expenses; cost of plans and/or specifications; and/or any other expenses necessary or incident to construction and/or improvements, and/or to determining the feasibility and/or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and/or the acquisition, construction, equipping and/or operating [of] any project or any part thereof. 
(F)  Any four (4) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of ordinary business of the authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the authority must be approved by not less than four (4) affirmative votes. 
(G)  The powers of the authority herein created shall include, but are not limited to, the power, for its corporate purposes: 
(1)  To have a corporate seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
(2)  To contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead or be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, to contract with the State of Georgia and any instrumentality thereof, any county or municipality thereof, and any other political subdivisions, and with private persons, firms, corporations, and associations. 
(3)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts. 
(4)  To buy, acquire, receive as gifts, own, improve, expand, develop, operate, maintain, sell, donate, lease as lessor or lessee, mortgage, pledge, convey to secure debt, and/or otherwise encumber and/or dispose of land, buildings, equipment, furnishings, and/or property of all kinds, real and/or personal, within Floyd County, Georgia, and to make a contract or contracts and/or to execute any instrument or document for the accomplishment thereof, or other purposes. 
(5)  To make contracts, and to execute any and all instruments necessary or convenient to, or in aid of, the accomplishment of any of the purposes of said authority, and/or the exercise of any power or powers of said authority. 
(6)  To enter into any contract or contracts for any period of time not exceeding fifty (50) years. 
(7)  To appoint and select officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
(8)  To construct, erect, buy, receive as a gift, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, equip, furnish, extend, expand, develop, improve, donate, sell, lease as lessor or lessee, equip, add to, operate and manage projects and to pay the costs of such projects from any income of the authority, from the proceeds of revenue bonds issued and sold by the authority or others, from any taxes levied for the purpose by the State of Georgia, Floyd County, or any of the municipalities therein, or from any contributions or loans by political subdivisions or instrumentalities, persons, firms, or corporations, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(9)  To elect its own officers from the membership of the authority; to elect and employ an executive director who is not required to be a member of the authority; and to authorize and empower such officers to act for the authority generally or in any specific matter. 
(10)  To borrow money and to execute debentures, bonds, notes, mortgages, deeds or bills of sale to secure debt, trust deeds and/or other such instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing. 
(11)  To issue and sell revenue bonds for the purpose of raising funds for the payment, in whole or in part, of the cost of any project of the authority; to secure the payment of the obligations of such bonds by, but not limited to, selling, conveying, mortgaging, pledging and/or assigning any or all of its funds, income and/or property; and to exercise all the rights, powers and privileges, and to be subject to all the duties and liabilities, which a municipality may exercise and/or be subject to under the provisions of the Revenue Bond Law (Chapter 87-8 of the Code of Georgia) [O.C.G.A. section 36-82-60 et seq.], as the same now is, or hereafter may be, amended. The rights, powers and privileges of the authority are not limited to those of such a municipality, however. 
(12)  To use public funds appropriated to it, the rents, profits and proceeds from the projects erected, leased or sold, and other funds and income of the authority, to provide for the operation and maintenance of such projects or other projects, to discharge the principal, interest and expenses of bonds, revenue bonds, and notes issued by the authority, to pay other debts of the authority, and to further and promote the objectives of the authority. 
(13)  To exercise any power granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public corporations or authorities performing similar functions. 
(14)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested. 
(15)  To adopt, alter, amend and/or repeal its own bylaws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the powers granted to it may be enjoyed, as the authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(16)  To do all things necessary and convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this Act upon the authority. 
(H)  The acquisition, construction, improvement, betterment, expansion or extension of any undertaking or project of the authority, and the issuance in anticipation of the collection of revenues of such undertaking or project, of bonds to provide funds to pay the whole or a part of the costs thereof, may be authorized by resolution or resolutions of the authority which may be adopted at a regular or special meeting by a majority of the members of the authority. Unless otherwise provided therein, such resolution or resolutions shall take effect immediately and need not be laid over or published or posted. The authority in determining the cost of any undertaking or project for which revenue bonds are to be issued may include all costs as hereinbefore defined. Such bonds shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, not exceeding thirty (30) years from their respective dates, bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding seven (7) percent per annum, and may be in such denominations and may carry such registration privileges and be subject to redemption and may contain such terms, covenants, assignments and conditions as the resolution or resolutions authorizing the issuance of such bonds may provide. Except as herein provided to the contrary, such bonds shall be issued and validated in the Superior Court of Floyd County, Georgia, in the same manner as revenue bonds of municipalities are issued and validated under the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. L. 1937, pp. 761—774; Chapter 87-8 of the Code of Georgia) [O.C.G.A. section 36-82-60 et seq.], as now and hereafter amended. In the proceedings to validate such bonds, the Rome-Floyd County Development Authority shall be named as party defendant. In the event no bill of exceptions is filed within the time prescribed by law, or if filed, the judgment validating the bonds shall be affirmed by the Supreme Court of Georgia, such judgment shall be forever conclusive as to the validity of said bonds and the security therefor against said authority. 
(I)  All property, real and personal, the title to which is vested in the authority, and all debentures, notes, bonds, and revenue bonds issued by the authority, and interest thereon and income therefrom, shall be exempt from state, county, city, and local taxation for any purpose. 
(J)  It shall be the duty of the authority to have all persons handling funds of the authority fully and adequately bonded for their faithful accounting for such funds. 
(K)  The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation, against the State of Georgia, Floyd County, or any municipality therein. No debt, liability or obligation of the authority shall be considered a pledge or loan of the credit of the State of Georgia, or any county, city or other subdivision thereof. 
(L)  If the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall be in the County of Floyd and/or any incorporated city or town in said county, the governing authorities of the County of Floyd and of said municipalities, respectively, are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, without cost, to the authority. Said county and/or said municipalities may donate to said authority, real estate, personal property and service for any such project. Any such land, improvements, or personal property so conveyed or donated to the authority may be mortgaged, conveyed, or pledged to secure obligations of the authority. 
(M)  Should said authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution, shall be conveyed to Floyd County subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property. No private interest shall exist in the property of the authority. The authority shall hold title only for the benefit of the public. 
(N)  The books and records of the authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the authority, by a competent independent auditor; and the minutes and records of the same shall be filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners of said county, and shall be available for public inspection. 
(O)  The authority shall exist and have all of said powers, and the right to exercise the same for its corporate purposes, regardless of whether or not it shall issue revenue anticipation obligations hereunder. 
(P)  This amendment shall be effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the governor. No enabling act or legislation of the general assembly shall be necessary to place the same in effect. However, the General Assembly of the State of Georgia is hereby authorized to enact any laws from time to time, not in conflict herewith, to further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and the exercise thereof, to enlarge and/or restrict the same, to regulate the management and conduct of the authority, and/or to further and assist the objectives and purposes of the authority. 
(Q)  The provisions hereof are severable, and if any of the provisions hereof shall be held in violation of the constitution of the United States or invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect, impair or invalidate any of the remaining portions hereof. If this amendment necessarily conflicts with some previous provision of the constitution of the State of Georgia, this amendment shall prevail as a modification pro tanto of the former provision." 
(Ga. L. 1962, p. 1067; Code 1979, § 3-201) 
Sec. 1-4-21. - Continued in existence. 
That constitutional amendment which was proposed by Resolution Act No. 216 (House Resolution No. 491-965) of the 1962 General Assembly (Ga. L. 1962, p. 1067), and which was duly ratified at the 1962 general election and which relates to the creation of the Rome-Floyd County Development Authority and provisions for its powers, authorities, funds, purposes, and procedures connected therewith shall not be repealed or deleted on July 1, 1987, as a part of the constitution of the State of Georgia, but is specifically continued in force and effect on and after that date as a part of the constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ga. L. 1985, p. 4877, § 1) 
Sec. 1-4-22. - Powers under Development Authorities Law—Granted. 
In addition to any other powers granted to the Rome-Floyd County Development Authority and without limiting any such powers, said authority is hereby granted all powers granted to authorities under the Development Authorities Law, approved March 28, 1969, (Ga. L. 1969, p. 137) [O.C.G.A. section 36-62-1 et seq.] as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ga. L. 1980, p. 3060, § 2) 
Sec. 1-4-23. - Same—Exercise thereof regarding projects thereunder. 
In addition to any other projects regarding which the Rome-Floyd County Development Authority may exercise its powers and duties and without limiting any such projects, such powers and duties may also be exercised regarding any "project" as defined in the Development Authorities Law, approved March 28, 1969, (Ga. L. 1969, p. 137) as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ga. L. 1980, p. 3060, § 3) 
Editor's note— See subsection (E)(2) of § 1-4-20 for a definition of "project." 
Sec. 1-4-24. - Setting rates. 
In addition to any other powers granted to the Rome-Floyd County Development Authority and without limiting any such powers, said authority is hereby authorized to set the rate or rates at which bonds of the authority bear interest without any ceiling as to such rate or rates. 
(Ga. L. 1980, p. 3060, § 4) 
Secs. 1-4-25—1-4-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Creation of authority, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72; audit required, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-91. 

Sec. 1-4-30. - Membership. 
(a)  The members of the Hospital Authority of Floyd County who are serving as such upon the date this Act becomes effective in 1996 shall serve out their terms of office and until their successors are appointed and qualified pursuant to the provisions of this section. That member of the authority who is a member of the board of commissioners of Floyd County and appointed by such board shall serve until such member's term of office as a member of that board of commissioners next expires and until the appointment and qualification of a successor. 
(b)  The successors to the members of the authority whose terms of office expire on or after the 1996 effective date of this section and all future successors to members whose terms of office expire shall be nominated by the board of commissioners of Floyd County and selected by the grand jury of Floyd County. That board shall submit a list of three (3) eligible persons to the grand jury of Floyd County. Such list shall be furnished to the foreman of the grand jury of Floyd County, and that grand jury shall either select by majority vote one (1) of the persons named in such list or decline to select any of the persons named in the list. Should the grand jury decline to select any of the persons named in the list, the foreman of the grand jury shall so notify the board of commissioners. Such board shall then submit a new list of three (3) eligible persons, none of whom was named on the earlier list, to the grand jury. The grand jury shall select one (1) of the persons named in such list or decline to select any of the persons named in the list. This process shall be repeated until one (1) of the persons named in the list is selected. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a member of the board of commissioners of Floyd County from being selected as a member of Hospital Authority of Floyd County. 
(c)  If a vacancy occurs in the office of any member of the authority other than by expiration of term, that vacancy shall be filled within sixty (60) days of the date of the vacancy as provided in subsection (b) of this section, unless fewer than sixty (60) days remain in the term of the vacated office, in which case the office may remain vacant for the remainder of its term at the discretion of the board of commissioners of Floyd County and shall thereafter be filled as provided in subsection (b) of this section. The duration of the terms of office of members of the hospital authority shall not be changed by this section. 
(Ga. L. 1973, p. 2057, § 2; Ga. L. 1996, p. 3807, § 2; Ga. L. 1997, p. 3675, § 1) 
Secs. 1-4-31—1-4-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ROME-FLOYD COUNTY HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION 

Sec. 1-4-40. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Rome, Georgia, a municipal corporation. 
Commission means the Rome-Floyd County Human Relations Commission created by joint ordinances of the City of Rome and Floyd County. 
County means Floyd County, Georgia, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
(Amend. of 6-28-94, § 1) 
Sec. 1-4-41. - Creation of commission. 
The Rome-Floyd County Human Relations Commission is hereby created and established by this ordinance [article] in conjunction with the passage of an identical ordinance by the Rome City Commission. 
(Amend. of 6-28-94, § 1) 
Sec. 1-4-42. - Composition; terms of members; appointment of successors; filling of vacancies; removal; service without compensation. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of twenty (20) voting members, one (1) of whom shall be a member of the city commission, appointed by that body, and one (1) of whom shall be a member of the county board of commissioners, appointed by that body. Nine (9) of the remaining members shall be appointed by the city commission, and nine (9) of the remaining members shall be appointed by the county board of commissioners from a list of persons submitted by the nominating committee of the commission following the guidelines of the Georgia Human Relations Commission. 
(b)  No restrictions on numbers of representatives living in the city or county shall be established. 
(c)  The members shall serve for three-year staggered terms and until their successors are appointed as provided for in this section. Initially, each local government shall appoint three (3) members to serve for a period of one (1) year, three (3) members to serve for a period of two (2) years and three (3) members to serve for a period of three (3) years. No member may serve more than two (2) consecutive terms, not to exceed six (6) years. 
(d)  Any vacancy in membership, whether caused by the expiration of a member's term, or otherwise, shall, subject to the confirmation procedures contained in subsection (e), be filled by the governing body which originally appointed that member. Any appointment for an unexpired term shall terminate at the expiration of such term. All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(e)  When any vacancy on the commission occurs, the commission shall, subject to the written policies and procedures established by the commission and approved by the city and county, recommend to the appropriate local government the name of at least two (2) persons to fill such vacancy. The appropriate local government shall appoint the replacement from the names submitted by the commission, or shall direct the commission, consistent with its said policies and procedures, to make additional recommendations for said appointment. The local government shall not appoint any person to fill any vacancy on the commission who has not been recommended by the commission. 
(Amend of 6-28-94, § 1) 
Sec. 1-4-43. - Organization; rules; staff, finances. 
(a)  The commission shall elect its chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary from among its appointed members. The term of officers shall be one (1) year, or until they are re-elected or until their successors are elected. The appointed secretary may be an officer or employee of the city or county, or a member of the commission. The commission shall determine its time of meetings, and shall make its own rules of procedure, including any rule, providing for termination of membership by reason of non-attendance at meetings. All meetings of the commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the commission shall be public records. 
(b)  The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for such work and may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, or local, public or semi-public agencies or private individuals or corporations; may expend such funds; and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts and contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing bodies of the city and county. 
(Amend. of 6-28-94, § 1) 
Sec. 1-4-44. - Powers and duties. 
The commission shall have the following duties and functions: 
(1)  To encourage, promote, and develop fair and equal treatment and opportunity in the Rome-Floyd County Community for all persons regardless of race, color, creed, sex, religion, national origin, age, and physical or mental impairment (the "affected persons"); 
(2)  To cooperate with and provide guidance to local government agencies on human relations matters; 
(3)  To cooperate with private industry, community, professional, civic and religious organizations, and federal, state, county and municipal agencies in the development of public information programs, leadership, and activities in the interest of equal opportunity and treatment of all the affected persons; 
(4)  To examine, study and inform the public as to complaints received concerning discriminatory practices regarding the affected persons, and transmit such complaints to appropriate agencies for investigation and corrective action, when necessary; 
(5)  To coordinate research projects and studies and to make reports on human relations to the city commission and county commission; 
(6)  To implement programs which will insure fairness to all minority groups in such areas as housing, recreation, education, employment, law enforcement, vocational guidance and related matters; 
(7)  To provide a forum for airing human relations problems and to promote cross-cultural and inter-community communication; 
(8)  To recommend to the city commission and county board of commissioners such additional legislation and programs to effectuate the purposes of this article; and 
(9)  Perform such other human relations duties as may be reasonably requested of the commission by either the city commission or county board of commissioners. 
(Amend. of 6-28-94, § 1) 
Chapter 1-5 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Personnel, Ch. 2-14; to provide employee insurance, § 1-2-11. 
State Law reference— Civil service system for county employees, authority O.C.G.A. § 36-1-21. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 1-5-1—1-5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RETIREMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Current retirement system, § 2-14-40. 

Sec. 1-5-20. - Short title. 
The short title of said Act shall be the "Floyd County Employees' Pension Code." Said short title may be hereafter employed for all purposes to properly describe said Act. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 1) 
Sec. 1-5-21. - Pensions authorized; rules and regulations. 
The commissioners with their other duties and responsibilities placed upon them by the law are empowered to establish rules and regulations governing the payment of pensions to county employees of Floyd County, as in this Act set out. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 2) 
Sec. 1-5-22. - Board of commissioner's duties. 
It shall be the duty of the governing authorities of said county to pass on all applications from employees of Floyd County who may become eligible for the "standard service pension" and those who may become eligible for the "service-connected disability pension" and those who may become eligible for the "partial pension for disability from other cause after ten (10) years of service" for pension or retirement pay from Floyd County; and to pay same in the manner and form and under the conditions and limitations hereinafter set forth, and subject to the rules and regulations for the same which may be adopted by commissioners for Floyd County. After the granting of such pensions, the pensions shall thereafter be paid under the supervision of said county authorities who may discontinue the same in the manner hereinafter set out and prescribed. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 3) 
Sec. 1-5-23. - Pension fund. 
The commissioners or other lawful county authority of Floyd County shall be authorized to create a pension fund in the manner and form set out in this Act and to levy taxes to pay the same, and to discontinue the payment of the same in the manner and form hereinafter set out and such other rules and regulations prescribed by the commissioners for Floyd County, Georgia. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 4) 
Sec. 1-5-24. - Classes of pensions. 
The following classes of employees of said county shall be eligible to receive pensions under the conditions and limitations hereinafter set out and the following classes of pensions are hereby established: 
(1)  Standard service pension. Any regular employee of Floyd County (male or female) who has reached the age of sixty (60) years and who has served well and faithfully for a period of twenty-two (22) years or more (of which said service five (5) years or more must have been immediately preceding the right of said employee to have benefits under this Act), may, upon application to the said commissioners for Floyd County be retired from active service, if in the opinion of the commissioners for Floyd County such employee is entitled to said retirement, and said employee, if retired, shall receive for the balance of his or her life, retirement benefits of a monthly pension in the amount of one-half of his or her "average monthly salary," as defined herein, but not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. 
"Average monthly salary or wage, as used in this Act, shall mean an amount equivalent to the average monthly salary or wages paid to the employee by Floyd County during the calendar year in which said employee drew his or her highest monthly salary or wage, and in the next preceding or next following calendar year, whichever will produce the highest average." To illustrate, if an applicant for a pension who is sixty-five (65) years of age and who has completed twenty-two (22) years of service on the payroll of said county received during the two (2) consecutive years in which such applicant drew the highest monthly salary or wage an average monthly salary or wage of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month, such qualified applicant would be entitled to an allowance of a pension or retirement pay in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month, which allowance is one-half of such average monthly salary or wage and also not in excess of the maximum provided by this law. 
(2)  Service connected disability pension. Any regular employee (male or female) of Floyd County who shall be permanently and totally disabled in the performance of his duty as such employee, by accidental injuries suffered while engaged and while acting in the scope of his employment may be granted a pension to be paid monthly by Floyd County, in an amount not to exceed one-half the "average monthly salary or wage," as defined herein, paid to such employee by said Floyd County; provided, however, that such pension shall in no event exceed the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month; provided, further, that the permanent and total disability aforesaid shall be established by the sworn written statements of at least two (2) competent, reputable and practicing physicians of Floyd County, one (1) of whom shall be a regularly appointed county physician; and provided further that said commissioners aforesaid in regular meeting assembled shall vote by a majority of said board in favor of granting said pension and retirement pay to such employee and such action of said board shall be spread upon [entered on] the minutes of said board. The pension provided for in this paragraph may be granted irrespective of the term of service of such employee. 
(3)  Partial pension for disability from other cause after ten years of service. Any such employee who is not otherwise entitled to a pension under this law and who has been in the active service and on the payroll of said county for ten (10) years or more (of which said service three (3) years or more must have been immediately preceding the right to have benefits under this Act) and whose health during said period of service becomes totally and permanently impaired to the extent of being unable to perform his duties by reason of injury, ill health, age or infirmity, shall be entitled to retire and to receive as a pension to be paid monthly an amount proportionate to the total number of whole years of service to the county by such employee. Said amount shall be calculated as a fractional part of one-half the average monthly salary. The denominator of such proportion shall be twenty-five (25) in all cases, and the numerator shall be such arabic figure not to exceed twenty-five (25) as denotes the number of whole years of service of such employee to the county. If such employee at the time of applying for such disability pension has spent twenty-five (25) years or more in the service of Floyd County, the amount of such disability pension shall be 25/25 of one-half of the average monthly salary or wage of such member as defined by this Act, but not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month in any instance. To illustrate, an employee whose health becomes totally and permanently impaired after eleven (11) years of service (of which years of service the three (3) last years had been continuous) and otherwise qualified under this Act, whose average monthly salary or wage if one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) per month, would be entitled to a pension of 11/25 of one-half of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00) per month, that is, a pension in the amount of thirty-eight dollars and fifty cents ($38.50) per month. No pension shall exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. 
Said disability pension for disability after ten (10) years or more of service shall be paid without regard to the age of the applicant and for the period provided by this Act. 
(4)  Payment of disability pension conditional on continuance of disability. Any disability pension provided by any section of this Act for disability from any cause, that is, either the service-connected disability pension or the disability pension allowed after ten (10) years or more of service (of which ten (10) years the last three (3) years or more of service must have been continuous as herein defined) shall be allowed and paid to a disabled member only during the continuance of such disability as defined by this Act. If a question should arise at any time as to the continuance of such disability and the eligibility for that reason of the pensioner to continue to receive a pension, then such question of disability shall be determined as set out in the remainder of this section. 
For the purpose of ascertaining whether or not disability of a pensioner continues, the board of commissioners shall from time to time be authorized to investigate and inquire into the physical condition of such pensioner and (if said board deems it advisable) have such pensioner examined by the county physician and to make a new finding based upon such examination and the evidence regarding continuance of disability. In passing upon any question of continuance of disability, said board of commissioners may receive and consider the reports and recommendations of physicians who have examined the pensioner, and either party shall have the right to submit medical and other competent evidence on the question of continuance of disability as herein defined, and the judgment of the board upon this issue shall be entered on the minutes of the board. The pensioner may appeal from the judgment of the board, by filing written exceptions thereto with the clerk of the board within ten (10) days from the date of said judgment. Upon the filing of such exception, the question of continuance of disability shall be arbitrated by three (3) licensed physicians of this state, one (1) of whom shall be selected by the pensioner, one (1) by said board and the third by the two (2) physicians so chosen by the pensioner and the board. Such arbitrators shall have the right to examine the pensioner and hear evidence upon the question of continuance of disability to the same extent as the board of commissioners, and the written report of said arbitrators or a majority of them upon the question of continuance of disability duly returned to the board of commissioners and entered on its minutes shall constitute a final judgment upon the issue as to whether such disability then exists. If, upon such investigation, it should be determined by the board of commissioners or by the arbitrators as herein provided that such disability or impairment of health has ceased then no further pension or retirement benefit shall be paid or payable to such pensioner or his beneficiary herein named based upon the same disability. 
In the event any regular employee of the county is lawfully receiving at the time of his or her death, any pension hereinabove provided for in this section, and shall have received the same for less than ten (10) years, and shall leave a spouse surviving, then and in that event only said pension shall continue to be paid to such spouse until the death or remarriage of such spouse or until the expiration of ten (10) years from the date of the first payment of said pension to said employee, whichever occurs first. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 5; Ga. L. 1952, p. 2494; Ga. L. 1965, p. 3261) 
Sec. 1-5-25. - Death benefits. 
Should any employee who has contributed to said pension fund the contributions required by section 1-5-27 of said Act be hereafter killed in the performance of duty as such employee, then his surviving widow (and in the event he has no surviving widow, his "qualified minor child [children]" as defined in this Act) shall be eligible and entitled to receive as a pension a sum equivalent to fifty (50) percent of the "average monthly salary or wage" (as defined by said Act) of such employee except that such pension to a surviving widow or minor children shall not exceed the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per month in any instance. 
Said pension to a surviving widow shall be paid to her only during her natural life or widowhood and upon her death or remarriage, continued to the "qualified minor children" of such deceased employee, to be distributed equally among them until the youngest child attains the age of eighteen (18) years. 
The term "surviving widow" as used in this section refers to and includes only a surviving widow who has been the wife of a deceased employee for a period of five (5) years prior to his retirement, or for a period of five (5) years prior to the time which [when] such employee was entitled to retire, or a period of five (5) years prior to the death of such pensioner, and who remains [un]married. 
The term "qualified minor children," shall refer to and include only the surviving minor child or children of a deceased employee who are unmarried and not more than seventeen (17) years of age. Upon marriage or upon attainment by a qualified minor child of the age of eighteen (18) years, such child's interest in any pension payable under said Act or any amendment thereto shall cease and terminate. Any pension payable to the "qualified minor children" of a deceased employee shall be distributed in equal shares for the benefit of all children within that class, as herein defined and same may be paid either to the person having custody or control of such minor children or to their legal guardian. In the event of the death or marriage or attainment of the age of eighteen (18) years by one (1) of several minor children entitled to share in a pension under this law, said pension shall be distributed among the remaining eligible minor children entitled to receive same as long as there remains a minor child of such deceased employee unmarried and under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 6; Ga. L. 1952, p. 2492) 
Sec. 1-5-26. - Employee contributions. 
All present employees of Floyd County who may come under this Act, as hereinabove set out and as hereafter set out and who shall be eligible for a pension under the terms hereof, shall from and after the first day of July 1951, contribute three (3) percent of his or her monthly salary but not exceeding six dollars ($6.00) per month to the pension fund of said county. Said eligible present employees shall elect in writing during the sixty-day period before July 1, 1951, whether or not he or she shall come under the provisions of this Act. To be eligible for such pensions as herein provided for, such employees must contribute said three (3) percent of his or her monthly salary or wage but not exceeding six dollars ($6.00) per month from July 1, 1951. Employees hired after July 1, 1951, shall elect in writing whether or not he or she shall come under the provisions of this Act within thirty (30) days from the date of such employment. Should any employee elect not to come under the provisions of this Act, then subsequently elects to come under the provisions of this Act, such employee must pay into said fund an amount equal to three (3) percent of the amount not in excess of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month paid him or her by the county as salary since July 1, 1951, plus six (6) percent interest on said pension fund payment for one-half the time since July 1, 1951, or the date of his or her employment, whichever is later. An employee electing not to come under the provisions hereof shall not be allowed subsequently to elect to come under the provisions hereof after he or she has become otherwise qualified for any pension provided herein. Said pension fund shall be paid over to the trustees of the Floyd County Employees' Pension Fund, as hereinafter provided, as a trust fund for said employees who come under this Act and who may contribute to the same. Said pension fund shall be managed and administered by said trustees subject to the direction of the commissioners for Floyd County, Georgia. Should the employment by said county and the service to said county by any employee who has contributed to said fund terminate for any reason other than death, retirement or disability, then seventy-five (75) percent of the amount of his or her contribution to said pension fund shall be returned to said employee; provided such employee makes claim for the same within twelve (12) months after the termination of his or her employment; and provided, further, that at the time of such termination of his or her employment no pension has ever been granted to such employee. Should any employee of Floyd County, whose employment and service to Floyd County has terminated, be paid the amount hereby authorized to be paid to such employee, he or she shall not be eligible for a pension again unless and until such employee repays into such pension fund the amount that was heretofore withdrawn by him or her from said fund, plus six (6) percent interest on such amount from the date of such withdrawal. After an employee is granted and begins to receive a pension, such employee shall no longer be required to contribute to the pension fund, until said pension terminates. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 7; Ga. L. 1952, p. 2494) 
Sec. 1-5-27. - Deductions for, garnishment or assignment of, contributions. 
From and after July 1, 1951, it shall be lawful for the said Floyd County to deduct from the monthly salary of the employees who are eligible to receive pensions under this Act, and who elect in writing to come under the provisions of said Act, three (3) percent of said monthly salary but not exceeding six dollars ($6.00) per month and place the same with the said trustees as a pension fund aforesaid. The amount or amounts of money which each of said employees thus contributes to said pension fund and which is thus deducted from the salary of said employee shall not be subject to garnishment or other process, nor shall it be subject to assignment by said employee. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 8; Ga. L. 1952, p. 2494) 
Sec. 1-5-28. - Government contributions. 
There shall be appropriated by said board of commissioners from the funds of the county and paid to said trustees for said pension fund each year a sum equal to one-half of all payments or contributions made to such pension fund by employees of the county during such year, and said board of commissioners is hereby specifically authorized to levy a tax for Floyd County for such purpose. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 9; Ga. L. 1952, p. 2494) 
Sec. 1-5-29. - Computation of the length of service. 
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to deprive any present employee of Floyd County, of the number of years of service in the employ of said county which he or she has to his or her credit in determining the right of such employee to a pension at any time hereafter. The number of years which any employee of said county who is eligible to [for] a pension and who comes under the provisions of this Act, has heretofore served in the employ of Floyd County, shall be preserved and shall be counted and computed to his or her credit and in his or her behalf when said employee applies for a pension under the terms of this Act and under any of the classes herein established. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 10) 
Sec. 1-5-30. - Employees included. 
The employees who come under the terms of this Act and who are to receive the benefits of this Act are such employees of Floyd County who are not members of or eligible for any other retirement benefit plan, pension benefit plan, or social security benefit plan, other than the Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund of Georgia; and it is intended that this Act shall be optional in its application to such eligible employees as in this section named, that is, the employees employed by and compensated by Floyd County, Georgia. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 11; Ga. L. 1952, p. 2492) 
Sec. 1-5-31. - Involuntary retirement. 
As to any of the employees that come under the terms of this Act, upon their reaching the age of sixty-five (65) years and that have served twenty-five (25) years with the county, whether continuous or not, they may be retired by said board of commissioners for Floyd County, Georgia, whether said employees desire to retire or not, and receive on such retirement thereafter for the balance of the term of their natural lives the same monthly pension pay that they would be entitled to had they voluntarily applied for retirement. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 12) 
Sec. 1-5-32. - Right or option to participate. 
It is intended by this section to grant to such of the personnel as are described in section 1-5-31 hereof, the right, or option, to contribute three (3) percent of his or her salary but not exceeding six dollars ($6.00) per month to such pension fund and to come under the provisions and terms of this Act. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 13; Ga. L. 1952, p. 2492) 
Sec. 1-5-33. - Rules and regulations authorized. 
The commissioners for Floyd County shall have authority and power to enact by ordinance, resolution or other formal action, any and all reasonable rules and regulations which it may deem necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this Act with reference to pensions and retirement fund. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 14) 
Sec. 1-5-34. - Pension to cease on other employment, when. 
From and after the passage of this Act, if any employee of Floyd County, after having been placed on the pension roll of Floyd County and being granted a pension under the terms of this Act and rules and regulations hereunder, does thereafter become an employee of any department of the government, whether national, state, municipal or county, then and in that event his or her said pension ceases, and it shall be unlawful for any pension to be thereafter paid to said employee; nor shall it be lawful for the governing authorities of Floyd County to thereafter revive and recommence to pay said pension under any circumstance; provided that an employee who receives a disability pension from Floyd County, and is reemployed by Floyd County upon termination of his disability, then he shall be eligible, upon compliance with the provisions herein, to again come under the provisions of this Act. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 15) 
Sec. 1-5-35. - Date system operative. 
The commissioners for Floyd County be and they are authorized to commence collections of the monthly amount to be paid by said employees from said employees from and after July 1, 1951, and to commence the retirement and payment of pensions from and after January 1, 1952. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 16) 
Sec. 1-5-36. - Pension fund trustees. 
Said board of commissioners shall appoint three (3) adult citizens and residents of Floyd County, Georgia, as trustees of the Floyd County Employees' Pension Fund and each shall serve for a term of three (3) years and thereafter until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Said trustees shall take and subscribe an oath to well and truly perform the duties of their office and shall give a fidelity bond, with good and ample security, to be approved by said board, payable to Floyd County, Georgia, in an amount to be fixed by the board from time to time, the premium for which shall be paid from said pension fund. Said trustees shall be the custodians of said pension fund, and shall receive the payments and contributions thereto hereinbefore provided for. All pension funds now in the hands of the treasurer of Floyd County shall be paid by him to said trustees promptly upon their appointment and qualification, and said trustees shall issue to said treasurer their receipt for such funds, which receipt shall be a full and complete discharge of said treasurer from any and all liability and responsibility for such funds. 
All pensions hereinbefore provided for to be paid by Floyd County or from the pension fund shall be paid from the funds in the hands of said trustees, subject to the direction of said board of commissioners as hereinbefore provided. Said trustees shall have the right, power and authority to invest any funds in their hands in any property in which existing laws permit trustees to invest trust funds, and additionally in valid warrants issued by Floyd County, Georgia. Said trustees may invest and reinvest said funds, and sell any property in which the same are invested, at public sale, without the order of any court, with or without advertising and upon such terms and at such times as the board of commissioners of said county may direct. 
Said trustees shall make an accounting and return of all of the funds and investments in their hands, and of all of their acts and doings, to the board of commissioners of said county at its regular meetings in January, April, July and October of each year. 
Any trustee may be removed from office for malfeasance at any time by action of said board. 
(Ga. L. 1951, p. 2746, § 20; Ga. L. 1952, p. 2492) 
Chapter 1-6 - FINANCE AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Tax commissioner, § 1-3-21 et seq., as to finance, county property and taxes, see also Ch. 2-9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-6-1. - County audit. 
(a)  From and after the passage of this Act, it shall be the duty of the board of commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia, to conduct an annual audit of the finances, financial records and books of Floyd County, in accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth. 
(b)  The board of commissioners of Floyd County shall on or before January thirty-first, annually, employ a certified public accountant or firm of certified public accountants who shall have practiced as such in the State of Georgia under certificates issued by this state for at least two (2) years, for the making of an annual audit of finances, financial records and books of the board of commissioners of Floyd County, and the county treasurer [official performing duties of a treasurer] and county comptroller of Floyd County. The board of commissioners of Floyd County may also engage said certified public accountant or firm of certified public accountants to make an audit of the finances, financial records and books of such other county offices and officers at such time as they see fit. 
(c)  The accountant so employed shall make the audit provided for herein in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and shall perform a complete audit for the preceding year and shall point out any irregularity found to exist. 
(d)  Each annual audit submitted to the board of commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia, shall be filed with the clerk of the board, and shall be available for public inspection as other records in such office. The board shall cause to be published in the official organ of Floyd County, in which the sheriff's advertisements regularly appear, and posted at the courthouse door a summary of each such audit. Said accountant shall transmit to the grand jury of the superior court of Floyd County, which convenes immediately preceding the completion of said audit, a copy of each audit prepared and furnished to the board of commissioners of Floyd County. 
(e)  The compensation of such certified public accountant or firm of certified public accountants shall be fixed by agreement between the board of commissioners and the certified public accountant or firm of certified public accountants selected to make such audit. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 2872) 
State Law reference— Publication of annual financial statements, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-6; audit, §§ 36-1-10, 36-81-7 et seq. 
Sec. 1-6-2. - Buying or selling by persons in county government. 
No member of the board of commissioners, and no county warden or warden of the correctional institution or county manager or superintendent, or clerk of the board shall buy or sell to the County of Floyd anything whatsoever, either directly or indirectly; and no corporation, firm, or partnership in which such officials or any of them are financially interested shall buy from or sell to said county any property of any kind or character. 
(Ga. L. 1931, p. 467, § 4) 
Cross reference— Criminal provisions in § 1-1-1 also apply. 
State Law reference— See O.C.G.A. §§ 16-10-6, 36-1-14. 
Sec. 1-6-3. - Uniform accounting and bookkeeping system—Required. 
In all counties of this state having a population of not less than eighty thousand (80,000) and not more than eighty-five thousand (85,000) according to the United States decennial census of 1990 or any such future census, the governing authorities thereof shall adopt a uniform central bookkeeping and accounting system which shall be based upon sound and acceptable accounting and bookkeeping procedures. After the adoption of such accounting and bookkeeping procedures by the governing authorities, all departments of the county government and all elected officials and employees thereof charged with the responsibility of administering or handling any county funds shall amend their accounting and bookkeeping systems and procedures so as to conform to the central accounting and bookkeeping systems which have been adopted by the governing authorities of such counties. 
(Ga. L. 1967, p. 2969, § 1; Ga. L. 1992, p. 2337, § 1) 
Sec. 1-6-4. - Same—Penalty for failure to follow. 
The head of any department of the county government or elected official charged with the responsibility of administering or handling county funds and which shall fail or refuse to conform to the central accounting and bookkeeping system adopted by the governing authorities of such counties shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Ga. L. 1967, p. 2969, § 2) 
Secs. 1-6-5—1-6-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUDGET[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1-6-20. - Definitions. 
These terms when used in this Act shall have the following definitions: 
(a)  "Authorities" shall mean the commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia. 
(b)  "Budget officer" shall mean the clerk of the commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia, if selected by a majority of the members of the commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia, or the person designated by a majority of the commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia. 
(c)  "Budget commission" as provided in this Act shall mean the chairman of the commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia, or his designated appointee, and the comptroller of Floyd County, Georgia and the superintendent of public works of Floyd County, Georgia and the budget officer as referred to in subsection (b) of this section. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 3040, § 1) 
Sec. 1-6-21. - Fiscal year; budget preparation by budget commission. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the county shall begin on the first day of January and continue through the thirty-first day of December. On the third Wednesday of November at a public meeting called for said purpose by the authorities, the budget officer shall submit to the authorities a budget certified by the budget commission containing the financial plan for the conduct of the affairs of the county for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by an explanatory message in detail and may include recommendations as to capital projects to be undertaken by the authorities within the ensuing fiscal year and within the five (5) succeeding years. 
(b)  In the preparation of the budget, the budget commission through the budget officer or an officer designated by him shall, at such date as he shall determine, obtain from the head of each office, department or agency, which is not a constitutionally established office or agency, estimates of revenue and expenditures of that office, department or agency, detailed by organization units and character and object of expenditures and such other supporting data as he may request; together with an estimate of all capital projects pending of which such department head believes should be undertaken: (1) within the next fiscal year, and (2) within the five (5) next succeeding years. 
(c)  The budget commission through the budget officer or an officer designated by him shall discuss the head of each constitutionally established office and agency, and seek to obtain the same information required of the head of each office, department or agency hereinabove and seek the enlightened support of all such constitutionally established offices and agencies with the understanding that such constitutionally established offices and agencies are related arms of the state and cannot fail to carry out legal responsibility because of some budget limitation. 
(d)  The budget commission shall review the estimates, may hold hearings thereon and may revise the estimates, as they [it] may deem advisable and shall approve the budget, explanatory message, and recommendations before submission to the authorities by the budget officer. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 3040, § 2) 
Sec. 1-6-22. - Budget contents. 
The budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year and shall include, but not be limited to: (a) detailed estimate of all anticipated revenue applicable to proposed expenditures, (b) proposed expenditures with enumeration of debt service requirements, appropriations required by statute and other purposes, and (c) comparative data on the last completed fiscal year and actual and estimated data for the current fiscal year. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 3040, § 3) 
Sec. 1-6-23. - Anticipated revenues. 
The budget commission shall include in its anticipation for the next fiscal year a sum not to exceed the actual revenue collected by the county from all sources during the period from January first to November first of the current year and the estimated revenue for the remainder of the current year, provided that there may be added to such anticipations a sum equal to not more than eighty-five (85) percent of all tax executions on real estate and fifty (50) percent on tax executions on personal property not more than three (3) years old and choses in action owned by the county and certified by the tax commissioner of Floyd County, as being solvent and collectible. Actual revenue shall include income of a recurring nature but shall not include the proceeds from the sale of real estate or from insurance thereon, nor shall actual revenue include any surplus or unencumbered or unappropriated cash balances carried forward from one (1) fiscal year to the next. However, in the preparation of the budget there shall be added to the anticipated revenues the amount anticipated as being available the next year from surplus, unencumbered or unappropriated funds but when the actual amount of funds aforementioned is known, the budget shall be adjudged accordingly. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 3040, § 4) 
Sec. 1-6-24. - First appropriations; priorities. 
The first appropriations shall provide funds sufficient to cover the debt and cost of financing debt service in full, including interest and the sinking fund requirements of any outstanding indebtedness, which funds shall not be diverted to any other purpose. The limitation on the authorities of the amount to be appropriated for public works and other purposes defined in an act relating to the county road system in certain counties approved February 21, 1951 (Ga. L. 1951, p. 765 et seq.), shall continue in full force and effect. Provision shall be made for any appropriation required by law to a hospital or other public agency or subdivision or [of] government. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 3040, § 5) 
Sec. 1-6-25. - Budget to be public record; balanced budget. 
The budget as submitted and all supporting data shall be a public record open to inspection by anyone and shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the authorities for such purpose. The authorities shall consider the budget submitted as hereinbefore provided at the regular meeting the first Tuesday in December, which shall be a public meeting. Should the authorities desire to propose changes; increase or decrease items of the budget, or otherwise revise the budget as submitted, such proposals shall be announced and recorded at said meeting; provided, however, the total expenditures, including the changes, shall at no time exceed the total of the anticipated revenue as certified by the budget commission to the authorities. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 3040, § 6) 
Sec. 1-6-26. - Budget adoption; publication. 
The budget shall be finally adopted by the authorities at, or before the adjournment of, their second regular meeting for the month of January, which shall be a public meeting, and upon adoption it shall relate back to the first of the year and shall cover the full fiscal year. Within one (1) week after the adoption of the budget a summary thereof shall be published in the newspaper in which sheriff's advertisements appear. A copy of the budget as finally adopted shall be certified by the budget commission and shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the authorities. The budget so certified shall be printed, mimeographed or otherwise reproduced and sufficient copies thereof shall be made available for the use of all officers, department and agency heads, and for the use of the public. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 3040, § 7) 
Sec. 1-6-27. - Special revision. 
In the event of a change in the personnel of the authorities between the December meeting referred to in section 1-6-25 and the January meeting referred to in section 1-6-26, a public meeting of the authorities may be called in January prior to the second regular January meeting, at which called meeting the proposed budget may be considered and revised in all respects as fully as it could at said December meeting. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 3040, § 8) 
Sec. 1-6-28. - Budget amendments. 
The budget so adopted shall not be changed or altered during the fiscal year, except as to constitutionally created offices and agencies, and the authorities may not vary the titles, descriptions or conditions of administration specified in the budget, except in the manner provided hereinafter. Any proposal to insert any additional item, increase or decrease any item or appropriation, transfer any item or to revise the budget in any particular shall be made only at a regular meeting of the authorities. The authorities shall have no authority to transfer funds set aside for debt service or for the payment of outstanding obligations to any other purpose until all such obligations are paid. Should the anticipated income of the county be either increased or decreased by law or by a change in the tax rate or in the assessed value of property subject to taxation, the budget commission shall within a period of ten (10) days certify to the authorities the amount of the new budget for the balance of the fiscal year and such authorities, upon certification by the budget commission, shall adjust the budget accordingly. However, should any property of the county be damaged or destroyed by fire, windstorm or other casualty, the authorities may appropriate at any time for the restoration of such property any amount realized from insurance thereon, but any additional appropriations shall comply with the formalities herein provided. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 3040, § 9) 
Sec. 1-6-29. - Exclusions and exceptions. 
This Act shall not affect the expenditure of any monies derived from bonds that are issued and sold by the authorities in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia, nor does it prohibit the appropriation of funds for the support of a hospital authority as provided by law or any other appropriation provided by law. Nothing herein shall be construed to restrain or limit the authorities in the amount of taxes that may be levied by them which are otherwise authorized by law. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 3040, § 10) 
Sec. 1-6-30. - Publication of certain expenditures. 
At least two (2) weeks prior to the approval by the authorities of a cash expenditure for materials or an independent contract for services for any permanent improvement on public works, or the purchase or sale of real property for any purpose, except the acquisition of real property through condemnation proceedings or through the use of bond funds for projects financed through bond funds, the estimated expenditure for such purposes being in excess of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), a description of such project and the estimated cost for such purposes, shall be published one (1) time by advertisement in a newspaper in the county in which the sheriff's advertisements are published. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 3040, § 11) 
Sec. 1-6-31. - Salaries to be budgeted. 
The budget prepared in accordance with this Act shall fix the salaries and expenses of all officers and employees of the county, except those now fixed by legislative enactment. 
(Ga. L. 1966, p. 3040, § 12) 
Secs. 1-6-32—1-6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PURCHASING CARD AND CREDIT CARD ORDINANCE FOR FLOYD COUNTY ELECTED OFFICIALS 

Sec. 1-6-51. - Intent and scope. 
This article is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of county-issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(Ord. No. 2016-001A, 1-26-16) 
Sec. 1-6-52. - Definitions. 
"Authorized elected official" means an elected official designated by public vote of the board of commissioners to receive a county-issued government purchasing card or credit card. 
"Card administrator" means the purchasing card and credit card administrator designated by the Floyd Board of Commissioners, see O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c)(6). 
"County" means Floyd County and/or the board of commissioners. 
"County purchase card," "county p-card" or "county credit card" means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a county official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of the county. 
"Financial transaction card" means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
"User agreement" means the required agreement between the board of commissioners and the authorized elected officials which restricts the use of a county purchasing card or credit card, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c)(2). 
(Ord. No. 2016-001A, 1-26-16) 
State Law reference— The board of commissioners is required to designate a purchasing card or credit card administrator, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c)(6). 
Sec. 1-6-53. - Designated elected officials. 
(a)  The Floyd County Board of Commissioners ("county"), in its discretion, may authorize specific county elected officials to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting, see O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c). 
(b)  No authorized elected official may use a county purchasing card or credit card until, and unless, he or she has executed the county's purchasing card and credit card user agreement, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c)(2). 
(c)  The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official to any purchasing cards or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this article or for any purchases that are not authorized by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-001A, 1-26-16) 
State Law reference— Requiring the board of commissioners to designate the elected officials authorized to use a county purchasing or credit card through a public vote, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c). 
Sec. 1-6-54. - Card administrator. 
The board of commissioners shall designate a county purchasing card and a credit card administrator. The responsibilities of the card administrator(s) include: (The board of commissioners is required to designate a card administrator, but the duties of the card administrator are not specified by law. These are sample duties of a card administrator. Each county should tailor the duties of their card administrator to fit within the structure of its government and the requirements of the organization or institution issuing the cards to the county.) 
(1)  Manage county-issued purchasing cards and/or credit cards. 
(2)  Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and credit card issues. 
(3)  Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card or credit card. 
(4)  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
(5)  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
(6)  Assist authorized elected officials to dispute transactions when necessary. 
(7)  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this ordinance, county procurement ordinances and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(8)  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(9)  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
(10)  Maintain records for at least seven (7) years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. (Unless the county has adopted its own record retention schedule, it is subject to the retention schedule for local government paper and electronic records adopted by the state records committee. The retention schedule for local government paper and electronic records requires records documenting administration of credit cards to be kept for at least seven (7) years.) 
(Ord. No. 2016-001A, 1-26-16) 
Sec. 1-6-55. - Use of cards. 
(a)  Authorized purchases. 
(1)  County purchase cards and credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this article, the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, county procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. (O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37(b) and 36-80-24(c)(4) requires that the county describe in writing the types of purchases that are "authorized." The law only proscribes that the purchases must be for items and services directly related to the elected officials public duties and that they comply with the county's policy and user agreement, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-80-24(a) and (c). This paragraph is a sample of what could be included as authorized purchases. Each county should tailor this provision to meet the needs of its government.) 
(2)  Only authorized elected officials may use a county purchase card or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferrable to employees. The authorized elected official shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
(3)  Unless otherwise approved by the governing authority or established in the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement, the transaction limits are as follows: (O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37(b) and 36-80-24(c)(3) require that the county adopt written transaction limits. The transaction limits could be a maximum dollar amount or a maximum number of transactions per day, per month, per year.) 

 
(b)  Unauthorized purchases. County purchasing cards and credit cards shall not be used for goods and services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's purchasing ordinances and procedures, to purchase goods and services that are not approved in the county's budget, to purchase goods and services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the county purchasing card and credit card user agreement. (O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c)(5) requires that the county describe the types of purchases that are "not authorized." This paragraph is a sample of what could be included as unauthorized purchases. Each county should tailor this provision to meet the needs of its government. Specific consideration should be given to the county's travel policies, reimbursement policies, cash advances, entertainment, alcohol, tobacco, fuel, software, computers, apps, gift cards, etc.) 
(c)  Receipts and documentation. Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card or credit card shall be obtained and maintained by the authorized county elected official for five (5) years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. (Unless the county has adopted its own record retention schedule, it is subject to the retention schedule for local government paper and electronic records adopted by the state records committee. Accounts payable files must be kept for five (5) years.) If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. 
(d)  Public records. All receipt and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. See O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(b). 
(Ord. No. 2016-001A, 1-26-16) 
State Law reference— Any official that destroys records for the purpose of preventing their disclosure can be prosecuted for a felony punishable by two (2) to ten (10) years in a state prison, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-6-56. - Review of purchases and audit. 
Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection to misuse or abuse of county-issued purchase cards and credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the procedures established by the county. 
(1)  Review of purchases. All purchases shall be reviewed according to the following procedure: See procurement card policy. 
____________________________________________  ____________________________________________  ____________________________________________  ____________________________________________  ____________________________________________  ____________________________________________ 
(O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c)(7) requires the county to establish a procedure where purchases are reviewed. To ensure timely and proper payment by the county of the charges each month, the county needs to establish a procedure for the elected officials to turn in documentation to the card program administrator or other person processing accounts payable for the county.) 
(2)  Audits. The card administrator(s) shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and staff shall cooperate with such review. (The law requires an audit and review of purchases made with a p-card or credit card. The law does not specify who performs the audit. Depending upon whether the card program administrator has a card, the county may wish to appoint another person or outside auditor to audit the program.) 
(Ord. No. 2016-001A, 1-26-16) 
State Law reference— A process for auditing and review must be developed, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c)(7). 
Sec. 1-6-57. - Violations. 
(a)  An elected official shall reimburse the county for any purchases made with a county-issued purchase card or credit card in violation of this article or the user agreement. (O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c)(8) requires the county to establish a procedure to deal with purchase card and credit card policy violations, including revoking card privileges. Some policies allow for small infractions to result in a warning, while larger or multiple infractions to result in suspension or termination of p-card or credit card privileges.) 
(b)  In the discretion of the county governing authority, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this article may result in: 
(1)  A warning; 
(2)  Suspension of the elected official's authority to use a county purchase card or credit card; or 
(3)  Revocation of the elected official's authority to use a county i [county-issued] purchase card or credit card. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall preclude the county governing authority from referring misuse of a purchase card or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 2016-001A, 1-26-16) 
Secs. 1-6-58—1-6-80. - Reserved. 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 2-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2-1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances, resolutions and other enactments embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, Floyd County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 2-1-2. - Specific rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of commissioners: 
General. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Commission. The terms "commission," "county commission," "board of commissioners," "governing authority," and "governing body," shall mean the board of commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years, or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. section 1-1-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Floyd County, Georgia, unless otherwise indicated. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears, requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. The one (1) gender includes the feminine and the other genders. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to three (3) or more persons may be executed by a majority of them. 
Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. The singular or plural number each includes the other. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Officers, departments. Whenever titles of various officers, departments or other agencies are used, they shall refer to the persons holding such offices, departments or agencies of Floyd County, Georgia; and shall include their duly authorized subordinates and representatives. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The word "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as such person's place of habitation, and to which, whenever such person is absent, such person has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one (1) place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed such person's residence. 
Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street or road between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street, road. The word "street" or "road" shall mean the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense includes the future. 
Week. The word "week" shall mean seven (7) days. 
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1002) 
State Law reference— "Sidewalk" and "street" defined, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1. 
Sec. 2-1-3. - Statutory rules of construction. 
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, the same rules shall be applied in construing provisions of this Code, and ordinances, resolutions and motions of the board of commissioners as are applied in construing the statutes of this state, which rules are found in O.C.G.A. sections 1-3-1 through 1-3-3, and the same meanings are to be given words appearing in this Code as are given similar words found in the statutes of this state. 
Sec. 2-1-4. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1003) 
Sec. 2-1-5. - Effective date of ordinances and resolutions. 
Ordinances and resolutions which do not provide for their taking effect at a different time, shall take effect immediately after their passage, or as otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 2-1-6. - Amendments; new provisions. 
(a)  All ordinances and resolutions passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances and resolutions, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Floyd County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: …. " The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Floyd County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows: …. " The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All subsections, sections, articles, or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by subsection, section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1006) 
Sec. 2-1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances and resolutions. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not revive any ordinance or resolution in force before or at the time the ordinance or resolution repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance or resolution shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance or resolution repealed, nor any right acquired or liability incurred under any ordinance or resolution repealed. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1004) 
Sec. 2-1-8. - Violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever herein the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, or as otherwise provided by the laws of this state. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance or resolution shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the county as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1008; Amend. of 5-11-93) 
State Law reference— Authority, O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60, 36-1-20; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-1-9. - Provisions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(5)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order relating to specific public improvements or assessments therefor. 
(6)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order providing for the levy or collection of taxes or for an annual budget or appropriations. 
(7)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order pertaining to zoning. 
(8)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order relating to the investment of county funds. 
(9)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion, order, rule or regulation prescribing regulations, compensation, positions, classification, and matters pertaining to county officers or employees, not inconsistent herewith. 
(10)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the county. 
(11)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order naming, renaming, opening, closing, prescribing grades, etc., of streets, roads, bridges and other public ways. 
(12)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order establishing utility connection charges, deposits, service charges or other charges not inconsistent with this Code. 
(13)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order creating, establishing, prescribing or abolishing housing authorities, urban renewal projects and minimum housing standards. 
(14)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order not inconsistent with this Code prescribing or providing traffic regulations at specific places, such as speed limits, through streets, stop intersections, yield intersections, one-way travel, no left turns, no right turns, traffic control by electrical devices, truck routes, loading zones, no parking zones and limited parking zones; this enumeration is not to be by way of exclusion. 
(15)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order pertaining to or providing for zoning or subdivision regulations, or airport hazard districts, not in conflict with this Code; or accepting any plat. 
(16)  Any ordinance, resolution, motion or order enacted after all such ordinances, resolutions, etc., are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 2-1-10. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code, and of codes or other provisions adopted by reference herein, are severable, and if any such phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section shall be declared invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code and provisions adopted by reference, since the same would have been enacted by the county commission without the incorporation therein of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1005) 
Sec. 2-1-11. - Applicability of Code. 
The provisions of this Code, unless otherwise clearly specified, shall apply only to the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 1979, § 10-1009) 
Sec. 2-1-12. - Applicable fees, charges and fines. 
All fees, charges and fines provided for in this Code shall be determined by reference to the Fee Schedule Book available for public inspection in the office of the county clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-27-92, § 1; Amend. of 7-13-99, § 1) 
Chapter 2-2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Structure, election, powers of governing body, § 1-2-1 et seq.; responsibilities and duties, etc., of county manager, § 1-3-1 et seq. 
State Law reference— County manager authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-2-1. - Minimum age for qualification to hold office. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 45-2-1(1), citizens of this state who have attained eighteen (18) years of age, and who are otherwise qualified under state law, shall be eligible to hold any elective county office, except offices of a judicial nature. 
(Code 1979, § 1-2001) 
Sec. 2-2-2. - Public meetings. 
(a)  All meetings of the board of commissioners, or any board, commission or other body of the county, shall be open to the public except that any meeting or portion thereof may be closed to the public for the following activities: 
(1)  Instructions to or receipt of information from an investigative staff; 
(2)  Discussions or negotiations on the acquisition of real estate; 
(3)  Discussions on county employee disciplinary action; 
(4)  Hearings or discussions on the discipline or removal of any public official unless the official requests that the meeting be open to the public, whereupon the meeting shall be open; 
(5)  Instructions to or legal advice and information from an attorney representing the county; or 
(6)  Discussion on any person's confidential tax matters. 
(b)  Members of any body covered by this section shall be allowed to bring with them in closed meetings of the body any county employees or officers each may deem necessary, provided such persons shall not divulge any information so gained without the permission of the full membership of that body and to divulge such information otherwise shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1979, § 1-1001) 
Annotation— Legislative committees do not take "official action" and therefore are exempt from the requirements of the "sunshine" law. Coggin v. Davey, 233 Ga. 407, 211 S.E. 2d 708(1975). 
State Law reference— Meetings of governing bodies to be public, O.C.G.A. § 36-08-1; "sunshine" law, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2-3. - Regular meeting times. 
The board of commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia shall meet not less often than once during each calendar month on such date and at such time as may be established by resolution of such board from time to time. 
(Code 1979, § 1-1002; Ord. of 1-26-93, § 1) 
Cross reference— Authority to set regular meetings by resolution, and calling special meetings, §§ 1-2-5, 1-2-6. 
Sec. 2-2-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Former § 2-2-4, which pertained to county clerk and deputy clerk, has been deleted at the request of the county. Such provisions derived from § 1-3002 of the county's 1979 Code. 
Sec. 2-2-5. - County attorney. 
(a)  There is hereby created the position of county attorney. The county attorney shall be appointed and removed at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. The county attorney shall be the chief legal officer of the county and in such capacity the county attorney shall: 
(1)  Advise the board of commissioners, the county manager, the county clerk, sheriff, probate judge, tax commissioner, coroner, county development authority, county health department, merit board and other county officials and boards as may be proper in the discharge of their respective duties; 
(2)  Prepare the various orders of the board of commissioners necessary in making the various contracts which the board of commissioners must execute in behalf of the county and in other transactions in which the county engages. 
(b)  In the event of any conflict of interest between the board of commissioners and any other county officer, other person or authorities, the county attorney shall advise the board of commissioners exclusively. 
(Code 1979, § 1-3003) 
Secs. 2-2-6—2-2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY DEPARTMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Tax commissioner, § 1-3-21 et seq.; boards, commission and authorities, § 1-4-1 et seq.; personnel, § 1-5-1 et seq., Ch. 2-14; enumeration of subdivision of county government for purposes of nepotism prohibition, § 1-1-1; police officers, § 2-14-2 et seq. 

Sec. 2-2-20. - Public works department. 
A public works department is hereby created for the county. The department shall be composed of the superintendent and any other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the county manager, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the superintendent. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5001) 
Cross reference— Roads, streets and sidewalks, §§ 1-2-8 et seq., 2-16-1 et seq.; building maintenance, §§ 2-9-1, 2-16-1 et seq.; vehicle maintenance, § 2-9-2. 
Sec. 2-2-21. - Police department. 
A police department is hereby created for the county. The department shall be composed of a chief of police and any police officers or other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the county manager, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the chief of police. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5002) 
State Law reference— County police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2-22. - Water and sewer department. 
A water and sewer department is hereby created for the county. The department shall be composed of the superintendent and any other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the county manager, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the superintendent. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5003) 
Cross reference— Department's responsibility and liability, § 2-7-20 et seq. 
Sec. 2-2-23. - Department of indigent sick. 
A department of indigent sick is hereby created for the county. The department shall be composed of a director and any other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the county manager, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the director. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5004) 
Sec. 2-2-24. - Building inspection department. 
A building inspection department is hereby created for the county. The department shall be composed of a chief inspector and any other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the county manager, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the chief inspector. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5005) 
Cross reference— Enforcement and organization, § 2-6-1; technical codes, § 2-6-3; zoning, Ch. 2-19; subdivision regulations, App. A. 
Sec. 2-2-25. - County correctional institution. 
A county correctional institution is hereby created for the county. The department shall be composed of a warden and any other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the county manager, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the warden. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5006) 
Sec. 2-2-26. - Animal control department. 
There is hereby created the county animal control department, which shall have primary responsibility for animal control and welfare in the county. The director of the animal control department shall be appointed by the county manager and shall serve at the county manager's pleasure. The director may also be designated by the board of health as the official rabies control officer for the county. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4005(a), (b); Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Cross reference— Duties of director, § 2-5-6. 
Chapter 2-3 - AIRPORT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1999-005A, adopted Dec. 28, 1998, did not specifically amend the Code and has been included herein as superseding the provisions of Ch. 2-3, Arts. I and II. The former Art. I, §§ 2-3-1—2-3-27, and Art. II, §§ 2-3-30—2-3-49, pertained to the airport generally and the airport commission, respectively, and derived from Code 1979, §§ 8-3002—8-3016, 8-3021—8-3025; § 1 of an ordinance adopted June 24, 1997; and § 4 of an ordinance adopted Aug. 13, 1996. See the Code Comparative Table for further information. 

Sec. 2-3-1. - Definitions. 
When used in this chapter, the terms hereinafter set forth shall have the meanings prescribed: 
Air operations areas: Any area of an airport used or intended to be used for landing, takeoff or surface maneuvering of aircraft, including but not limited to runways, taxies, ramps and aprons. 
Aircraft: Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation and/or flight in the air. 
Airport: The Floyd County Airport, Richard B. Russell Airport at 304 Russell Field Road, in Floyd County, Georgia and including all of the lands and reservation contained therewith under the day to day management and supervision of the Floyd County Airport Commission and its duly appointed airport manager pursuant to the Ordinance of the board of commissioners of the county. 
Airport manager: The individual duly appointed by the county commission to perform the duties and functions assigned to such individual by the county airport commission. 
FAA: The Federal Aviation Administration. 
FARs: Federal aviation regulations promulgated by the Federal Aviation Administration pursuant to its authority under the Federal Aviation Act of 1958, as amended, and other applicable federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-2. - General rules. 
(a)  Conditions of airport use; liability: All users of and persons on the airport shall be governed by these regulations and by any emergency directives issued by the airport management pursuant to section 2-3-2. These regulations supersede all those previously published and are subject to change by the county airport commission. These regulations are not intended to amend, modify or supersede any provisions of the federal, state, and county or any specific contractual agreement of the county or city with which they may conflict and shall insofar as possible, be interpreted so that no such conflict shall exist. If any of these regulations become invalid or unenforceable due to a revision, then all other regulations shall nevertheless remain in effect. 
The owner, (county commission), obligates itself to operate the airport for the use and benefit of the public and to keep the airport open to the various types, kinds and classes of aeronautical use for which the airport facility is designed and intended to serve. The owner has established these rules to be met by all users so as to provide for the safe and efficient use of the airport and to otherwise protect the safety of persons and property both on the ground and in the air. 
It is understood that the landing area facilities constructed are primarily intended for the use of powered aircraft, the weights of which are not in excess of the published strengths of the paved surfaces concerned. Operations on these surfaces, of aircraft slightly in excess of the published pavement strengths, may be permitted on an infrequent basis with the permission of the airport manager. 
Considering the owner's obligation to keep the airport open to the public for aeronautical purposes, the airport facilities will not be used for nonaviation events which would conflict with its aeronautical use unless it is approved by the airport manager. 
The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create an obligation on the part of the user to obey all regulations herein provided and otherwise adopted by the owner. The right of using the airport and its facilities shall be conditioned on the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user, and the user shall release and hold harmless and indemnify the owner, its officers and employees, from any liability of loss resulting from such use, as well as claims of third persons to using the airport. 
The air traffic rules and aircraft operations regulations of the FAA, as in effect and all additions thereto, are made a part of these regulations as fully as if set forth herein. 
(b)  Amendments to rules and regulations: Future amendments, additions deletions or corrections to these rules and regulations may be promulgated by the county board of commissioners and shall be filed with the county commission and the county clerk. 
(c)  Special regulations, notices or directives: Special regulations, notices, memorandums or directives of an operational nature of interest to persons engaged in business with the airport shall be issued under the authority of these regulations. 
(d)  Emergency powers of the airport management: When an emergency exists at the airport the airport management is empowered to issue such direction and take such action which, within his discretion and judgment, is necessary or desirable to protect persons or property and expedite the operation of the airport. Such directives and actions of the airport manager shall have the force of a regulation hereunder so long as said emergency exists. 
(e)  Posting of rules and regulations: The airport manager and all fixed base operators at the airport shall post a copy of these rules and regulations in a conspicuous location for the use of employees and customers. 
(f)  Nonliability of the county and the county airport commission: The use of the airport and its facilities shall be at all times conditioned upon the assumption of full responsibility therefor by every person exercising or taking advantage of the use of. It shall be a further condition thereof that each person, as a consideration for the use of the airport and for its facilities, shall at all times release, hold harmless and indemnify the county and its agents and employees from any and all responsibility, liability, loss or damage, resulting to any such person, or responsibility, liability, loss or damage, resulting to any such person, or caused by or on his or her behalf, and incident to the manner in which the airport is operated, constructed or maintained, or served from within or without, or used from without. The use of the airport by any person for any purpose, or the paying of fees therefor, or the taking off or landing aircraft thereon, shall be itself an acknowledgment that such person accepts such privileges on the condition herein set forth. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-3. - General regulations. 
(a)  Public and tenant usage: All persons using the airport shall at all times abide by the following rules and regulations of this section. 
(b)  Advertising: No person or organization shall post, or display signs, advertisements, literature, circulars, pictures, sketches, drawings, or other forms of printed or written matter on the airport except with the prior written authorization of the airport manager and in such manner as he may prescribe. 
(c)  Solicitation: No person shall engage in any form of solicitation or offer merchandise or services for sale on the airport without obtaining prior written authorization from the airport manager. 
(d)  Alcohol: No person shall transport or consume alcohol on airport property without the express written permission of the airport manager. 
(e)  Disorderly conduct: No person shall be or become intoxicated or drunk, commit any disorderly, obscene or indecent act, or commit any act of nuisance, nor conduct or engage in any form of gambling on the airport. 
(f)  Sanitation: No person shall dispose of garbage, papers, refuse or other material on the airport except in the receptacles provided for that purpose; nor use a comfort station other than in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(g)  Preservation of property: No person shall destroy, injure, deface or disturb in any way any building, sign, equipment, marker or other structure, trees, flowers, lawn or other property on the airport; nor alter, make additions to, or erect any building or sign or make any excavations on the airport; nor willfully abandon any personal property on the airport. In addition to any other penalty provided in these rules, civil law provides that any such action be considered as a misdemeanor. Any person causing or liable for damage of any nature shall report such damage to the office of the airport manager and upon demand by such office, shall reimburse the county for the full amount of the damage. Anyone failing to comply with this regulation may be refused admittance to the airport until the county airport commission has been fully reimbursed for damage done or the offender has been prosecuted under civil law as necessary. 
(h)  Deadly weapons at public gatherings: No persons, except peace officers, duly authorized post office and airport employees or members of the Armed Forces of the United States on official duty, shall carry loaded or unloaded weapons on the airport property without permission from the airport manager. Nor shall any person store, keep, handle, use, dispense or transport at, in or upon the airport, any hazardous or dangerous articles (as defined by the department of transportation regulations for transportation of explosives or other dangerous articles), at such time or place or in such manner or condition as to endanger unreasonably or as to be likely to endanger unreasonably persons or property. 
(i)  Interfering or tampering with aircraft: No person shall interfere or tamper with any aircraft or put in motion the engine of such aircraft, or use any aircraft, aircraft parts, instruments or tools without permission from appropriate authorities. 
(j)  Restricted areas: No person shall enter any restricted area of the airport posted as being closed to the public without permission except: 
(1)  Persons assigned to duty therein; 
(2)  Persons authorized by the airport manager; 
(3)  Business representatives in the conduct of their affairs with the FBO or other tenants. 
(k)  Use of roads and walks: No person shall travel on the airport other than the roads, walks, or places provided for the particular class of traffic. No person shall occupy the roads or walks in such a manner as to hinder or obstruct their proper use. 
(l)  Use of shop areas: All shops, garages, equipment and facilities are expressly for the conduct of the owner's or lessee's business and operations. No persons other than employees of the owner or lessee shall make use of these facilities or loiter around such premises without individual and specific permission of the owner or lessee. 
(m)  Conduct of business or commercial activity: No person shall engage in any business or commercial activity of any nature whatsoever on the airport except with the approval of the county airport commission, and under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed. Persons conducting regular air operations from privately owned property adjacent to but not part of airport property shall be considered as conducting a commercial activity operation as defined in the minimum standards and subject to all provisions thereof. 
(n)  Aeronautical business activity; application, approval, compliance: 
(1)  Application: Any applicant wishing to establish an aeronautical activity on the airport shall be furnished a copy of these minimum standards, as amended, and shall make application in writing to the owner, setting forth in detail the following: 
a.  The name and address of the applicant. 
b.  The proposed land use, facility, and/or activity sought. 
c.  The names and the qualifications of the personnel to be involved in conducting such activity. 
d.  The financial responsibility and technical ability of the applicant and operator to carry out the activity sought. 
e.  The tools, equipment, services and inventory, if any, proposed to be furnished in connection with such activity. 
f.  The requested or proposed date for commencement of the activity and the term of conducting the same. 
g.  The estimated cost of any structure or facility to be furnished, the proposed specifications for same and the means or method of financing such construction or acquisition or facilities. 
(2)  Consideration: Upon the filing of such an application with the owner, it shall be immediately referred to the appropriate committee and considered at the next scheduled meeting. If no meeting is scheduled within thirty (30) days from the filling of such application, a meeting shall be called for considering same and notice shall be called for considering same and notice thereof given to the applicant. Upon consideration of the application, the owner shall determine whether or not the applicant meets the standards and qualifications as herein established and whether or not such application should be granted in whole or in part. 
(3)  Preparation of business agreement: Upon approval of any such application in principal, the owner shall cause to be prepared a suitable lease or contract agreement setting forth the terms and conditions under which the activity shall be conducted. 
(4)  Return of rejected application: Any rejected application shall be returned to the applicant within ten (10) days of the rejection with a written explanation of the reasons for rejection. 
(5)  Proof of financial solvency and business ability: All persons doing business at the airport must show financial solvency and business ability to the satisfaction of the owner. 
(6)  Public liability insurance: All persons doing business at the airport shall be required to obtain and keep in force at all times, during the conduct of such business at the airport, public liability insurance in the amounts provided by the written contract with the owner. 
(7)  Construction to comply with standards: All construction required herein shall be in accordance with design and construction standards established by the owner for the facility involved. 
(8)  Determination of conformance: The owner shall determine substantial conformance to the standards for fixed base operators. No fixed base operator shall be allowed to operate on the airport without a fully executed written lease agreement with the owner. 
(o)  Open flame operations: No person shall conduct any open-flame operations in any hangar or on the airport unless specifically authorized by the manager and in accordance with NFPA standards, excluding hot air balloons as defined in FAR 1-1 (General Definition). Smoking or lighting of an open flame is prohibited at places with posted signs, within fifty (50) feet of any aircraft and within fifty (50) feet of hangers, fuel trucks, or fuel-loading stations and tank farms. No person shall smoke, carry or possess a lighted item or equipment capable of causing an open flame, in or about any loading area, building or fueling area where appropriate signs to that effect have been posted. No person shall start any open fires of any type, including flare pots, torches or fires in containers formerly used for oil, paint and similar materials on any part of the airport without permission. 
(p)  Tobacco: No person shall smoke on the airport apron, in any hangar or shop, service station area, gasoline storage area, or in any building, room or place on the airport where tobacco is specifically prohibited by appropriate signage. 
(q)  Accidents: All persons involved in any accident; personal, aircraft, or automotive, occurring on the premises of the Richard B. Russell Airport shall advise the airport manager, make a report to the police department as soon as possible, giving all pertinent information as requested by the officer in charge, and comply with appropriate FAA and Georgia DOT reporting requirements. The pilot or operator of any aircraft involved in any accident shall be responsible for the prompt disposal of aircraft wrecked or disabled at the airport and parts of such aircraft as directed by the airport manager; in the event of failure to comply with such directions, such wrecked or disabled aircraft and parts may be removed by the airport manager at the operator's expense and without liability for damage which may result in the course of such removal. 
(r)  Picketing, marching, demonstrations: No person may walk in a picket line as a picket or take part in a labor or other public demonstration on any part of the airport except in or at a place specifically assigned by the airport manager for picket line or other permitted public demonstrations. Any such picketing shall be conducted in a peaceful and orderly manner, without physical harm, molestation, threat or harassment of persons, without violence, breach of the peace or any other unlawful conduct, without obstructing the use of the airport by others and without hindrance to or interference with the proper, safe and efficient operation of the airport, and the activities conducted thereon. All permits required by law for public demonstration shall be required for such demonstration on airport property. 
(s)  Use of sound-amplifying devices: Sound trucks and amplified audio machines shall be prohibited on the airport, except when required for special occasions and ordered by the proper county authorities and designees. 
(t)  Building requirements and ground rentals: Any person desiring to erect or construct any building on the airport shall be required to submit plans and specifications for the same to the county airport commission. The plans shall also include a general layout, drawn to scale, showing the desired amount of ground actually required for the operation of such building in addition to the portion occupied by the building proper. Doors on all buildings shall not protrude or extend beyond the building line as established by the county and/or the airport commission. 
All buildings erected upon the airport shall conform to the building code requirements of the county and be approved by the bureau of fire prevention in accordance and meeting NFPA minimum standards. They must be of either steel, concrete, masonry or other fireproof construction. Temporary permits may be granted for a period not to exceed one (1) year, to construct temporary shelter in a space to be designated by the airport manager. Such temporary building must be removed at the expense of the owner with ten (10) days notice in writing by the airport manager. Waivers of this section may be granted only by approval of the county airport commission. State approval should be acquired on all airport construction and FAR Part 77 requires that the FAA be notified and Form 7460-1 must be completed and forwarded to the FAA Airports District Office, as described in FAA AC 70/7460-1E. No crane shall be erected on airport property or within a four-mile radius from the center of the airport without approval of the airport manager and an approved FAA form 7460-1. When plans have been approved by the county board of commissioners the lease may be entered into at the rate prescribed. 
Lands within the reservation of the airport are a limited and valuable commodity. It is the policy of the county and Richard B. Russell Airport, that no land or building space in excess of foreseeable requirements will be leased to any person. Additional areas may be added to existing leases of persons upon application and upon showing of need and subject to availability. 
All future leases will be made on a space available basis at a commercial rate and in compliance with the Richard B. Russell Airport Plan. 
(u)  Trash containers: No person shall keep unsafe trash containers in any area. No vehicle used for hauling trash, dirt, or any other material shall be operated on the airport unless such vehicle is constructed so as to prevent the contents thereof from dropping, blowing, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. Areas to be used for trash or garbage containers shall be designated by the manager and no other areas shall be used for this purpose. Tenants and other persons are required to keep their premises clean and clear of all rubbish, junk, debris, old aircraft and vehicles and unsightly objects. If, after warning by the airport manager, the area is not cleaned, cleaning will be done by the airport manager and billed to the tenant or other persons. 
(v)  Storage of inflammable substances or equipment; violation of fire codes: No tenant or lessee on the airport shall store or stack material or equipment in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to personnel or property. No person shall store material or equipment, use inflammable liquids or gases or allow their premises to become in such condition so as to violate, in any manner, the fire code in force in the area of the airport. 
(w)  Maintenance: All tenants shall be required to maintain their leased property in a condition of repair, cleanliness and general maintenance in a manner agreeable to the county airport commission and in accordance with their individual lease agreements and free from all fire hazards. 
(x)  Fire equipment: All commercial operators shall supply and maintain such adequate and readily accessible fire extinguishers as are provided for fire underwriters and in accordance with NFPA minimum standards for the particular hazard involved. Tenants of all hangers and buildings shall provide suitable fire extinguishers and equipment and they shall be kept in good condition as recommended by the fire chief and inspected at least every twelve (12) months by trained personnel. Fire equipment on the airport shall not be tampered with at any time or used for any purpose other than firefighting and fire protection. 
(y)  Structural and decorative changes: No tenants, lessees or grantees will be permitted to effect structural or decorative changes or additions of any type without prior permission and approval of the county airport commission. 
(z)  Damages: Tenants, lessees and grantees shall be fully responsible for all damages to buildings, equipment, real property and appurtenances in the ownership or custody of the county airport commission caused by negligence, abuse or carelessness of their employees, agents customers, visitors, suppliers or persons with whom they may do business. No person shall destroy, deface, damage or disturb in any way any building, sign, equipment, marker or other structure, tree, flower, lawn or other property on the airport. Any person, committing such an act shall be liable for the reasonable value of the property so damaged or destroyed. 
(aa)  Metering: Each tenant shall acquire utility meters for the purpose of accurately measuring gas, water and electrical power used by the tenant, as applicable, otherwise the tenant will be charged the flat rate fees for these utilities as prescribed by the county airport commission, unless otherwise included with lease fee. 
(bb)  Payment of charges: 
(1)  All billings are payable upon presentation unless otherwise noted thereon. 
(2)  All percentages or income charges are payable within thirty (30) days of the end of the accounting period or the usual and normal late charges and collection fees will be assessed. 
(cc)  Animals: No person shall enter the movement area of the airport with a dog or other animal except seeing-eye dogs on duty, or dogs or other domesticated animals to be properly transported by air and restrained by leash or properly confined, nor shall any person owning or in charge of such dogs or animals permit same to wander upon the airport unrestrained. 
(dd)  Excavations: No person shall dig holes, trenches or do other excavation work on the airport or airport property, unless prior approval is granted by the airport manager. 
(ee)  Lost articles: Any person finding lost articles at the airport shall turn them over to the office of the airport manager. 
(ff)  Transporting explosives, etc: No person shall transport on airport property any explosives, flammable or combustible materials or liquids, or readily flammable solids or oxidizing materials or any radioactive substances or materials, at any time, place or condition, so as to endanger unreasonably persons or property without first coordinating and obtaining the airport manager's permission in each instance. 
(gg)  Log to be kept; information to be shown: Each fixed base or storage hangar operator shall keep a log of the visiting or itinerant aircraft serviced by him or using his facilities on the airport during the hours of operation. The log shall contain the following information: (See Exhibit 1-1 to Ordinance No. 1999-005A.) 
(1)  Date and time of arrival/departure. 
(2)  Make and model of plane, and the registration number. 
(3)  Type of fuel purchased. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-4. - Airfield operations. 
(a)  Deviation from rules: The rules set forth in this section may be deviated from when an immediate emergency presents itself that requires such deviation in the interest of safety. 
(b)  Generally: All aircraft in flight within the airport traffic area or in motion or parked on the Richard B. Russell Airport shall operate in accord with the following rules and regulations and be governed by the current federal aviation regulations and other federal and state aeronautical regulations as may apply. 
(1)  Except for emergency landings, the airport manager may prohibit aircraft landing and taking off at any time and under any circumstances when he deems such landings and takeoffs are likely to endanger persons or property. 
(2)  In the event the airport manager believes the conditions of the airport to be unsafe or safe for landings or takeoffs, it shall be within his authority to issue a NOTAM to close or open the airport, or any portion thereof. 
(3)  All users engaging in known aeronautical activities will comply with the instructions and regulations contained herein. 
(4)  No aircraft engine shall be started or run unless a competent operator is in the aircraft attending the engine controls. Chocks will be used unless the aircraft is provided with adequate parking brakes which are fully engaged. 
(5)  No person shall run the engine or engines of any aircraft at any location on the airport in such manner as to cause damage to other aircraft or property or in such a manner as to blow paper, dirt, or other materials across taxiways or runways in such manner as to endanger the safety or operations on the airport. 
(6)  Aircraft engines will be warmed up at RPMs above normal idle only in places approved for such purposes by the airport manager. At no time will aircraft with engines running or engines being tested be left unattended by any person. At no time shall engines be warmed up at RPMs above normal idle or operated when hangars, shops, offices, buildings, persons, equipment, passengers or aircraft landing, parked or taking off are in the path of the propeller stream or jet engine exhaust. Starting of engines shall be prohibited until proper clearance has been ascertained and until all standard safety procedures have been met. 
(7)  No aircraft shall be operated on the surface of the Richard B. Russell Airport in a careless or negligent manner or in disregard of the rights and safety of others. 
(8)  No person shall park an aircraft or leave the same standing on the public landing area, public aircraft ramp and apron area, public aircraft parking and storage area, except at such places as may be prescribed or permitted by the airport manager. When in such an area, every aircraft shall be adequately tied down. The landing gear of every such aircraft shall be chocked with at least two (2) wheel blocks or other approved devices, except in cases where, in the opinion of the airport manager, proven procedures such as those followed by the scheduled airlines are equally safe. Upon direction from the airport manager, the operator of any aircraft shall move said aircraft from the place where it is parked or stored to any other designated place; if the operator refuses to comply with such direction, the airport manager may tow said aircraft to such designated place at the operator's expense, and without liability for damage which may result in the course of such moving. 
(9)  No person or firm shall do major repair on aircraft, in any area of the airport other than that specifically designated for such purposes by the airport manager, except that minor adjustments may be made while the aircraft is on a loading ramp preparatory to departure. No fuel shall be placed in any aircraft by any person or company except by authorized vendors of aviation fuel so authorized for this operation by the county airport commission or except as permitted in writing by the county airport commission. 
(10)  Any person damaging any light or fixture shall report such damage to the airport manager's office immediately and shall be fully responsible for any costs required to repair or replace the damaged facility. 
(11)  Any use of fire extinguishers must be promptly reported to the airport manager so that extinguishers and other items can be serviced without delay. 
(c)  Taxiing rules: 
(1)  No person shall taxi an aircraft until he has ascertained, by visual inspection of the area, that there will be no danger of collision with any person or object in the immediate area. 
(2)  No fixed wing aircraft shall be operated on the airport paved or turf surfaces unless it is equipped with a tail wheel or nose wheel, wheel brakes, or tail skid, except with the permission of the airport manager. When any pilot of an aircraft that is not equipped with adequate brakes receives permission from the airport manager to taxi such aircraft, such pilot shall not taxi such aircraft near buildings or parked aircraft unless an attendant is at the wing of the aircraft to assist the pilot; provided, that an aircraft with wings and tail higher than five (5) feet from the ground, and without adequate brakes, shall not be taxied on the airport, but shall be towed if it is necessary to move such an aircraft. 
(3)  Aircraft awaiting takeoff shall remain clear of the runway in use and in a position so as to have a direct view of aircraft approaching for landing. 
(d)  Landings and take-offs: 
(1)  All activities, which are of an aeronautical nature and all flying of aircraft departing from or arriving at the airport, shall be conducted in conformity with the current pertinent provisions of the regulations issued by the county board of commissioners. 
(2)  All aircraft at the Richard B. Russell Airport will conform to the traffic patterns promulgated by the county board of commissioners. 
(3)  Traffic patterns and landing direction shall be in such a manner as to not endanger other aircraft landing or taking off and will be advised by the local common traffic advisory frequency when in operation. At all other times the landing direction will be as indicated by the wind cone. During calm or zero wind conditions, pilots are encouraged to land to the north, using Runway 01. 
(4)  Simulated forced landings within the airport traffic area must be done with great care. 
(5)  Operators of aircraft so equipped are recommended to transmit their intentions on the UNICOM or the common traffic advisory frequency of 123.0 when operating on the airport or in its airspace. 
(e)  Disabled, derelict aircraft: Upon demand made by the airport manager to the owner or operator of any abandoned, disabled or derelict aircraft or parts thereof, wrongfully or improperly left upon airport property, it shall be the duty of said owner or operator to remove the same at his own expense. If after such demand said owner or operator fails or refuses to remove such aircraft within a reasonable time as determined by said manager from the circumstances and condition of hazard created by reason of the presence of such aircraft at such place, the said manager shall cause the same to be impounded, stored, or donated to the county. The cost of such removal and storage shall be a charge against the owner or operator of such aircraft, and upon the payment of said charge, the impoundment herein provided shall be released and possession of said aircraft shall be restored to said owner or operator. 
(f)  Damage to airport: The owner or operator of any aircraft which by reason of any type of accident, crash, or fire, or which by reason of malfunction or operation, causes any damage to airport property shall be responsible to the county board of commissioners for such damage, and the amount thereof shall be ascertained by the county board of commissioners which shall make demand upon said owner or operator for payment thereof. In the event of the failure or refusal of said owner or operator to pay the amount of such claim for damage, a full report of the circumstances on which said claim is based, together with a copy of said claim, shall be turned over to the counselor, who shall, when directed by the county attorney, institute in the name of said county airport commission all necessary legal proceedings for collection of said claim. 
(g)  Security of aircraft: The county police department makes regular patrol checks of the airport and aircraft tie-down areas in accordance with an agreement with the county airport commission. However, when, in the opinion of the owner, the kind, type, mission and donation of an aircraft make it necessary to provide security guards or policemen wherever the aircraft is located on the airport, the owner of the aircraft shall be responsible for obtaining, providing and maintaining its own security guards or policemen after permission to establish such security has been obtained from the airport manager or his duly authorized representative. Security requirements shall not be used as a means to hinder or delay removal of aircraft at the direction of the airport manager. 
(h)  Stunt flying; acrobatics: Except for public displays of aviation flight specifically authorized by the county airport commission to be conducted under responsible auspices and control, violations of any of the following provisions shall be illegal and an offense: 
(1)  No person shall operate an aircraft in a careless or reckless manner so as to endanger the life or property of others by buzzing, diving or low-altitude flying. 
(2)  No person shall engage in acrobatic or stunt flying over congested areas or over an open air assembly of persons or below an altitude of five hundred (500) feet above the surface unless appropriate waivers from the FAA have been obtained. 
(i)  Categories of aircraft: Final determination as to the proper category designation of any aircraft shall rest with the county airport commission, in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Private: 
a.  Privately owned aircraft will be operated noncommercially by owner or owners. The aircraft can be used in connection with the owner's business in a manner comparable to the owner's use of his private automobile. Company and corporation owned aircraft that are operated for the transportation of their and other personnel and/or products are classified as private aircraft. 
b.  Flying clubs. A flying club is recognized as a plan for the joint ownership of aircraft and the fair distribution of the cost of maintaining and operating those aircraft. Such operation is not considered to be commercial in nature when so operated; neither is flight instruction by club members for other club members to be commercial in nature so long as there is no profit or for-hire motive involved in the operation. Club aircraft must be owned and operated by a non-profit partnership or non-profit Georgia corporation, and each club member must be a bona fide owner of a part of the aircraft or a share in the corporation. The club may not derive greater revenue from the use of its aircraft than the amount necessary for the operation, maintenance and replacement of its aircraft and will file and keep up to date with the airport manager a list of membership. At any time the airport manager has reason to believe that a club aircraft is being so operated that it falls under the "commercial" classification hereunder, he shall so notify the club and if they fail to remedy conditions complained of, the airport manager shall reclassify the aircraft and levy fees necessary to the pertinent type of operation. 
c.  Aircraft of sale. New or old aircraft held for sale may be demonstrated to prospective purchasers, or, when sold, may be used to instruct the new owner of their operation. 
(2)  Commercial: Aircraft used: 
a.  To carry passengers for hire. 
b.  For rental, hire or charter. 
c.  Flight instruction and its kindred occupations. 
d.  Any aircraft used for commercial purpose including aerial application and not otherwise covered in these regulations. 
(j)  Balloons and model aircraft: No person shall operate or release any model aircraft, rocket, kite, balloon or similar contrivance at or upon the airport except hot air balloons as defined by FAR 1-1. 
(k)  Parachute jumping: The FAA has defined "parachute jumping" as an aeronautical use. Consequently, requests of clubs, organizations and individuals to establish a drop zone within the boundaries or reservation for the airport shall be evaluated by the airport manager on the same basis as other aeronautical uses of the airport. The airport manager shall not be required to permit or allow any request to establish a drop zone for parachute jumping within the boundaries of the airport. However, the airport manager shall exercise his judgment or discretion in determining whether to permit, allow or disallow such request based on information contained in the application to establish a drop zone or carry on parachute jumping activities within the boundaries of the airport and considering safety to applicants and the public making other use of the airport and the FARs and advisory circulars or other FAA guidance at the time and date of request and at the time of the proposed activity. The airport manager shall require written application from any person, club or organization requesting a permit to establish a drop zone or to carry on parachute jumping activities within the boundaries of the airport. The form shall be as prescribed by the airport manager but shall minimally contain the following information: 
(1)  The address of the individual who will be directing and in charge of the parachute jumping activity who is hereinafter referred to as the "drop zone operator"; 
(2)  The time within which the parachute jumping activity is to be carried on; 
(3)  The names and addresses of all individuals who will either fly aircraft or participate in any way in the parachute jumping activity. 
All persons engaging or participating in any way in such parachute jumping activity shall provide or be covered under a policy of liability insurance indemnifying the county commission and airport commission, its officers, agents, attorneys and employees by proper endorsement for any and all liability to any person either participating or otherwise for bodily injuries or property damage in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit. The policy or certificate of insurance shall be on file with the airport manager prior to commencement of the parachute jumping activity. 
The airport manager shall require any person engaging or participating in any manner in the parachute jumping activity to execute a personal waiver and release of liability in favor of the county commission and the airport commission, their respective officers, agents, attorneys and employees. The airport manager is authorized to promulgate rules and issue such other requirements for establishment of a drop zone or carrying on parachute jumping activities within the boundary of the airport as are not inconsistent with the provisions of these rules and regulations, the Federal Aviation Act, and applicable FARs promulgated pursuant thereto. 
Upon application to establish a drop zone or to carry on parachute jumping activities within the boundaries of the airport as approved by the airport manager the following minimum requirements shall apply to such permit or allowance: 
(1)  The drop zone shall not conflict with landing aircraft; 
(2)  The drop zone shall meet all requirements set up by the FAA and USPA; 
(3)  There shall be a USPA certified jumpmaster, instructor, instructor examiner, or safety and training advisor directing all parachute jumping activity; 
(4)  The drop zone operator shall keep a written record of each jump including aircraft used in carrying on the parachute jumping activity; the name(s) and telephone number(s), current address(es) and pilot certificate number(s) of the pilot in command of the aircraft used in the parachute jump activities, and the name(s) and address(es) of all parachute jumpers on each lift. 
(5)  The pilot-in-command of the aircraft used in carrying on the parachute activity, shall, announce a parachute jump at two (2) minutes prior to jumping, then,announce "jumpers away" at time of jump. Jump pilot shall remain in the air until all jumpers are on the ground and announce, "all jumpers on the ground," prior to landing. 
(6)  The airport manager has the right to conduct periodic inspections of records, aircraft, and rigs to ensure compliance with F.A.R. Part 105. 
No parachute jumping activity shall take place in an aircraft not properly certified for airworthiness. While carrying on any parachute jumping activity the jump master and pilot in command of the aircraft used in carrying on the parachute jumping activity shall maintain two-way radio communication with the airport UNICOM. The jumper, jumpmaster, drop zone operator, and the pilot-in-command of the aircraft used in the parachute jumping activities shall be responsible, jointly and severally, to comply with the provisions of FAR 105. All loading and unloading of jumpers on the ground will be only be conducted in areas approved by the airport manager and well off the runways and taxiways. 
All parachute jumping activity permitted by the airport manager shall be conducted within the conditions and limitations set forth by the airport manager in the written permit to the person, club or organization requesting to establish the drop zone or carry on the parachute jumping activity. In the event radio communications is ever lost between jump master and the pilot-in-command for the parachute jumping activity and airport UNICOM, there shall be no parachute drop until communication is re-established and verbal permission to commence parachute drop is given by airport UNICOM. 
Any club applying to establish a drop zone or a permit to engage in parachute jumping activity within the boundaries of the airport must show that the club is an official United States Parachute Association (USPA) affiliated club in good standing; that all jumpers listed to participate in the parachute jumping activities have subscribed to all rules, policies and regulations of the United States Parachute Association (USPA). It shall be the responsibility of the drop zone operator and the jump master to insure that all United States Parachute Association rules and regulations are complied with throughout the carrying-on of the parachute jumping activity. 
It is the decision of the airport manager to allow, permit or disallow jumping activity on a day to day basis and on any certain day in the event it may be dangerous to other aeronautical activity or other operations on the airport. 
The decision of the airport manager to allow, permit or disallow an application to establish a drop zone or the carrying on of parachute jumping activities shall be final and constitute the decision of the county commission and airport commission and there shall be no appeal through the county or the authority of the decision of the airport manager in this regard. 
(l)  Air shows: No air meets, aerial demonstrations, parachute jumping or other special activities shall be held at the airport unless prior permission and air show waiver is obtained from the FAA and the county airport commission, and no such permission shall be granted unless the applicant has deposited with the airport management proof of the FAA authorization and either a policy or a certificate of insurance protecting Floyd County and any third party against loss or damage due to such event and indemnifying the county against liability to any third persons resulting therefrom. This insurance shall be in amounts deemed satisfactory by the county airport commission. 
(m)  Gliders and glider tow aircraft: No person shall operate a tow aircraft at or upon the airport without prior written approval of the airport manager; and while so doing must: 
(1)  Maintain and use an operating aircraft communication radio in the tow aircraft prior to each operation such as taking off the runway, beginning the tow, departing the airport traffic pattern releasing the glider, entering the traffic pattern and landing. 
(2)  Broadcast the above information on the designated common traffic advisory frequency. 
(3)  Advise other aircraft in the vicinity of the airport that glide operations are being conducted if not so done by the UNICOM or common traffic advisory frequency operator. 
(4)  Maintain types of insurance for commercial or rental operations and for corporate or personal operations. 
(5)  Each glider operator/pilot operating a glider at or upon the airport will: 
a.  Adhere to the glider traffic pattern. 
b.  Move glider clear of the runway by fifty (50) feet immediately after landing. 
All personnel vehicles, equipment and objects will be so controlled by the Glider Operators as not to interfere with other operations at the airport. 
Glider operators will advise the airport UNICOM operator prior to beginning operations and at the conclusion of operations of their intentions. The UNICOM operator will be requested to include this information in all traffic advisory transmissions. 
(n)  Ultralights/gyrocopters: All ultralight vehicles shall be operated in accordance with Part 103 of the Federal Aviation Regulations and in accordance with specific policies established by the county airport commission and/or the airport manager. All gyrocopters shall follow the same rules as ultralights as set forth in this section. 
(1)  If possible, each and every ultralight operator shall be equipped with a UNICOM radio in order to transmit and receive traffic advisories. If one is not available a knowledgeable observer will be located at the ultralight entry point to the runway in use to assist ultralight pilots in timing operations safely with respect to other operations. 
(2)  The observer will have and use a portable transceiver set to the applicable UNICOM frequency. 
(3)  The ultralight traffic pattern will be 500 feet AGL, and will have prior written approval from the airport manager before operations are commenced. 
(4)  The ultralight traffic pattern should be maintained well inside the normal traffic pattern for conventional aircraft operations on the cross wind, down wind, and base legs of the pattern unless otherwise modified by written directive as set forth in this section by the airport manager the ultralight pattern shall be the pattern shown on Exhibit 1-2 to these rules and regulations (Exhibit 1-2 to Ordinance No. 1999-005A). 
(5)  Ultralight operators will advise the airport UNICOM operator prior to beginning operation and at the conclusion of operations of their intentions. The UNICOM operator will be asked to include this information in all traffic advisory transmissions. 
(6)  Ultralight pilots will demonstrate to airport management a knowledge of airspace regulations and the airport operating regulations as applicable to the Richard B. Russell Airport. Satisfactory demonstration of knowledge will include one (1) of the following: FAA pilot license, U.S.U.A., pilot rating, A.S.C. pilot rating or E.A.A. pilot rating. Any one (1) of these should be proof of competency. Also, the above organization's students licenses with a solo endorsement by an authorized instructor should be acceptable. 
(7)  Each ultralight operator will maintain an aviation insurance policy of the types of insurance in the limits specified as follows: 
a.  Commercial (rental) ultralight operators. 
b.  Corporate or personal ultralight operators. 
(o)  Two-seat ultralight training operations: Two-seat training operations are authorized at Richard B. Russell Airport, provided: 
(1)  The two-seat trainer used is registered as a two-seat ultralight trainer with the proper authority and must display the proper registration numbers and placards as required by the FAA exemption under which it operates. 
(2)  Two-seat ultralight instructors operating at Richard B. Russell Airport show proof of a current exemption from the FAA. 
(3)  All ultralight aircraft shall be maintained in safe and airworthy condition (not certificated) and may be grounded by the airport manager or his designated representative for unsafe conditions until such time as the unsafe condition has been corrected to the satisfaction of the airport manager or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-5. - Ground vehicles. 
(a)  Generally: 
(1)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the airport otherwise than in strict accordance with the applicable provisions of these regulations and applicable federal, state and county laws, codes and other similar regulatory measures, now in existence or as may hereafter be modified or amended. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to ignore the instructions of any official traffic sign placed in accordance with these regulations unless otherwise directed by a traffic officer. 
(3)  Any person driving a motor vehicle on the airport shall operate it in such manner that it is under safe and proper control at all times, weather and traffic conditions considered. 
(4)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle of any kind on the airport in a reckless or negligent manner, or in excess of the speed limits posted or as prescribed by the airport manager. 
(5)  Unless otherwise posted, no person shall operate any vehicle other than authorized emergency and maintenance vehicles on the airport at a speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(6)  Pedestrians and aircraft shall at all times have right-of-way over vehicular traffic. All vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft. 
(7)  No persons operating a motor vehicle on the airport shall fail to give proper signals, or fail to observe the directions of posted traffic signs. No person under the influence of alcohol or other drug substances shall operate a motor vehicle or aircraft on the airport. 
(8)  No person shall ride on the running board, stand up in the body of moving vehicles, ride on the outside of the body of a vehicle, or with arms or legs protruding from the body of motor vehicles, other than crash, fire and rescue vehicles designed for standing personnel. 
(9)  No person shall operate motor vehicle upon the airport which is so constructed, equipped or loaded or in such physical or mechanical condition as to endanger persons or property, or which has attached thereto any object or equipment which is being towed, or drags, or swings, or projects so as to be hazardous to persons or property. 
(10)  No person shall operate a motor scooter, truck or other motor vehicle in any hangar on the airport without exhausts protected by screens or baffles to prevent the escape of sparks or the propagation of flame. 
(11)  When parking or driving in the proximity of an active runway, all vehicles must maintain a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet from the centerline of the runway at all times. 
(12)  Before crossing runways or taxiways, drivers must insure by personal observation that no aircraft is approaching his position. 
(13)  Emergency conditions existing at any time on the airport air operations area will not mitigate or cancel these regulations. During such conditions, the driver of any vehicle, civilian or military, will make certain that he does not move his vehicle in any direction unless specifically cleared to do so by the appropriate authorities. The airport manager or officer-in-charge shall determine when normal operations may be resumed. 
(14)  The airport manager is authorized to install such traffic control signs on the airport as may be necessary in order to properly control and regulate vehicular traffic with approval of the county airport commission. 
(15)  Any person found to be in violation of vehicular traffic or parking regulations as specified herein may be denied permission by the airport manager to operate a vehicle upon the airport premises. 
(16)  No person shall clean or make any repairs to vehicles anywhere within the airport boundary other than in shop or other areas designated for such purposes, except minor repairs necessary to remove such vehicles from the airport, nor shall any person move, interfere or tamper with any vehicle or put in motion the engine or take or use any vehicle part, instrument or tool thereof without permission of the owner or satisfactory evidence of the right to do so presented to the airport manager. 
(17)  Heavy trucks in excess of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds single axle load will not be permitted on runways or taxiways without the airport managers approval. A fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) and the cost of repairing any damage caused by such truck will be levied against the operator of said truck. 
(18)  All ground vehicles operating on active air operations surfaces must display a checkered flag in accordance with FAA AC 150/5210-5. 
(19)  Individuals, partnerships and corporations basing their aircraft at the airport may drive ground vehicles to and from their aircraft as necessary as long as the privilege is exercised with reasonable care and caution. 
(b)  Public parking: 
(1)  No person shall park a motor vehicle for loading, unloading or any other purpose on the airport other than in the areas specifically established for parking, and in the manner prescribed by signs, lines or other means. No person shall abandon any motor vehicle on the airport. No person shall park a motor vehicle in a manner which would obstruct roadways, nor in aircraft parking areas. 
(2)  No person shall park a vehicle in any space marked for parking in such a manner as to occupy part of another marked space, nor shall any person park or stand any vehicle in any reserved or restricted areas so marked. 
(3)  Person or persons found in violation of these regulations pertaining to parking shall be cited for traffic violations under the applicable provisions of county ordinances. 
(4)  Parking in designated public parking areas is open to all members of the public using the airport. 
(5)  All employees of organizations and agencies having tenancy in the airport's building areas shall park private vehicles in the employees' parking lots, if provided, or in areas so designated by the airport manager or organization/agency. 
(6)  All individuals, partnerships and corporations operating taxicabs, limousines or buses on the airport for the purpose of transporting persons or passengers for hire shall comply with the following: 
a.  All taxicabs, limousines and buses shall be parked in such manner and in such areas as may be designated from time to time by the airport manager or the county airport commission. 
b.  The airport manager may designate airport areas for the parking, loading, and unloading of courtesy cars. Operators or courtesy cars shall be required to use said areas, and for said purposes only. 
(c)  Impounding of vehicles: The airport manager shall have the right to move and to impound any vehicle parked on airport premises in violation of applicable rules and regulations. Any such vehicle may be released to the owner or operator thereof upon proper identification of the person claiming it and upon payment of all towing, storage, and parking fees. Neither the county nor its employees will be liable for damage or theft to the vehicle which might result during the act of removal or subsequent impounding. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-6. - Marking and lighting unserviceable areas including closed runways and taxiways. 
(a)  Generally: Application of the standards and practices contained in the appropriate FAA Advisory Circular, "Marking of Paved Areas on Airports," apply when there is a closed or hazardous area on the airport or when a deceptive area exists and the airport manager determines that an operational need exists to mark same. Replace or modify as soon as possible existing markings that are not in accordance with those described in the advisory circular. 
(b)  Hazardous and unserviceable parts of the air operations area: 
(1)  Where a relatively small paved area has failed or for any other reason becomes hazardous for aircraft operation and it is not intended to close the entire area to operations, use red flags not less than 18 inches square for day marking and use red lights for night marking to delineate the hazardous area. When flags are made of fabric, use a wire stiffener to hold the flag in an extended position. Mount flags so they are not a hazard. 
(2)  Where large apron areas are unserviceable, place a cross, as shown by the appropriate FAA advisory circular, in the center of the unserviceable area. If this type movement area is used at night, place red lights to delineate the unserviceable parts of the area. 
(3)  On runways or taxiways where the unserviceable area is such as to render the runway or taxiway or portion thereof unusable, place red lights at the entrance to such areas and disconnect controls to the runway or taxiway lights in the section rendered unusable. 
(4)  Use red lights of at least ten (10) candlepower for night marking of unserviceable parts of the movement areas. Red lights with a light distribution equivalent to a fixture meeting the requirements in AC 150/5345-2, Specification for L-180 Obstruction Light, are acceptable. 
(c)  Closed airports: When the entire air operations area is rendered unsafe by a hazardous condition, declare the field closed and mark as follows: 
(1)  Day marking: Place a cross at a central location readily visible from the air. Make all crosses in accordance with FAA Advisory Circular 150/5340-1D, "Marking of Paved Areas on Airports." 
(2)  Night marking: Disconnect controls to runway, boundary, and landing direction indicator lights. Permit the beacon to remain in operation unless the airport is to be closed permanently, in which case the appropriate FAA regional director should be notified before extinguishing the beacon. 
(d)  Color: Use aviation yellow for all deceptive, closed, and hazardous area markings. 
(e)  Notification: Immediately report closed runways and taxiways, airport hazardous areas and closed airports to the Atlanta Flight Service Station (404-691-1474). 
(f)  Safety during construction: These guidelines apply to all construction work which may affect the movement of aircraft: 
(1)  Prior to the development of contract specifications for construction activity affecting aircraft movement areas, safety requirements relating thereto should be coordinated between the airport management and appropriate representatives of the FAA to determine the restrictions required for the project's special provisions, which should result in a minimum of interference to aircraft operations. 
(2)  For construction activity to be performed in other than active operational areas, the storage and parking of equipment and materials when not in use or about to be installed should not encroach upon active operational areas. In protecting operational areas, the minimum clearances maintained for runways will be in agreement with FAR Part 77. For taxiways, maintained clearances will not be less than fifty (50) feet from the pavement edge. 
(3)  Open-flame, welding, or torch cutting operations are to be prohibited unless adequate fire and safety precautions have been made and approved by the airport management. 
(4)  Open trenches, excavations, and stockpiled material at the construction-site will be prominently marked with red flags and lighted by red light units (acceptable to the airport manager) during hours of restricted visibility and/or darkness. 
(5)  All vehicles will be clearly identified for control purposes, by assigned numbers prominently displayed on each side. The identifying symbols should be eight-inch minimum, block-type characters of a color easily read on a contrasting background. They may be applied by use of tape or water soluble paint to facilitate removal. 
(6)  All vehicles will follow routes and roadways selected by the airport manager or his representative and stay clear of areas adjacent to NAVAIDS that if traversed could cause emission of false signals or failure of NAVAIDS. These sensitive areas will be identified and clearly marked by the airport engineer. 
(7)  The county engineer will identify and mark with yellow flags the location of all utilities in the construction areas that if interrupted, could cause failure of a facility or NAVAID. 
(8)  The airport manager will issue the necessary notices to airmen, (NOTAMs), to reflect hazardous conditions. NOTAMs will be kept current and reflect the actual condition with respect to construction situations, active NOTAMs will be reviewed periodically. 
(9)  Frequent inspections will be made by the airport manager during critical phases of the work to insure that the contractor is following the recommended safety procedures. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-7. - Bird hazard reduction and sanitary landfills. 
(a)  Birds are not a current hazard; however, trees located around the Richard B. Russell Airport are potential bird nesting sites. Periodic checks of the trees in the immediate area will be conducted by the airport manager or his representative to assure that these areas have not become nesting areas. 
(b)  In the event the trees become nesting sites, proven effective measures will be taken to eliminate the possible hazard this condition would create to operating aircraft. Such measures may include arming personnel with shotguns with authority to kill or drive away the birds, the use of bio-acoustics, habitat manipulation, removal of attractants, bird distress calls, chemical repellents and/or the use of pyrotechnics. 
(c)  Visual surveillance for birds will be maintained by the operations personnel. All operating aircraft will be notified on the common traffic advisory frequency, of any flocks of birds detected. 
(d)  Quantities of FAA Form 3830, Bird Strike/Incident, will be maintained in the flight operations office and strikes reported in accordance with FAA regulations. 
(e)  During the migratory season special watch will be maintained to detect birds in the airport surveillance area with assistance from the U.S. Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service and/or the Georgia Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aeronautics and the Georgia Department Natural Resources. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-8. - Violation of rules and regulations. 
(a)  Default of obligations: When any tenant, user or grantee is formally notified that he is held in default of any written or implied obligation to Richard B. Russell Airport, whether it be for breach or performance of service covenants or non-payment, he shall thereafter be billed for all losses of revenue, expenses incurred to re-establish performance or service, and other costs unless the tenant, user or grantee files with the county airport commission within ten (10) days of receipt of the formal notification a statement that corrective or preventative measures have been initiated and will diligently be carried to completion. If the promises contained in the statement are not fulfilled, the tenant, user or grantee will be considered in absolute default and appropriate legal steps shall be taken. 
(b)  Violation: Violation of these rules and regulations shall subject the offender to administrative action as provided below and to legal action by the county court or punishment as provided under Georgia Criminal Law. A violation of each and every rule, regulation or order shall be considered a separate offense. 
Any person who fails or refuses to comply promptly with the rules and regulations contained herein following notices of violation by airport authorities, where such non-compliance interferes with the management, regulation or operation of the airport and its facilities or creates any hazard or condition which endangers the public or airport personnel, may be promptly directed to leave the premises of the airport by the authority of the county board of commissioners. Failure to comply may be considered as either criminal mischief punishable under criminal law or criminal trespass. 
"Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating any of these rules and regulations except those which constitute Aggravated or Simplified Obstruction shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. On a second or subsequent offense, he shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both." 
Pursuant to Georgia State Statute R.S. _____ "Obstructing Highways of Commerce": 
"Aggravated obstruction of a highway of commerce is the intentional or criminally negligent placing of anything, or performance of any act on any railway, railroad, navigable waterway, road, highway thoroughfare, or runway of an airport, wherein it is foreseeable that human life might be endangered." 
"Whoever commits the crime of aggravated obstruction of a highway of commerce shall be imprisoned at hard labor for not more than fifteen years." 
R.S. _______ stipulates that: 
"Simple obstruction of a highway of commerce is the intentional or criminally negligent placing of anything or performance of any act on any railway, railroad, navigable waterway, road, highway, thoroughfare, or runway of an airport, which will render movement thereon more difficult. 
Whoever commits the crime of simple obstruction of a highway of commerce shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars, or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both." 
Such person may also be deprived of the further use of the airport and its facilities for such length of time as may be required to insure the safeguarding of the public interest. Any person deprived of the use of airport facilities must apply to the county airport commission for reinstatement of the privileges of use. 
(c)  Enforcement: The airport management, county, and state uniformed police officers or other representatives as designated by the county board of commissioners or the Georgia Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aeronautics are empowered to require compliance with these rules and regulations. No authority is either hereby expressed or implied, however, that would permit any individual other than the county board of commissioners to change, alter or amend these rules and regulations, except as provided in subsection 2-3-2(d), "Emergency powers of the airport management." 
(d)  Use of other law enforcement agencies: In the event that situations arise that are beyond the capability of regular airport personnel, outside law enforcement agencies shall be called for assistance. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-9. - Manager—Employment and qualifications. 
It shall be the duty of the county board of commissioners to employ an airport manager who shall be the administrative head of the airport and who shall be responsible for the efficient administration of the affairs of the airport commission and the airport. The appointment of the airport manager shall be subject to the approval of the board of county commissioners. The airport manager shall be an individual who is qualified by education, training and experience to perform the duties of airport manager. The airport manager shall be paid a salary as determined and fixed by the board of county commissioners. Although the airport manager shall have all of the powers and duties as set out herein, including, but not limited to, the duty to make various reports to the airport commission. However, the airport manager becomes the equivalent of a department head upon his or her appointment and as such reports directly to, and is evaluated by, the county manager. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-10. - Same—Responsibilities and duties. 
(a)  Generally: The responsibilities, powers and duties of the airport manager shall be: 
(1)  To see that the rules, regulations and policies of the airport commission are enforced. 
(2)  To attend all meetings of the airport commission with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote. 
(3)  To serve as secretary to the airport commission. 
(4)  To recommend to the airport commission for adoption of such measures as such manager may deem necessary or expedient. 
(5)  To keep the airport commission fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the airport. 
(6)  To prepare for the airport commission a budget each fiscal year showing the estimated revenues and expenditures of the airport for the ensuing year. 
(7)  To hire and supervise other airport employees in accordance with the personnel policies of the airport commission and to remove any airport employees when such manager deems such removal necessary or advisable for the public good. These powers and duties shall be subject to the approval of the board of commissioners 
(b)  Enforcing rules; promulgation of rules in certain contingencies: The airport manager shall at all times have authority to take such reasonable action as may be necessary to enforce these regulations and to efficiently manage the airport and its operations. In any contingencies not specifically covered by these rules and regulations, the airport manager shall be authorized to make such reasonable rules, orders and decisions as may be necessary and proper. In the absence of the airport manager, the authority hereby given shall be in the person designated by the airport manager to act during the absence of the airport manager. 
(c)  Specific duties: 
(1)  The airport manager shall have the general supervision of all airport lands, buildings, equipment, facilities, including navigational aids and instruments, electronics, radio transmitters, lighting, runways, taxiways, vehicles and other fixed assets of the airport, located both on and off the airport. 
(2)  Further, it shall be the duty of the airport manager, and such manager is given full power and authority, to maintain, keep in repair, and improve, within the budget approved by the board of commissioners for such purposes, all lands, buildings, equipment and facilities, either by airport employees, agents or contracts. Further, such manager shall have the general supervision over all new construction work of any kind located at the airport. 
(3)  In the event any work is done by contract under provisions of this section, such contract shall be made only after advertisement as provided by law, with the right reserved to reject any and all proposals. Such contracts must be made and entered into only by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Reports: The airport commission may require the airport manager to come before it at any regular, special or called meeting and answer questions either orally or in writing; and it may require at any time from said manager written reports upon any matter involving the airport commission or the airport that it may deem proper; and said manager shall report regularly and at intervals, at least quarterly, such manager's general acts and doings on behalf of the airport commission and the airports. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-11. - Employees. 
(a)  Appointment: The airport manager shall appoint employees in accordance with federal, state, and county rules and regulations. 
(b)  Benefits: The employees shall receive the same benefits as other employees of the county. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Secs. 2-3-12—2-3-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— See the editor's note to Art. I. 
Cross reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, § 1-4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-3-30. - Created; purpose; scope. 
(a)  Created; name: The commission hereby created shall be the Floyd County Airport Commission. 
(b)  Purpose: The purpose of the commission is to provide for the policy, governing body and management of the airport and related properties, and for the capital and operating long-range plans and development of the airport. 
(c)  Scope: The airport commission shall govern the airport and all of the lands, buildings, equipment, facilities, instruments, terminals, runways, taxiways, hangars and navigational instruments, both on and off the airport property, in accordance with the powers granted in this article. All management and/or policy decisions made by the airport commission as set out herein shall be subject to review and/or approval by the board of county commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-31. - Members appointments; length of terms. 
(a)  Appointments for all posts shall be by the majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Appointments shall be for the following terms: 
Post 1: Term expires June 30, 2001. 
Post 2: Term expires June 30, 2002. 
Post 3: Term expires June 30, 2000. 
Post 4: Term expires June 30, 2000. 
Post 5: Term expires June 30, 2003. 
(c)  All terms expire on June thirtieth of their respective designated years. 
(d)  All terms shall be for a four-year period and until a successor is qualified and appointed. 
(e)  The members who serve on the airport commission shall be subject to the length of term and the attendance provisions and policies as set by the board of commissioners. If at any time the policies of the board of commissioners conflict with the policies of the airport commission, then the policies of the board of commissioners shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-32. - Qualifications. 
An airport commission member must meet the following qualifications: 
(1)  Be at least twenty-five (25) years of age and a resident of this county for a minimum of two (2) years prior to becoming a member, and must maintain said residence during membership on the airport commission. 
(2)  Not have any contractual arrangement for the sale of goods or services at the time of appointment or during the term of such service, except for rental of hangar space or similar casual services of the airport. A person who owns less than ten (10) percent of any business or entity which has a contractual arrangement, as defined herein, shall be eligible for appointment and service. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-33. - Filling vacancies. 
In the event of a vacancy from expiration of term or otherwise in any post on the airport commission, then the airport commission shall recommend two (2) people to the board of commissioners for that vacancy whether for a new term or to fill an unexpired portion of a term. The board of commissioners shall then give due consideration to the names submitted to them from the airport commission, but the board of commissioners has the sole discretion to fill the seat as they deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-34. - Compensation. 
(a)  Airport commission members shall receive no compensation for service. 
(b)  Members shall be reimbursed for all direct expenses approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-35. - Officers. 
(a)  Officers of the airport commission are as follows: 
(1)  Chairman. 
(2)  Vice-chairman. 
(b)  After the initial election of officers, the officers shall be elected annually in July by a majority vote of the airport commission. 
(c)  The chairman, or in the chairman's absence, the vice-chairman, shall preside over the deliberations of the airport commission and shall be eligible to vote on all questions. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum at all meetings of the airport commission. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-36. - Committees. 
The airport commission shall establish standing and temporary committees as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-37. - Meetings. 
(a)  Monthly regular meetings: The airport commission shall hold regular meetings at least monthly at a time and day established by the airport commission by resolution. 
(b)  Called meetings: The airport commission may have special or called meetings as needed, with a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the public and to all airport commissioners personally. A called meeting may be initiated by the airport manager, chairman, or two (2) other members of the airport commission. 
(c)  Meetings open: All meetings shall be open to the public and press, except for: (1) matters relating to specific personnel, (2) recommendations concerning land acquisition by the board of commissioners, and (3) attorney-client relationships. 
(d)  Minutes: The secretary of the commission shall keep accurate minutes of the proceedings, and shall have all acts and doings recorded thereon and all votes taken shall be by "aye" or "no" and shall be made to appear on said record. 
(e)  Quorum: Three (3) airport commissioners shall constitute a quorum at any meeting for the transaction of any business, and it shall require the affirmative vote of three (3) commissioners to report any measure, resolution, or contract. 
(f)  Voting: All airport commissioners present at a meeting shall vote on all issues except for a "not vote" (abstention), due to a conflict of interest. A failure to vote shall be counted as an affirmative vote for the motion. An airport commissioner who has any pecuniary or financial interest in any contract or obligation shall acknowledge such interest to the full commission before a vote on the issue. Such commissioner shall be counted as "abstaining." 
(g)  Attendance: If an airport commissioner is absent from more than twenty-five (25) percent of the meetings of the airport commission within any consecutive twelve-month period, then such commissioner is considered to have "resigned by virtue of nonattendance." The secretary shall report the resignation to the airport commission and the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-38. - Recommending rules, regulations, policies and practices. 
The airport commission shall recommend rules, regulations, policies and practices for the operation of the airport, including the landing field, taxiways, parking ramps, the terminal buildings, hangers, navigational instruments located both on and off the airport, roads and all public buildings, grounds, equipment and facilities. It shall have the power to recommend such rules, regulations and policies necessary for the peace, safety, good order, health, comfort, protection and security of said airport. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-39. - General powers. 
(a)  The airport commission shall make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners of Floyd County regarding the levy and collections of fees and charges for the use of the service of the airport; and the leasing or renting of airport facilities, terminal space, hangars, tie-down space, land, buildings and equipment. 
(b)  The airport commission shall make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners of Floyd County regarding the contracts and arrangements for the use of airport buildings, facilities, equipment and land. 
(c)  The airport commission shall make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners of Floyd County regarding accepting grants, gifts, gratuities and donations for the support, improvement and operation of the airport. 
(d)  The airport commission shall make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners of Floyd County regarding the engagement of professional assistants, including engineers, consultants and planners to plan for the future operations and orderly improvement of the airport. 
(e)  The airport commission shall make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners of Floyd County regarding contracts for improvements, construction, expansion and refurbishment of airport facilities. 
(f)  The airport commission shall make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners of Floyd County regarding the regulation of all commercial activities that are conducted on airport property and within the buildings and facilities of the airport. 
(g)  The airport commission shall be vested with authority for the construction, equipment, improvement, maintenance and operation of the airport as the Board of Commissioners of Floyd County specifically delegate from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99; Ord. No. 2007-008A, § I, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 2-3-40. - Master plan adoption. 
The airport commission shall have prepared and shall adopt master plans to provide for the orderly development and improvement of the airport. The master plan shall include a five-year, ten-year and twenty-year plan of improvement. Said master plan shall be kept current and in good order. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-41. - Land use and zoning authority. 
The airport commission shall have the power and duty to evaluate, comment upon, and recommend zoning and land use in and about the airport and its associated airspace. It shall be the responsibility of the airport commission to advise the board of commission of any proposed action that may adversely affect the use, operation, safety or orderly development of said airport and associated airways. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-42. - Reporting. 
The airport commission acting through the secretary shall provide the following report to the clerk of the board of commissioners: 
(1)  Minutes of all regular, special and called meetings. 
(2)  Monthly and other financial reports. 
(3)  An annual inventory of all land, buildings, equipment, facilities, navigational instruments and other fixed assets located at the airport, having a life greater than one (1) year and a value of more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). 
The airport commission shall prepare, adopt and present an annual report of the past year's activities of the airport commission and of the future activities and needs of the airport commission to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-43. - Fiscal and financial matters. 
(a)  Fiscal year: The airport shall use the same fiscal year as that of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Budget: The airport commission shall prepare an annual budget to provide for the operations, maintenance, repairs and capital improvements of the airport. It shall be the duty of the airport manager to prepare and recommend an annual budget for the consideration and adoption of the airport commission subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Financial reporting: The airport manager shall keep the airport commission fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the airport on a monthly basis. The report shall include a statement of revenues from airport activities and other sources and all expenditures. 
(d)  Auditing: The airport commission shall engage the county auditor or auditing firm, whose duty it shall be to thoroughly inspect and examine the books of the airport commission annually. 
(e)  County appropriations: Annually, the airport commission shall submit its request for appropriation of county funds along with a tentative budget at the time requested by the board of commissioners. However, the appropriations request shall be submitted no later than October first of the year prior to the budget year of the request. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-44. - Secretary. 
The secretary of the airport commission shall be required to keep all the books and records of the airport commission including the minutes of all meetings. The commission may designate a deputy secretary who shall serve in the absence of the secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-45. - Attorney. 
The attorney for the airport commission shall be the county attorney. However, in the event of a conflict between the airport commission and the county board of commissioners, then the airport commission is empowered to appoint a separate attorney to represent the airport commission in said matter. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Sec. 2-3-46. - Auditor. 
The airport commission shall have the power to appoint an auditor. Said auditor is to be the county auditor or auditing firm. 
(Ord. No. 1999-005A, 12-28-99) 
Secs. 2-3-47—2-3-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AIRPORT ZONING 

Sec. 2-3-60. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Airport: Russell Field Airport. 
Airport elevation: The established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area. 
Airport hazard: Any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for or is otherwise hazardous to the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport. 
Airport reference point: The point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
Board of zoning appeals: A board consisting of five (5) members appointed by the board of commissioners. 
Height: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
Instrument runway: A runway equipped or to be equipped with electronic or visual air navigation aids adequate to permit the landing of aircraft under restricted visibility conditions. 
Landing area: The area of the airport used for the landing, taking off or taxiing of aircraft. 
Nonconforming use: Any structure, tree or use of land which is lawfully in existence at the time the regulation is prescribed in this article or an amendment thereto becomes effective and does not then meet the requirements of this article. 
Noninstrument runway: A runway other than an instrument runway. 
Runway: The paved surface of an airport landing strip. 
Structure: An object constructed or installed by humans, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, and overhead transmission lines. 
Tree: An object of natural growth. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3042) 
Sec. 2-3-61. - Zones. 
In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the instrument approach zones, noninstrument approach zones, transition zones, horizontal zone and conical zone. The areas and zones are shown on the Russell Field Airport Zoning Map consisting of one (1) sheet prepared by Williams and Sweitzer Engineers, dated August 21, 1961, which is attached to the resolution from which this article is derived and which is made a part hereof. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Instrument approach zone. An instrument approach zone is established at each end of the instrument runway for instrument landings and takeoffs. The instrument approach zones shall have a width of one thousand (1,000) feet at a distance of two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of sixteen thousand (16,000) feet at a distance of fifty thousand two hundred (50,200) feet beyond each end of the runway, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Noninstrument approach zone. A noninstrument approach zone is established at each end of all noninstrument runways on the airport for noninstrument landings and takeoffs. The noninstrument approach zone shall have a width of four hundred (400) feet at a distance of two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of two thousand four hundred (2,400) feet at a distance of ten thousand two hundred (10,200) feet beyond each end of the runway, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(3)  Transition zones. Transition zones are hereby established adjacent to each instrument and noninstrument runway and approach zone as indicated on the zoning map. Transition zones, symmetrically located on either side of the runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning map. Transition zones extend outward from a line two hundred (200) feet on either side of the centerline of the noninstrument runway, for the length of such runway, plus two hundred (200) feet on each end; and five hundred (500) feet on either side of the centerline of the instrument runway, for the length of such runway, plus two hundred (200) feet on each end, and are parallel and level with such runway centerlines. The transition zones along such runways slope upward and outward one (1) foot vertically for each seven (7) feet horizontally to the point where they intersect the surface of the horizontal zone. Further, transition zones are established adjacent to both instrument and non-instrument approach zones for the entire length of the approach zones. These transition zones have variable widths, as shown on the zoning map. The transition zones flare symmetrically with either side of the runway approach zones from the base of the zones and slope upward and outward at the rate of one (1) foot vertically for each seven (7) feet horizontally to the points where they intersect the surfaces of the horizontal and conical zones. Additionally, transition zones are established adjacent to the instrument approach zone where it projects through and beyond the limits of the conical zone, extending a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured horizontally from the edge of the instrument approach zones at right angles to the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(4)  Horizontal zone. A horizontal zone is hereby established as the area within a circle with its center at the airport reference point and having a radius of seven thousand (7,000) feet. The horizontal zone does not include the instrument and noninstrument approach zones and the transition zones. 
(5)  Conical zone. A conical zone is hereby established commencing at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extending to a distance of twelve thousand (12,000) feet from the airport reference point. The conical zone does not include the instrument and non-instrument approach zones and transition zones. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3043) 
Sec. 2-3-62. - Height limitations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the height limits herein established for that zone. The height limitations are computed from the established airport elevation and are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Instrument approach zones. One (1) foot in height for each fifty (50) feet in horizontal distance, beginning at a point two hundred (200) feet from the end of the instrument runway and extending to a distance of ten thousand two hundred (10,200) feet from the end of the runway; thence one (1) foot in height for each forty (40) feet in horizontal distance to a point fifty thousand two hundred (50,200) feet from the end of the runway. 
(2)  Noninstrument approach zones. One (1) foot in height for each forty (40) feet in horizontal distance, beginning at a point two hundred (200) feet from the end of the non-instrument runway and extending to a point ten thousand two hundred (10,200) feet from the end of the runway. 
(3)  Transition zones. One (1) foot in height for each seven (7) feet in horizontal distance, beginning at a point two hundred (200) feet from the centerline of noninstrument runways and five hundred (500) feet from the centerline of the instrument runway, measured at right angles to the longitudinal centerline of the runway, extending upward to a maximum height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation which is six hundred forty-four (644) feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits of one (1) foot vertical height for each seven (7) feet of horizontal distance measured from the edges of all approach zones for the entire length of the approach zones and extending upward and outward to the points where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Further, where the instrument approach zone projects through and beyond the conical zone, a height limit of one (1) foot for each seven (7) feet of horizontal distance shall be maintained, beginning at the edge of the instrument approach zone and extending a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the edge of the instrument approach zone measured at right angles to the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(4)  Horizontal zone. One hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation or a maximum height of seven hundred ninety-four (794) feet above mean sea level elevation. 
(5)  Conical zone. One (1) foot in height for each twenty (20) feet of horizontal distance, beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and measured in an inclined plane passing through the airport reference point. 
(b)  Where an area is covered by more than one (1) height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to forty-five (45) feet above the surface of the land. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3044) 
Sec. 2-3-63. - Use restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no use may be made of land within zones established by this article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft; make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others; result in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport; impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3045) 
Sec. 2-3-64. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or alterations of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the resolution from which this article was derived, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of such resolution and was diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of subsection (a) of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the county superintendent of public works or any other duly appointed official to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport hazards. The markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the county. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3046) 
Sec. 2-3-65. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. Except as specifically provided in subsections (1), (2) and (3) hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone hereby created, unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted: 
(1)  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and the conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except where because of terrain, land contour or topographic features such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for the zones. 
(2)  In the areas lying within the limits of the instrument and noninstrument approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than four thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runways, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except where such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for the instrument or noninstrument approach zone. 
(3)  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except where such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic feature would extend above the height limit prescribed for the transition zones. 
Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this article except as set forth in section 2-3-62. 
(b)  Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of the resolution from which this article was derived or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the building inspection department or other duly authorized official determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than eighty (80) percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use such person's property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply to the board of zoning appeals for a variance from such regulations. The variance shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but would do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. 
(e)  Hazard marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the county, at its own expense, to install, operate, and maintain thereon, such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3047) 
Sec. 2-3-66. - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the building inspection department to administer and enforce regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the building inspection department upon a form furnished by it. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the building inspection department shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by it. Applications for action by the board of zoning appeals shall be forthwith transmitted by the building inspection department. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3048) 
Sec. 2-3-67. - Board of zoning appeals. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of zoning appeals to have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the building inspection department in the enforcement of this article; 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which the board of zoning appeals under such regulations may be required to pass; and 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances. 
(b)  The board of zoning appeals shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the board of commissioners and each shall serve for a term of three (3) years and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the members first appointed, one (1) shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two (2) for a term of two (2) years and two (2) for a term of three (3) years. Members shall be removable by the appointing authority for cause, upon written charges, after a public hearing. 
(c)  The board of zoning appeals shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this article. Meetings of the board of zoning appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board of zoning appeals may determine. The chairman, or in the chairman's absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of zoning appeals shall be public. The board of zoning appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the building inspection department and shall be a public record. 
(d)  The board of zoning appeals shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this article. 
(e)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of zoning appeals shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the building inspection department or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to effect any variation in this article. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3049) 
Sec. 2-3-68. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the building inspection department made in its administration of this article, if of the opinion that the decision of the building inspection department is an improper application of these regulations, may appeal to the board of zoning appeals. 
(b)  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of zoning appeals, by filing with the building inspection department a notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor. The building inspection department shall forthwith transmit to the board of zoning appeals all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building inspection department certifies to the board of appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed, except by order of the board of zoning appeals on notice to the agency from which the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of zoning appeals shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of zoning appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3050) 
Sec. 2-3-69. - Penalties. 
Each violation of this article or of any regulation, order or ruling promulgated hereunder, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 2-1-8. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3051) 
Sec. 2-3-70. - Conflicting regulations. 
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Code 1979, § 6-3052) 
Chapter 2-4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, adopted July 13, 2004, amended by striking the entire chapter, and enacted a new Ch. 2-4 as set out herein. The former Ch. 2-4 pertained to similar subject matter. The license fee schedule is at the end of this chapter. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages and controlled dangerous substances, § 2-13-16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all beer, malt beverage or wine. 
Board of commissioners means the Board of Commissioners of Floyd County. 
Distance means the measurement in feet from the point on that premises where malt beverages and/or wine is sought to be sold which is the centerline of the customer entry closest to the protected use along the shortest traveled route on applicant's property through the point of access for vehicles nearest the protected use to the center of the right-of-way and along the center of the right-of-way to the nearest property line of the protected use. 
License means the authorization by the board of commissioners to engage in the sale or consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages, and for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off of the premises. 
Licensee means a person holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
Malt beverage and beer mean any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, larger beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manager means the person in charge of the day-to-day operation of the business establishment for which an application is made under this chapter and whose primary place of employment is at the location for which the applicant's application is made. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Park means any public lands or parking facilities for boat trailers and motor vehicles owned or controlled and operated by the county, the Rome-Floyd Parks and Recreation Authority, or any other governmental unit of the state in and upon which play facilities are provided for the recreation and enjoyment of the general public. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one (1) family customarily resides, but does not include any residence that has not been occupied for a period of six (6) consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application for license. 
Protected use means private residences in a residential zoning district, churches, alcohol or drug treatment centers owned and operated by the state, any county or municipal government, daycare facilities, schools, college campuses, public libraries, branches of a public library, public parks, public housing, or public hospitals, as applicable. 
Provisional license means a license that would be issued except for the building's not being completed at the time. 
Retail sale means selling or offering for sale malt beverages or wine to any member of the public. 
Retailer or retail dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2007-001A, § I, 1-23-07) 
Sec. 2-4-2. - Compliance with chapter required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale at wholesale or retail any malt beverage or wine without first having complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-3. - Applicability to territory outside municipalities only. 
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply only to the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Secs. 2-4-4—2-4-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 2-4-11. - Separate licenses; classification; fees. 
(a)  A separate license is required as follows: 
(1)  For the sale of malt beverages for consumption off the premises. 
(2)  For the sale of wine for consumption off the premises. 
(3)  For the sale of malt beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(4)  For the sale of wine for consumption on the premises. 
(5)  For the wholesale delivery of alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  For the sale of malt beverages for consumption on the premises on Sundays. 
(7)  For the sale of wine for consumption on the premises on Sundays. 
(b)  The amount of the fee for each class of license shall be as set forth in the fee schedule book of the county as authorized by section 2-1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2013-001A, § I, 11-26-13) 
Sec. 2-4-12. - Application; filing; forms; contents; investigation report. 
(a)  All businesses and individuals twenty-one (21) years of age or older desiring to obtain a license shall make written application to board of commissioners for such privilege, which application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant which shall also be the individual or business entity desiring to sell malt beverages and/or wine by virtue of a license issued by the county; 
(2)  The place where the proposed business is to be located; 
(3)  The name and address of the manager of the business establishment for which a license application is made; 
(4)  The nature and character of the business to be carried on; 
(5)  If a partnership, the names of the partners; 
(6)  If a corporation, the names of the officers and registered agent of the corporation; 
(7)  If a limited liability company, the names of all officers of the company and the registered agent of the limited liability company; 
(8)  Whether the applicant, if an individual, is a legal resident of the United States; and 
(9)  Such other information as may be required by the board of commissioners. 
All information shall be sworn to by the applicant and must be accompanied by, in the case of an individual, a valid driver's license, birth certificate, permanent residence card, ("green card"), naturalization documents, valid passport, valid state identification card or work visa. Any false statement made by an applicant in the application or any false documents submitted in support of any statements made therein shall authorize the immediate denial or revocation of the license. 
(b)  All nonresident individual applicants and nonresident applicants who are a corporation, limited liability company or partnership shall designate an officer, member, partner, manager, or employee, who shall be a resident of Floyd County, and who shall hold the license for the benefit of the applicant. The applicant may designate a successor license holder, who shall meet the requirements of this section, notifying in writing the clerk of the board of commissioners, and if the clerk of the board of commissioners finds that all requirements of this section have been met, a corrected license shall be issued showing such change. All licenses held by an individual for another, a corporation, limited liability company or partnership shall be deemed held for the benefit of the applicant, and shall not be the license of such individual. 
(c)  All applications shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by the tax commissioner of the county or the tax commissioner's designee stating that all property taxes, both rent and personal, due the county by the applicant and the owner of the premises for which a license is being sought have been paid. 
(d)  All applications shall be accompanied by a certificate from the county health department that water and other facilities meet health department standards. The burden shall be upon the applicant to obtain and submit at the time of filing the application such certificate, and where food is served in conjunction with the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, the food preparation facilities shall also be covered by the certificate. 
(e)  All applicants shall furnish to the clerk of the board of commissioners all data, information and records requested of them by the board of commissioners or their authorized designee; and failure to furnish such data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. The applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for the purpose of answering questions any persons requested by the board of commissioners, its designee, or the county attorney, who are considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such license. The failure to produce such person within thirty (30) days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal with prejudice of such application. The clerk of the board of commissioners shall be an authorized designee of the board of commissioners with respect to the application process, the issuing of licenses, and the collection of fees. 
(f)  Each applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints, which shall be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, which shall search the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for any instances of criminal activity during the two (2) years immediately preceding the date of such application. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation shall also submit such fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under the rules established by the United States Department of Justice for processing and identification records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the board of commissioners considering such application. 
(g)  All applications for licenses shall be made to the clerk of the board of commissioners and shall be accompanied by a deposit equal to the amount of the license fee applicable to the license for which the applicant is applying. In the event the license is denied, one-half of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant (the remainder shall be retained for defraying some of the expense of the investigation required). 
(h)  Promptly upon filing of each application with proper deposit and all required information, the clerk shall place the application on the agenda for a regular meeting of the board of commissioners that shall take place no later than thirty (30) days from the date the application was filed, unless extenuating circumstances exist preventing the completion of all investigations. 
(i)  All applications for a license shall be investigated by the county police department to determine if the applicant is qualified to obtain the license and to determine whether any of the criteria for denying a license exists. The county police department shall attach a written report of the investigation to the application and return the same to the clerk of board of commissioners prior to the meeting at which the application is to be considered. The county police department's report will include information on the checklist furnished by the board of commissioners or its designee to the county police department. If the county police department shall be unable to complete its investigation and make its recommendation within the time prescribed, a written statement setting forth the reasons for the delay shall be attached to the application and delivered to the clerk. As soon as the reason for delay ceases to exist, the county police department shall give written notice to the clerk. Upon receiving such notice from the county police department, the clerk shall ensure all other requirements of this chapter have been met in order for the application to be heard by the board of commissioners and shall then place the application on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(j)  The clerk shall also circulate the application to the building inspector and fire marshal for their investigation and recommendation or approval. If a recommendation is delayed for any reason, the building inspector or fire marshal shall state the reasons in writing for the delay. As soon as the reason for the delay ceases to exist, the building inspector or fire marshal as applicable shall give written notice to the clerk. Upon receiving such notice from the building inspector or fire marshal, the clerk shall ensure all other requirements of this chapter have been met in order for the application to be heard by the board of commissioners and shall then place the application on the agenda of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2008-002A, § I, 1-22-08) 
Sec. 2-4-13. - Advertising; filing. 
(a)  For new license applications and not for renewals, the license applicant shall cause an ad to be placed in the local newspaper that has been designated as the legal paper for running legal ads for the county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the meeting of the board of commissioners to consider the application, which ad shall contain the following and be completed in full: 
"Alcoholic beverage license application with Floyd County, Georgia. A license application before the Board of Commissioners of Floyd County shall be heard on the ____________ day of ____________ , 20 ____________ , unless deferred by the Board of Commissioners, to consider the application of ____________ for a license for ____________ at ____________ address. The owners and managers of the business at said address are as follows: ____________ . All interested persons take notice. Any person objecting to the application in addition to being heard at the meeting may register his or her objection, either orally or in writing, to the Chief, Floyd County Police Department." 
The ad shall be in the same size as usual legal notices run by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  For new license applications, at least two (2) weeks before a license application is heard by the board of commissioners, a sign shall be placed at the location for which the license is applied on a metal or wooden post, which sign shall be provided by the county and shall measure not less than six (6) square feet which shall be in addition to the notice that is to be run in the local newspaper. The sign shall have printed on the front in bold letters the following words: "ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE LICENSE APPLICATION PENDING," and shall also state the date, time and place the license application is scheduled to be heard. The sign shall face toward the public street, sidewalk or other public property that adjoins the location so as to be clearly legible by persons using such public area. The sign shall be provided by the county, but the costs associated with the sign shall be paid by the applicant along with the application fee. 
(c)  The applicant before consideration will be given to his application shall file with the clerk of board of commissioners a copy of the advertisement, together with affidavits to the effect that the ad has been printed as required. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. of 5-8-18) 
Sec. 2-4-14. - Submitting plan; architectural standards; compliance with codes and zoning. 
(a)  All new applicants for licenses and not renewals shall furnish a plat of the building and surrounding areas showing the lot the building is located on and the location of the building on the lot. The plat shall also show the parking areas and all entrances and exits to public streets or roads, the exact location of the business, including street address. Distance shall be measured in feet as set forth in section 2-4-1 and shown on the plat, except that the requirement of showing such distances shall not exist for any distance in excess of five hundred (500) feet, provided the plat shall so state. Each building located on the premises shall be in compliance with all fire, health, and similar state and county codes. The premises shall be subject to inspection and approval before the application is approved. 
(b)  Each building in which the business is to be located shall contain sufficient lighting so the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all the outside premises of such building. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2007-001A, § I, 1-23-07) 
Sec. 2-4-15. - Consideration and guidelines for grant or denial. 
(a)  The board of commissioners, in making its determination on an initial application, shall be guided by the following factors as to whether or not to grant a license under this article: 
(1)  The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location, that is, whether the same is predominantly residential, industrial or business. 
(2)  The proximity of private residences in a residential zoning district, churches, alcohol or drug treatment centers owned and operated by the state, any county or municipal government, daycare facilities, schools, college campuses, public libraries, branches of a public library, public parks, public housing or public hospitals. 
(3)  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons. 
(4)  Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom. 
(5)  The criminal record of the applicant and the manager listed in the application and the general good character and reputation and financial responsibility of the applicant and manager listed, provided that nonpayment of federal, state, county or city taxes shall be prima facie evidence of lack of financial responsibility. 
(6)  A report of the county police chief, the building inspector, and the fire marshal. 
(7)  The information required in the application or statement and whether all requirements as to notice, advertising, fire and health codes, building, zoning, parking, lighting, and legal matters have been met. 
(8)  Evidence presented to the board of commissioners for or against the application. 
(9)  Whether or not the granting of the application is in the interest of the county. 
(10)  Whether any license or sale of malt beverages or wine previously issued for the location has been revoked for cause by the board of commissioners. 
(11)  Whether the applicant holds or possesses any other licenses for the sale of alcohol issued by the county. 
(12)  The history or reputation of the building or establishment where licensee will operate with regard to prostitution or other sex offenses, fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence, gambling, illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs, and other violations of the law. 
(13)  Even if there is compliance with the minimum distance from schools and churches, whether the type and number of schools or number of churches in the vicinity cause minors to frequent the immediate areas. 
(14)  Whether the location or type of structure is likely to create difficulty in law enforcement. 
(15)  Whether the license for the location would be detrimental to the property values in the area. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the county to grant any license for the sale of malt beverages or wine or for the wholesale delivery of alcoholic beverages within the following areas of the county: 
(1)  Within any residential zoning district. 
(2)  Within a distance, as defined in section 2-4-1, of two hundred fifty (250) feet of the nearest property line of a private residence, if such residence is located within a residential zone. 
(3)  Within a distance as defined in section 2-4-1, of three hundred (300) feet of the nearest property line of any churches, alcohol or drug treatment centers owned and operated by the state, any county or municipal government, daycare facilities, schools, college campuses, public libraries, branches of a public library, public parks, public housing or public hospital. 
(10)  Any existing building or establishment having a history of, or reputation for, prostitution or other sex offenses; fighting; shooting; stabbing; or other violence; gambling; illegal dealings in alcoholic beverages or drugs; or other violations of the law. 
(c)  Subsection 2-4-15(b) shall not apply to renewals, grandfather renewals or existing licenses. 
(d)  Prohibited persons or entities. It shall be unlawful for the board of commissioners to grant a license for the sale of malt beverages or wine to: 
(1)  A person or business entity who is not a resident of the county at the time of the filing of the application; provided that such prohibition as to residency in the county shall not apply where said person and/or business entity designates an officer, member, partner, manager, or employee who is a resident of Floyd County who shall hold the license for the benefit of the applicant. 
(2)  A person or business entity who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides, or an operator, manager, clerk or other employee of an applicant who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(3)  A person who is not a legal resident alien or a citizen of the United States. 
(4)  A person or business entity whose principals, officers, or managers have been convicted of a felony or a crime opposed to decency and morality, or who has been convicted of a crime involving a violation of the ordinances of the county relating to the use, sale, taxability or possession of malt beverages, wine, or intoxication liquors or he taxability thereof. 
(5)  A person or business entity whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause or who has had a license under this chapter revoked for cause. 
(6)  A person who is under the age of twenty-one (21) or who is not of sound mind and memory. 
(7)  Any applicant where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for a reason whatsoever. 
(e)  All decisions of the board of commissioners either approving or denying a license application shall be stated in writing, and a copy of such statement shall be provided to the applicant either personally or by first-class mail to the business address shown on the applicant's license application. 
(f)  If no action is taken on a license application, it shall be tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners, provided that no application shall be tabled more than twice without good cause. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2007-001A, § I, 1-23-07; Ord. No. 2008-002A, § II, 1-22-08) 
Sec. 2-4-16. - Renewal; new licenses for consumption on the premises on Sunday to existing licensees; denial. 
(a)  All licenses under this article shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated on the license, and no such license may be renewed except upon approval of the board of commissioners. A licensee who desires to continue the license for the next consecutive year must make a new application for the next consecutive calendar year on or before November 15 of each year on forms provided by the board of commissioners, the county manager, or the clerk of the board of commissioners or their designee. The license fee for the next consecutive calendar year shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a new license. All current licensees who apply for a corresponding initial license for the sale of malt beverages for consumption on the premises on Sunday and/or the sale of wine for the consumption on the premises on Sunday shall complete a new application and shall pay the license fee established by the county. 
(b)  All new license applicants who are not current licensees must comply with the requirements of section 2-4-12, except current licensees who apply for a corresponding initial license for the sale of malt beverages for consumption on the premises on Sunday and/or the sale of wine for consumption on the premises on Sunday may comply with this section and shall not be required to comply with all of the requirements of section 2-4-12. 
(c)  All applications authorized by this section shall be referred to the county police chief, the building inspector and the fire marshals who shall report on the licensee's activity, if any, and upon activity at the location of the licensed business, if any, during the year. 
(d)  All licenses authorized by this section shall be approved or renewed by the board of commissioners as a matter of course upon payment of appropriate fees and taxes, except as is set out in subsection (e). 
(e)  If the county police chief, building inspector or fire marshal reports any activity which constitutes probable cause for not approving or renewing a license pursuant to this section, approval or renewal shall not be made and the matter shall be referred to the board of commissioners for its consideration. The board of commissioners in making its determination on an application for a current licensee who is applying for a corresponding initial license for the sale of malt beverages for consumption on the premises on Sunday and/or the sale of wine for consumption on the premises on Sunday shall make its decision pursuant to the criteria established in section 2-4-15. The board of commissioners shall afford the licensee seeking a renewal a public hearing where the licensee may present evidence and cross-examines witnesses and in passing upon the application for renewal, the board of commissioners shall be guided by the following factors applicable to an initial application: 
(1)  The criminal record of the applicant, its principals, officers or managers, and the manager listed in the application and the general good character and reputation and financial responsibility of the applicant and manager listed; provided that nonpayment of federal, state, county or city taxes shall be prima facie evidence of lack of financial responsibility. 
(2)  A report of the county police chief, the building inspector, and the fire marshal. 
(3)  Evidence presented to the board of commissioners for or against the application. 
(4)  Whether or not the granting of the application is in the interest of the county. 
(5)  Whether any license or sale of malt beverages or wine previously issued for the location has been revoked for cause by the board of commissioners. 
(6)  The history or reputation of the building or establishment where licensee will operate with regard to prostitution or other sex offenses, fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence, gambling, illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs, and other violations of the law. 
(7)  Whether the applicant holds or possesses any other license for the sale of alcohol issued by the county. 
(8)  Whether the applicant has violated any ordinance contained in this chapter. 
(f)  At the public hearing, the board of commissioners may grant or deny for cause the renewal of any license issued under this article. If no action is taken by the board of commissioners, the matter shall be considered tabled and action deferred until the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners, provided that no application shall be tabled more than twice without good cause. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2013-001A, § II, 11-26-13) 
Sec. 2-4-17. - Suspension; renewal; revocation; probation. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall have the full power and authority to revoke, refuse to renew, suspend, or place on probation any license to sell malt beverages or wine for violation of this code, or the state or federal laws, or when continued operation of the licensed business is detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, provided that unless a state of emergency exists as set forth in subsection (b), the licensee shall be afforded a public hearing before the alcohol control commission (the "ACC"), as provided for hereinafter, where the licensee may present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. 
(b)  There shall be no summary seizure of licenses under this chapter unless there exists a state of emergency duly declared, and after any such seizure, a hearing shall be held as soon as practicable. 
(c)  The approval of an application by the board of commissioners and/or the granting of a license by the board of commissioners may be suspended or revoked, after notice and hearing, if any change in the information supplied, or in the physical layout represented in the plat submitted occurs without the approval of the board of commissioners. An applicant anticipating any such change shall submit all details thereof to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2007-002A, § I, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 2-4-18. - Removing residence from county or otherwise becoming a prohibited person. 
Any licensee who removes his residence from the county or otherwise becomes a "prohibited person" as defined in [subsections 2-4-15(c)1—7] shall, within three (3) days of the event, make the fact known to the board of commissioners or its designee and shall surrender his license upon demand by the board of commissioners in such case. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-19. - Substantially same application not to be resubmitted or entertained within twelve months of previous application; deferral of action on application, the subject matter of which is being litigated. 
(a)  No applicant under this chapter may submit and the board of commissioners shall not act upon an application which is substantially the same as an application submitted within the previous twelve (12) months unless directed by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The board of commissioners may defer action upon any application, the subject matter of which is substantially the same as the subject matter of litigation then pending in the state or federal courts, until such time as litigation is resolved. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Secs. 2-4-20, 2-4-21. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-001A, § I, adopted Jan. 23, 2007, repealed §§ 2-4-20, 2-4-21, which pertained to distance to location of business and derived from Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, adopted 7-13-04. 
Sec. 2-4-22. - Sale, possession or consumption in parks. 
No malt beverages or wine shall be sold, possessed or consumed by any person at any public park. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Secs. 2-4-23—2-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 2-4-31. - Employment of minors prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee shall employ any person in or about the premises where malt beverages or wine are sold, or offered for sale, to sell or deliver, or to aid or assist in the sale or delivery, directly or indirectly, of such beverages unless such person is twenty-one (21) years of age or older. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to sell, take orders for or deliver, or in any manner take part or assist in the sale, serving or delivery of such beverages. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under twenty-one (21) years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores from handling malt beverages or wine sold for consumption off the premises. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under twenty-one (21) years of age from being employed in a restaurant that is applying for a license to sell malt beverages or wine provided the person under twenty-one (21) years of age is not involved in the dispensing, serving, selling or handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-32. - Consumption of alcoholic beverage by licensees or employees while on duty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the licensee or any employee of a licensee to consume any alcoholic beverage or any intoxicating beverage while on duty at the licensed premises, or to be on duty at the licensed premises in an intoxicated state. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, any licensee or employee of a licensee who is on the licensed premises shall be presumed to be "on duty" if he is: 
(1)  Being paid any salary, wage, or remuneration of any kind for his services rendered during the time he is on the licensed premises. 
(2)  On the licensed premises for the benefit of or at the direction of the licensee or its management (other than as a customer, patron, or guest). 
(3)  Engaging in the sale, either directly or indirectly, of any food or beverage. 
(4)  Taking a break during periods of on-duty employment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-33. - Sale to minors, incompetents, those under the influence prohibited. 
No licensee shall sell any malt beverage or wine to any person under the age prescribed as the minimum age by state law, or to any person in an intoxicated condition, or to any person known to such licensee or such licensees employee to be a person habitually intoxicated, or to any person known to such licensee or licensees employee to be on probation under an order of any state court or superior court; nor shall any licensee permit the consumption of such beverages on the licensee's premises by any person within the above restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-34. - Purchase, consumption or possession by or for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a place where minors knowingly are allowed and permitted to come and purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy any alcoholic beverage and furnish the same to a minor for consumption. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility and duty of the licensee to examine the identification of customers and patrons to be certain that such customer or patron is of legal age. For the purpose of this section, "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person's date of birth, which includes but is not limited to a passport, military identification, drivers license, or identification card authorized under an act to require the department of public safety to issue identification cards to handicapped persons who do not have a motor vehicle drivers license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-34.1. - Magistrate court jurisdiction. 
The Floyd County Magistrate Court, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-10-260, is granted jurisdiction to try and dispose of violations of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23.1, or sections 2-4-33 and 2-4-34 of this Code, pertaining to furnishing alcoholic beverages to, and purchase and possession of alcoholic beverages by, a person under twenty-one (21) years of age, if the offense occurs within the unincorporated area of Floyd County. Such prosecution may proceed by citation, summons, arrest, citation and arrest, by arrest warrant or by accusation of the county attorney, all as provided for under state law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-003A, 10-26-10) 
Sec. 2-4-35. - Sanitation, good order and fire protection regulations; inspection. 
(a)  All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition. 
(b)  All premises licensed under this chapter shall conform at all times with all fire regulations of the state. 
(c)  All premises licensed under this chapter shall be subject to inspection by employees of the county, by law enforcement officers, or by the fire marshal to determine that the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-36. - Requirements for wholesalers generally. 
All wholesalers shall be licensed under the provisions of this chapter and shall comply with this chapter before they can sell or deliver any alcoholic beverages to any establishment in the county. Delivery shall be made in a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as set out in this chapter and shall, at all times when deliveries are being made, be subject to inspection by any duly authorized authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-37. - Employment of persons with prior convictions. 
No licensee shall employ in any premises for the sale of alcoholic beverages any person in any capacity whatsoever who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law for a criminal offense involving alcoholic beverages, gambling or tax violation or involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately prior to the application for employment. No licensee shall employ in any premises for the sale of malt beverages or wine any person who has been convicted of a felony. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-38. - Storage of inventory. 
All retail licensees shall store their alcoholic beverage inventory only on the location for which the license is issued. No retail licensee shall be permitted to enter into any type of arrangement whereby the alcoholic beverage inventory ordered by the licensee is stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-39. - Gambling on the premises prohibited. 
Except as otherwise authorized by state law, there shall be no gambling, bidding, games of chance, punchboards, slot machines, or the operation of any scheme for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any place of business licensed under this chapter, or in any room adjoining the same, or on any of the property contiguous to the licensed location. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-40. - Incorporation of state revenue department regulations. 
The state regulations relating to the sale and distribution of malt beverages and wines, as revised, are hereby incorporated and made a part of this section as if fully stated herein. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-41. - License constitutes grant or privilege. 
(a)  Licenses shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and related laws, and other ordinances and resolutions of the county relating to such business. 
(b)  Licenses shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled by the Board of Commissioners of Floyd County, and is subject to any future ordinances enacted by Floyd County." 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-42. - Separate license for each place of business. 
A person doing business at more than one place shall take out and pay for a separate license for each place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-43. - Display of licenses. 
Licenses shall be displayed openly and permanently at all times on the premises for which a license was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-44. - Licensees to maintain a copy of this chapter; employees to be familiar with terms; responsibility of licensee for violations. 
Each licensee shall keep a copy of this chapter in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person employed by the licensee with respect to the terms of this chapter, and it is the responsibility of the licensee that his agents and employees be familiar with all of the terms of this chapter. The licensee is responsible for any acts of his agents or employees in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-45. - Completion of proposed license premises. 
Where a building in which a retailer intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of the application for such license, not in existence, or not yet completed or renovated, a provisional license may be issued for such location provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with all other provisions of this chapter. No sale shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-46. - License periods. 
(a)  Any new license issued prior to July 1 of any calendar year shall be effective for the remainder of the calendar year. A renewal license, regardless of when originally issued, shall be effective for the entire calendar year; and any new license issued on or after July 1 shall be effective for the remainder of that calendar year. 
(b)  If the license is surrendered or revoked before the expiration of the calendar year, the holder shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(c)  Any new license issued before July 1 shall be subject to the full annual license fee without proration. Any new license issued on or after July 1 shall be subject to half the annual license fee without further proration. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-47. - Nonrenewal of license; suspension; probation; revocation for due cause. 
(a)  No license issued by the county to any retail dealer or wholesale dealer shall be suspended or revoked, subject to probation, or fail to be renewed except for due cause and after a hearing before the alcohol control commission (the "ACC") and upon written notice sent by certified mail or personal service to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. Three (3) days' notice shall be deemed reasonable for a revocation, suspension or probation hearing, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized by the ACC as it may deem the circumstances to justify. Fifteen (15) days' notice shall be reasonable for a non-renewal hearing, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the board of commissioners may deem the circumstances to justify. 
(b)  Due cause for suspension or revocation, probation or non-renewal of such license shall in addition to other criteria set forth in this chapter consist of the violation of any law or ordinance regulating such business or for violation of any state or federal law, or for violation of state regulations as promulgated by the state revenue department relating to malt beverages and wine. 
(c)  The county police department shall notify in writing the clerk of board of commissioners or the county manager that a licensee is suspected of committing any action that would cause a license to be revoked or suspended. 
(d)  The person so notified by the county police department shall notify the chairman of the ACC, who will have the authority to cause notice to be sent to the licensee that a hearing will be had on a date certain, which date shall be at least three (3) days of the date notice is received by the licensee, or a shorter period of time if in the discretion of the ACC circumstances exist that require a shorter hearing date. 
(e)  On the date and time set for the hearing, evidence shall be submitted to the ACC regarding the charge against the licensee, and the licensee shall be permitted to cross examine witnesses. The licensee shall also be permitted to offer evidence in support of the licensee's case. 
(f)  The chairman of the ACC shall conduct the hearing, and the county attorney shall represent the county at the hearing. The hearing will be informal, but general rules of evidence for the proper conduct of the hearing will apply. 
(g)  After all of the evidence has been submitted, the ACC shall confer and consider the evidence. The ACC shall make known their decision in public by majority vote, which shall be reduced to writing and presented to the board of commissioners for consideration. The licensee shall be given a copy of such decision. 
(h)  After considering the findings and conclusions of the ACC, the board of commissioners shall confer and make known their decision in public by majority vote. If the decision of the board of commissioners is to revoke the license, the county police department shall immediately take possession of the license and the licensee shall no longer be permitted to carry on the business for which the license was issued. 
(i)  If the license is suspended or the licensee is placed on probation, the terms and conditions of the suspension or probation shall be specifically set forth in writing by the board of commissioners and the licensee shall comply with such conditions. The county police department shall make frequent inspections of the licensee to determine that the conditions of suspension or probation are being complied with. 
(j)  A copy of the finding of the board of commissioners shall be forwarded to the state revenue commissioner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2007-002A, § I, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 2-4-48. - Automatic revocation. 
Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell, at wholesale or retail, malt beverages, or wine the county license to deal in such products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-49. - Removal of signs; no fee returned. 
(a)  When any license for selling beverages is revoked, all signs indicating that such beverage may be sold or purchased shall be removed from the place of business, both outside and inside. Upon receipt by the county police department of notice of such revocation, the county police department shall take the necessary steps to see that this section is enforced. 
(b)  In the event of revocation by the board of commissioners, the licensee shall not be entitled to a return of the unearned license fee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-50. - Restrictions upon transfers; notification of change in interest. 
(a)  No license shall be transferable to or assumable to any other person or location except upon prior approval of the board of commissioners subject to the following: 
(1)  Payment of ten (10) percent of the amount of the license fee. 
(2)  In case of the death of any person holding such a license or any interest therein, the same may, in the discretion of the board of commissioners, be transferred to the personal representative or the lawful heirs of the deceased person. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one (1) or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one (1) or more of the partners, who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(4)  Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee and a new location shall be considered under, and meet the requirements of, a new license hereunder; however, where a transfer of an existing location is approved and there is no change in the ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(b)  Any holder of a license for the sale of malt beverages or wine shall make and immediately report to the clerk of board of commissioners or county manager any change in the interest or ownership of the business stated in the application for license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-51. - Alcohol control commission: establishment and composition. 
(a)  There is hereby established an alcohol control commission (the "ACC"), which shall consist of the chairman of the Public Safety Committee of the Floyd County Board of Commissioners, who shall serve as chairman of the ACC, and four (4) citizens-at-large. 
(b)  All citizen-members of the ACC shall be chosen and appointed by the county commission. All members shall serve terms, and occupy posts, as follows: 
(1)  Post 1. Chairman of the Public Safety Committee of the Floyd County Board of Commissioners, with term expiring upon the expiration of his term as county commissioner. 
(2)  Post 2. A citizen-at-large, serving a three-year term. 
(3)  Post 3. A citizen-at-large, serving a three-year term. 
(4)  Post 4. A citizen-at-large, serving a four-year term; provided, however, that said term shall be reduced to three (3) years following the completion of the initial four-year term. 
(5)  Post 5. A citizen-at-large, serving a four-year term. provided, however, that said term shall be reduced to three (3) years following the completion of the initial four-year term. 
(c)  Each member shall serve his specified term and until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(d)  In all actions by the ACC, all members of the ACC shall be eligible to vote. A quorum shall be no less than three (3) members of the ACC, and all decisions and judgments of the ACC shall be by simple majority of those members present. 
(Ord. No. 2007-002A, § II, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 2-4-52. - Staff and advisors. 
(a)  The county clerk shall be the recorder and record keeper of the ACC and as such shall attend meetings, take minutes thereof, be responsible for all files and records, receive and process applications, and perform other such tasks as designated by the alcohol control commission. The county clerk may participate in all discussions of the alcohol control commission but has no voting power. 
(b)  The ACC shall have, as it requires, additional staff consisting of the county manager, county attorney, chief of police and all county employees available to it. These staff persons may participate in all discussions of the alcohol control commission but shall not have the power to vote. 
(Ord. No. 2007-002A, § II, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 2-4-53. - Powers and duties. 
The ACC is hereby vested with the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To recommend to the county commission modifications to the ordinances and policies of the county pertaining to the regulation, control and taxing of wine and malt beverages. 
(2)  To hear complaints, suggestions and recommendations from the county manager, the county commission, police department, state officials, alcoholic beverage dealers and the public at large as to the operation of wine and malt beverage outlets within the county. 
(3)  To promulgate rules and regulations governing procedures before it. 
(4)  To investigate and hear reports and charges constituting probable cause to suspend or revoke licenses for the sale of wine and/or malt beverages, at wholesale and retail, by the package and by the drink. After such hearing, and considering all evidence presented, the ACC shall make a recommendation to the commission as to what penalty, if any, shall be assessed against an accused license holder or his employee. Such recommendation shall be advisory only and shall not be binding upon the commission. The ACC may consult, but shall not be bound by, the following penalty guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2007-002A, § II, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 2-4-54. - Offense of sale of alcohol to a minor. 
(1)  First time offenders may receive a letter of warning which the county clerk shall place in the offender's file or up to a four-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(2)  Second time offenders may receive up to a ten-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(3)  Third time offenders may receive up to a thirty-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(4)  Fourth time offenders may receive a thirty-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(5)  Fifth and subsequent offenses may result in the revocation of the offender's license. 
(6)  An offense committed more than three (3) years subsequent to a prior offense may be considered a first offense for purposes of said penalty guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2007-002A, § II, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 2-4-55. - Offense of after hours sale of alcohol. 
(1)  First time offenders may receive a letter of warning which the county clerk shall place in the offender's file or up to a four-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(2)  Second time offenders may receive up to a ten-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(3)  Third time offenders may receive up to a thirty-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(4)  Fourth and subsequent offenses may result in the revocation of the offender's license. 
(5)  An offense committed more than three (3) years subsequent to a prior offense may be considered a first offense for purposes of said penalty guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2007-002A, § II, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 2-4-56. - Offense of Sunday sale of alcohol. 
(a)  First time offenders may receive a letter of warning which the county clerk shall place in the offender's file or up to a four-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(b)  Second and subsequent offenders may receive up to a ten-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine or a permanent suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(c)  An offense committed more than three (3) years subsequent to a prior offense may be considered a first offense for purposes of said penalty guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2007-002A, § II, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 2-4-57. - Offense of after hours consumption of alcohol. 
(a)  First time offenders may receive a letter of warning which the county clerk shall place in the offender's file or up to a four-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(b)  Second time offenders may receive up to a ten-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(c)  Third time and subsequent offenders may receive up to a ten-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine or a permanent suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(d)  An offense committed more than three (3) years subsequent to a prior offense may be considered a first offense for purposes of said penalty guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2007-002A, § II, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 2-4-58. - Offense of consumption of alcohol by on duty employee. 
(a)  First time offenders may receive a letter of warning which the county clerk shall place in the offender's file or up to a four-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(b)  Second time offenders may receive up to a ten-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(c)  Third time offenders may receive up to a thirty-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(d)  Subsequent offenders may have their license revoked. 
(e)  An offense committed more than three (3) years subsequent to a prior offense may be considered a first offense for purposes of said penalty guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2007-002A, § II, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 2-4-59. - Excessive or severe altercations on-premises. 
(a)  First time offenders may receive a letter of warning which the county clerk shall place in the offender's file or up to a thirty-day suspension of their license to dispense malt beverages and/or wine. 
(b)  Second and subsequent offends may result in the revocation of the offender's license. 
(c)  An offense committed more than three (3) years subsequent to a prior offense may be considered a first offense for purposes of said penalty guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2007-002A, § II, 4-10-07) 
Sec. 2-4-60. - Offense of failure to report management/license change. 
(a)  Offender shall receive a letter of warning to correct the offender's application. Failure to correct within ten (10) days of the receipt of such letter of warning may result in the suspension of the offender's license until the matter is corrected. 
(b)  An offense committed more than three (3) years subsequent to a prior offense may be considered a first offense for purposes of said penalty guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2007-002A, § II, 4-10-07) 
ARTICLE IV. - SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR CONSUMPTION OFF THE PREMISES 

Sec. 2-4-61. - For the sale of malt beverages or wine to be consumed off the premises. 
(a)  A licensee under this article shall not allow any patron or customer to consume any alcoholic beverage in the building or on the business property. 
(b)  The licensee shall not pour any alcoholic beverage into an open container, or allow the customer to pour any alcoholic beverage into an open container while on the premises. 
(c)  The licensee shall allow no loitering inside or outside the building. 
(d)  The licensee shall keep the building and grounds clean and free of trash and debris. 
(e)  No drive-through windows shall be allowed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-62. - Hours in which alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption off the premises. 
No sale of malt beverages or wine for consumption off the premises shall be allowed except Monday through Friday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 1:30 a.m. the following day, 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight on Saturday, and 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday, nor shall the sale of malt beverages or wine for consumption off the premises be allowed on Christmas and any other days prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2013-001A, § III, 11-26-13) 
Secs. 2-4-63—2-4-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 2-4-71. - For the sale of malt beverages or wine on the premises. 
(a)  A licensee under this article shall not permit any fights, disturbances or activities that would be a nuisance to the neighborhood to take place on the premises. 
(b)  The licensee shall not permit any weapons, guns, knives or clubs to be handled, displayed or used on the premises. 
(c)  The licensee shall not permit: 
(1)  Any disturbance of the peace. 
(2)  Obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices. 
(3)  Any prostitutes to remain on the premises. 
(4)  Nude dancing. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-72. - On the premises. 
(a)  A licensee under this article shall provide adequate parking. 
(b)  The licensee shall provide lighting as required in this chapter and provide sufficient lighting in the parking area so as to make the parking area visible by light at night. 
(c)  The licensee shall keep the building clean and free of trash and debris. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-73. - Condition of the building. 
(a)  A licensee under this article shall provide toilet facilities for male and female customers, and those facilities shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(b)  If the licensed business has cooking facilities, the cooking facilities shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(c)  The premises shall be kept in compliance with all health codes and fire codes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-74. - Hours in which alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on-premises. 
(a)  No sale of malt beverage or wine for consumption on the premises pursuant to subsections 2-4-11(3) and (4) shall be allowed except Monday through Friday between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 1:30 a.m. the following day, and 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Saturday. 
(b)  No sale of malt beverage or wine for consumption on the premises on Sunday pursuant to subsections 2-4-11(6) and (7) shall be allowed except Sunday from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight. 
(c)  All licensed premises must close their premises to the public and clear the premises of patrons within thirty (30) minutes after the time set by this section for the discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises. Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the sale of malt beverage or wine for consumption on the premises, pursuant to subsections 2-4-11(3), (4), (6) and (7) shall not be allowed on Christmas, or other days prohibited by state law. 
(d)  The licensee and/or licensed establishment shall not sell or permit to be sold any distilled spirits inside the establishment and/or outside the establishment in Floyd County. This includes purchasing and/or obtaining distilled spirits through the establishment and selling the distilled spirits outside the establishment on the open market since the sale of distilled spirits is unlawful in Floyd County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2013-001A, § IV, 11-26-13; Ord. of 9-26-17) 
Sec. 2-4-75. - Licenses for Sunday sales. 
(a)  Sunday sales of malt beverages on the premises and Sunday sales of wine on the premises will be permitted if a licensee under this article has a valid consumption on the premises license for Monday through Saturday for beer or wine as applicable to the application for Sunday sales, obtains the appropriate Sunday sales license as provided in section 2-4-11 and derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served or in any licensed establishment which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(b)  On or before the twentieth day of the month, the licensee of a license to sell malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises on Sunday shall file with the Floyd County Clerk a gross income report of the outlet for the preceding month, certified by the licensee, which contains a percentage breakdown of the amount of alcohol sales of the outlet relative to the outlet's total gross income from the sale of food for the applicable month. Failure to file a timely report as provided herein, or the filing of a fraudulent report, shall constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of the Sunday sales license issued by the county to the licensee. 
(c)  Article V, sections 2-4-71 through 2-4-73 shall apply to all licenses issued pursuant to subsections 2-4-11(3), (4), (6) and (7). 
(Ord. No. 2013-001A, § V, 11-26-13) 
Secs. 2-4-76—2-4-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXCISE TAXES 

Sec. 2-4-81. - Levy on malt beverages. 
In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the county in the business of selling malt beverages, as defined under the laws of the state, there is imposed and levied upon all such retail dealers within the unincorporated areas of the county an excise tax, to be computed and collected on the following basis: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of six dollars ($6.00) on each container sold containing not more than fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of fifteen and one-half (15½) gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers except barrels or bulk containers, a tax of five cents ($0.05) per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-82. - Levy on wine. 
In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the county in the business of selling naturally fermented wines, as defined under the laws of the state, there is imposed and levied upon all such retail dealers within the unincorporated areas of the county an excise tax to be computed and collected on the following basis: Twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on fractional parts of a liter. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-83. - Payment of tax; records and reports; penalty. 
The tax imposed in this article shall be computable and payable monthly by the licensed wholesale dealer. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping or delivering malt beverages or wine to any retail dealer in any unincorporated areas of the county, whether delivered to the dealer's place of business for resale or not, shall, as a condition to the privilege of carrying on such business in the county: 
(1)  Keep true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of such malt beverages and wine to each retail dealer, such records to be preserved for a period of one (1) year and to be made available on request for inspection by any duly authorized representative of the county. 
(2)  Collect from each retail dealer at the time of delivery of the malt beverages and wine the amount of tax due under the terms of this article and hold the same in trust for the county until such amount is remitted to the county as next provided. 
(3)  On or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the malt beverage or wine is sold by the wholesaler within the unincorporated area of the county, make a verified and comprehensive report to the board of commissioners or its designee, which report shall correctly show all sales and deliveries of malt beverages and wine made to or for retail dealers in the county for the month immediately preceding the report. The report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer by size and types of container, and the amount collected under the terms of this article and shall include copies of all sales invoices to each retail dealer, and such other information as may be called for by the board of commissioners. The report shall be accompanied by remittance to the county for all taxes collected or due as shown on the report. Failure of the wholesale dealer or distributor to remit the taxes required by this article would result in a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax due, in addition to the tax due. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-84. - Failure to make reports. 
If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports provided for in this article, the board of commissioners shall notify the party in writing; and if the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five (5) days from the date of the notice, the board of commissioners may withdraw from the wholesale dealer or distributor the privilege of doing business in the county by revoking such dealer's license. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-85. - Unpaid taxes. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell at retail within the unincorporated areas of the county any malt beverages or wine on which the taxes required by this article have not been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-86. - Failure to collect taxes at delivery. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any wholesale dealer or distributor to deliver any malt beverages or wine to any retail dealer within the unincorporated areas of the county without collecting the taxes provided for in this article at the time of delivery. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Secs. 2-4-87—2-4-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT PROHIBITION 

Sec. 2-4-101. - Findings; public purpose. 
Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; Dekalb County, Georgia; Cobb County, Georgia; Richmond County, Georgia; Dalton and Whitfield County, Georgia; Carrolton, Georgia; Amarillo, Texas; and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the county, the board of commissioners takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within the country. Moreover, it is the finding of the board of commissioners that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment" or "adult entertainment," begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcoholic beverages are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcoholic beverages are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare; and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments that serve alcoholic beverages and also allow and/or encourage nudity. To that end, this article is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-102. - Prohibited acts. 
The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  The employment or use of the services of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) of this section or where such person performs acts of or acts that simulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act prohibited by law. 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus, vulva or genitals. 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowing of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) above. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Secs. 2-4-103—2-4-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TEMPORARY PERMIT: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE: ACCOUNTING 

Sec. 2-4-111. - Definitions. 
Proper application is defined as an application containing the following information: 
(1)  As to the corporation or organization receiving donations: name, address, nature and purpose. 
(2)  As to the applicant (who must be an authorized member of the applying organization); name and address. 
(3)  Proposed location. 
(4)  Dates of sales. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-112. - Isolated or casual pouring license. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, upon proper application of the board of commissioners, the board of commissioners may grant a permit for an isolated or casual pouring of malt beverages and wine for consumption only on the premises, including for outdoor events with no buildings, for a period not to exceed one (1) day and subject to any ordinance regulating the time for selling of such beverage, provided that there is no objection from the state and provided that the proceeds from the sales under such permit shall be donated to a corporation or organization qualified as an exempt organization under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. The board of commissioners is authorized to delegate its authority to grant or deny such permits to the county police chief or county manager. 
(b)  No permit shall be granted under this section unless the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  The applicant shall be qualified to hold a permanent alcoholic beverage pouring license of the same classification under this Code. 
(2)  The proposed location shall not be a prohibited location in violation of this Code. 
(3)  The dates of sale under the permit shall not violate laws or regulations of the county or state. 
(4)  A permit fee shall be paid by the applicant to the county in the amount as set forth in the fee schedule book of the county as authorized by section 2-1-12 of this Code. 
(5)  The application shall comply with the regulations set forth herein. 
(c)  No permit for an isolated or casual pouring license shall be issued if the requested building is a prohibited location as set forth in subsection 2-4-15(b), or fails to meet all requirements of the police chief, building inspector or the fire marshal for an isolated or pouring license. 
(d)  All applicants shall, within five (5) working days from the expiration of the permit, file with the board of commissioners an accounting of the sale under any temporary granted permit. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04) 
Sec. 2-4-113. - Off-premises licenses. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the board of commissioners may grant a license to permit the off-premises pouring of malt beverages and wine, including a license for an outdoor event with no building, under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  An off-premises license may only be issued to licensees who hold in good standing a license to pour malt beverages or wine on-premises issued by the county or the City of Rome, and no such licensee shall be permitted to pour any alcoholic beverages off-premises which cannot be lawfully poured at licensee's premises. No such license shall permit licensees to pour any alcohol beverages other than malt beverages or wine. 
(2)  An application for an off-premises pouring license shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name of licensee. 
b.  Address of licensee. 
c.  Type of on-premises pouring license held by licensee. 
d.  Type of off-premises license requested by licensee. 
e.  Time period requested for an off-premises license. 
(3)  No off-premises license shall be valid until the licensee pays an annual license fee established in the fee schedule book of the county as authorized by section 2-1-12 of this Code. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for an off-premises licensee to pour any malt beverage or wine at any off-premises location until the licensee shall first obtain an off-premises pouring permit. Such permit may be issued for any period up to five (5) days. An off-premises permit may be issued in accordance with the following: 
a.  An application for an off-premises pouring permit shall contain the following information: 
1.  Name of licensee. 
2.  Date and description of licensee's proposed off-premises license. 
3.  Street address of proposed off-premises location. If the location has not been previously occurred, a current plat shall be filed with the application which meets the plat requirements of subsection 2-4-14(a). 
b.  No permit for a particular off-premises location shall be issued if the requested building is a prohibited location as set forth in subsection 2-4-15(b), or fails to meet all requirements of the building inspector or the fire marshal for an on-premises pouring license. 
c.  No off-premises permit shall be valid until the licensee pays a permit fee in the amount established by the fee schedule book of the county as authorized by section 2-1-12 of this Code. This permit fee shall be based on a per-day usage charge. 
d.  Unless otherwise provided for in this section, all regulations of this Code controlling the pouring of malt beverages or wine shall limit the pouring of malt beverages and wine off-premises. 
(Ord. No. 2004-004A, § 1, 7-13-04; Ord. No. 2012-005A, § I, 8-28-12) 
Chapter 2-5 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Conditions constituting nuisances, § 2-11-6(5). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-5-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Abandoned animal: Any animal shall be considered abandoned which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of said private property and unattended or uncared for. Any animal shall also be considered as abandoned which shall have been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of the animal for a period of time in excess of thirty-six (36) hours unattended or without proper food or water. 
Adequate food and water: Food and water, which is sufficient in an amount, and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from a lack of food or water. 
Animal: Any mammal other than a human being, domestic or wild, which may be affected by rabies. 
Animal at large: An animal not under restraint. 
Animal control center: The facility designated by the board of commissioners for the housing and care of animals taken up pursuant to this chapter. 
Animal control officer: That person designated by the county manager to perform the duties prescribed for such officer by this chapter. 
Animal nuisance: Created when an animal: 
(1)  Runs uncontrolled; 
(2)  Molests or disturbs persons or vehicles by chasing, barking or biting; 
(3)  Attacks other animals; 
(4)  Damages or abuses property other than that of the owner or harborer; 
(5)  Barks, whines, howls, honks, brays, cries or makes other noises excessively; 
(6)  Creates noxious or offensive odors; 
(7)  Defecates upon any public place or premises not owned or controlled by the owner or harborer unless promptly removed by the animal owner or harborer; 
(8)  Creates an insect breeding or attraction site due to the accumulation of excreta. 
Cross reference— Cross references: See also §§ 2-11-6(5), 2-11-7. 
At large: An animal is off the premises of the owner, and not on a leash or otherwise under the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal. 
Cat: Any domestic cat, male or female, of pure or mixed breed. 
Cruelty: Any act of commission or omission whereby unjustified physical pain, suffering or death of an animal is caused or permitted. This includes failure to provide proper drink, air, space, shelter or protection from the elements, a sanitary and safe living environment, necessary veterinary care or nutritious food. In the case of activities where physical pain is necessarily caused, such as medical and scientific research, food processing, customary and normal veterinary and agricultural husbandry practices, pest elimination, and animal training and hunting, "cruelty" shall mean a failure to employ the most humane method reasonably available. 
Dangerous dog: Any dog that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(a)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being, without provocation, on public or private property; or 
(b)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Director: The director of the county animal control department. 
Disposition: Adoption, quarantine, voluntary custodianship or placement, or euthanasia humanely administered to an animal in accordance with section 2-5-38 of this Code. Also placement for sale or the sale of an animal to the general public. 
Dog: Any dog of either sex, unless otherwise specified. 
Domestic animal: Any animal which is accustomed to living in or about the habitation of persons, including, but not limited to, cats, cows, dogs, fowl, horses, swine, domesticated wild animals or exotic animals. 
Euthanasia: Death brought about by any method which produces rapid loss of consciousness to a painless death. 
Harborer: Any person who provides food and shelter for any domestic animal on other than a periodic or temporary basis. 
Humane society: The Rome-Floyd County Humane Society. 
Inoculation: The administering of anti-rabies vaccine, by a licensed veterinarian of the state, or in conformity with the existing rules and regulations of the state board of health, and the laws pertaining thereto. 
Owner: Any person having right of property in any animal; who keeps an animal; who has an animal in such person's care or custody; or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied by such person. The term includes the person who has title to or the right to possession of an animal and shall include the caretaker or custodian of any animal. 
Potentially dangerous dog: Any dog that, without provocation, bites a human being on public or private property or acts in a threatening or aggressive manner towards a person that places said person in reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury. 
Proper enclosure: An enclosure used for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides, and a secure top, and if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence should be at least six (6) feet tall with twelve (12) inches of fence buried in the ground. If the animal is inside a fence it also needs to be restrained by a secondary security measure (such as a chain). Any such enclosure shall also provide the dog with protection from the elements. 
Public nuisance animal: Any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property. The term "public nuisance animal" shall include, but is not limited to: 
(a)  Any animal that is repeatedly found running at large. 
(b)  Any cat or dog in any section of a park or public recreation area, unless the cat or dog is controlled by a substantial leash or similar physical restraint. 
(c)  Any animal that damages, soils, defiles or defecates on any property other than that of its owner. 
(d)  Any animal that makes disturbing noises, including but not limited to, continued and repeated howling, barking, whining, or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. 
(e)  Any animal that causes fouling of the air by noxious or offensive odors and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. 
(f)  Any animal in heat that is not confined so as to prevent attraction or contact with other animals. 
(g)  Any animal, whether or not on the property of its owner, that without provocation, molests, attacks, or otherwise interferes with the freedom of movement of persons in a public right-of-way. 
(h)  Any animal that attacks domestic animals. 
(i)  Any animal that causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal is kept or harbored. 
(j)  Any animal that is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare by virtue of the number of animals maintained at a single residence or the inadequacy of the facilities. 
(k)  Any violation of this chapter relating to rabies control and to the rules and regulations of the board of health or any animal existing in a condition prohibited by this chapter. 
(l)  Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in situations where the owner is deceased or has been arrested or evicted from his regular place of residence and there is no other person who will take custody of the animal. 
(m)  Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous or dangerous where the animal control director determines that there is an immediate threat to public health and safety. 
Rabies control officer: That person so named and designated by the county board of health. 
Sanitary: A condition of good order and cleanliness to minimize the possibility of disease transmission. 
Severe injury: Any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery, or a physical injury that results in death. 
Sexually mature animal: Any cat or dog that has reached the age of one hundred eighty (180) days or six (6) months or more. 
Sterilization: The surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a cat or dog in order to render the animal unable to reproduce. 
Stray cat: Any cat without a collar and proof of rabies vaccination, and that is not claimed by anyone as its owner. 
Stray dog: Any dog without a collar and proof of rabies vaccination, and that is not claimed by anyone as its owner. 
Under restraint: An animal that is: 
(a)  Secured by a substantial leash, lead under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal and to whom the animal will display obedience when commanded by said person; or 
(b)  At heel; or 
(c)  Securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's property. 
Vicious animal: 
(1)  Any animal with a propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or other domestic animals; or 
(2)  Any animal which attacks a human being or other domestic animal one or more times without provocation; or 
(Code 1979, § 2-4003; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2; Ord. of 4-5-88, § 1; Ord. of 9-12-06; Ord. of 5-9-17(1)) 
Sec. 2-5-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to promote harmonious relationships in the interaction between human beings and animals by: 
(1)  Protecting animals from improper use, abuse, neglect, exploitation, inhumane treatment and health hazards; 
(2)  Delineating the animal owner's or harborer's responsibility for the acts and behavior of such person's animal at all times; 
(3)  Providing security to residents from annoyance, intimidation, injury and health hazards by animals; and 
(4)  Encouraging responsible pet ownership. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4002; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-3. - Conflict with federal or state law. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal or state law. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4004; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Apr. 24, 2018, abolished § 2-5-4 entitled "Commission of animal control and welfare—Created; membership," which derived from: Code 1979, § 2-4006; Ord. of June 25, 1985, § 2; Ord. of Sept. 23, 1986, § 1; Ord. of Feb. 23, 1988, § 1; Amend. of June 13, 1995(1); and Amend. of Oct. 10, 1995. 
Sec. 2-5-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Apr. 24, 2018, abolished § 2-5-5 entitled "Same—Powers and duties," which derived from: Code 1979, § 2-4007; and Ord. of June 25, 1985, § 2. 
Sec. 2-5-6. - Powers and duties of director. 
The director of the animal control department shall be primarily responsible, with support from the chief of police, for the enforcement of this chapter; and such director's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Responsibility for the operation of the animal control center and the performance of such duties and the keeping of such records as the county manager may require. 
(2)  Cooperation with the county board of health in the enforcement of rabies control regulations and of animal control directives. 
(3)  Cooperation with the county humane society through the commission of animal control and welfare. 
(4)  Taking up and impounding animals which are in violation of this chapter, using any and all means available which are humane in nature. 
(5)  Investigating all complaints made regarding animals. 
(6)  Issuing warning citations to violators of this chapter. 
(7)  Enforcing, only through duly authorized personnel, all state laws and ordinances enacted by the county for the care, control and custody of animals. 
(8)  Keeping a record of the number, description, and disposition of all animals impounded or otherwise taken into custody, showing in detail as to each animal a general description by sex, breed and approximate age, together with any identification tag, vaccination tag or other marking, if any; the date of receipt; the date and manner of disposal; the name and address of the person reclaiming or adopting; the fees and charges; the proceeds of sales received; the condition of the animal when received; any treatment administered to the animal, including any drugs, medication or appliances; the condition of the animal when reclaimed, redeemed, adopted or purchased; and such additional records as the county manager may require. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4005(c); Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Cross reference— Creation of department and office of director, § 2-2-26. 
Sec. 2-5-7. - Identification of department employees. 
The employees of the animal control department, while engaged in the execution of their duties, shall wear in plain view an identification badge containing the individual's name and stating "Floyd County Animal Control." 
(Code 1979, § 2-4005(d); Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-8. - Interference with animal control officers. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer or to take or attempt to take any animal from any vehicle of an animal control officer used to transport such animal, or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control impounding areas. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4025; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-9. - Fees. 
(a)  The fees with respect to all services performed in connection with enforcement of this chapter shall be set by the board of commissioners from time to time. A copy of such fee schedule shall be posted at the headquarters of the animal control office and may be changed at any time and from time to time as determined by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The fees established and collected under this chapter are not penalties, but are imposed for the sole purpose of defraying expenses borne by the county for animal control and welfare under this chapter and are subject to change at any time. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4021; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-10. - Violations—Issuance of citations. 
(a)  Upon information made known to the chief of police, or the chief's authorized representative, or to any animal control officer, or the county attorney, that any dog or other animal is in violation of this chapter, such officer or authorized representative shall cause a citation to be issued requiring said owner of such dog or other animal to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Citations issued hereunder shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and shall be personally served upon the person accused. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4030(a), (b); Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-11. - Same—Punishment. 
(a)  Any person violating the terms of this chapter, or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, may be punished as provided in section 2-1-8. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)  Any person convicted of a second offense for violating the terms of this chapter, or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, may be, in addition to the penalty provided in subsection (a) of this section, deprived of the right to keep an animal in the county for a period of up to two (2) years after such violation. 
(c)  In addition to the remedies provided in this chapter or elsewhere in the laws of the state or the county and notwithstanding the existence of an adequate remedy at law, the animal control officer or the county attorney is authorized to apply to the superior court of the county having jurisdiction for an injunction or restraining order pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-11-15 when an individual knowingly and maliciously causes death or physical harm to an animal by rendering a part of such animal's body useless or by seriously disfiguring such animal. The court may, for good cause shown, grant a temporary or permanent injunction or an ex parte or restraining order, restraining or enjoining any person from violating and continuing to violate this article. 
(Code 1979, §§ 2-4031(a), 2-4032; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2; Ord. NO. 2011-008A, § 1, 11-22-11) 
Cross reference— Violation constitutes a nuisance, § 2-5-22. 
Sec. 2-5-12. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Whoever wilfully or maliciously kills, abuses, maims or disfigures any animal or wilfully or maliciously administers poison to any animal or exposes any poisonous substance with intent that the same shall be taken and swallowed by such animal shall be in violation of this Code. 
(b)  Whoever overloads, overdrives, tortures, torments or deprives an animal of its necessary sustenance or shelter or beats, mutilates, or kills any animal or causes the same to be done, or carries in or upon vehicles or otherwise any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner shall be deemed in violation of this Code. 
(c)  Whoever confines any animal and fails to supply sufficient quantities of wholesome food and water, or who keeps any animal in any enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, or abandons to die any animal shall be deemed in violation of this Code. 
(d)  Any animal control officer shall impound any animal found to be treated cruelly. The disposition of such animal shall be at the discretion of the director of animal control or his designee. This disposition could include returning the animal to its owner or retaining the animal if the violation is found to be intentional. 
(1)  If the director of animal control determines that the cruelty is, in fact, intentional and a determination is made to retain the animal rather than return the animal, then the owner of the animal shall be given five (5) days' notice to object in writing to the director of animal control. A disposition of the animal shall be made as quickly after the five-day period as is reasonably practical. 
(2)  If an owner objects to the disposition of the animal as determined by the director of animal control or his designee, then the owner shall have the right to appeal said decision to the Floyd County Magistrate Court and said appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days of the decision. The animal control department will keep the animal in its custody and control pending said appeal unless otherwise directed by the court. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4029; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2; Ord. No. 2001-001A, § 1, 2-13-01) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-5, 16-12-4. 
Sec. 2-5-13. - Abandonment of animal. 
It shall be unlawful to abandon any domestic animal. 
(Code 1979, §§ 2-4003(2), 2-4024; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-14. - Shelter and shade for dogs. 
It shall be the duty of the owner of any dog kept outdoors or in any unheated enclosure to provide bedding and adequate shelter from the elements. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4012; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-15. - Use of animals as prizes. 
It shall be unlawful to offer as a prize or give away any animal in any contest, raffle or lottery or as an enticement for fundraising. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4022; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-16. - Motorist hitting animal to stop and report. 
Any person who, while operating a motor vehicle, strikes or causes injury to any domestic animal shall notify the owner if known or ascertainable, as well as the animal control department, or the county police department, of the injury to and location of the animal. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4023; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-17. - Running at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal, or any person having an animal in such custody, to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the streets and highways of the county, or on the property of another person without permission of the owner of that property, or of the person in possession of that property. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4028; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-18. - Confinement of female dog in heat. 
Every female dog in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such manner that such female dog cannot come into contact with another animal except for planned breeding. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4010(b); Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-3. 
Sec. 2-5-19. - Restraining dogs so as to prevent molesting, etc., of persons—Generally. 
Every dog shall be restrained and controlled so as to prevent it from molesting passersby, chasing vehicles, or attacking persons or other animals. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4020(c); Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-20. - Same—Vicious animals. 
Any animal which is vicious, and while on the property of its owner is not kept enclosed by way of a fence at least five (5) feet in height, the sides of which are embedded into the ground no less than one (1) foot, and the gate of which is secured by a childproof lock, and restrained by a leash or chain to prevent it from wandering out of the confined area, or, while off the real property of its owner, is not muzzled and kept secured by a leash or chain held by a competent person, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance; and any person who knowingly keeps, owns, harbors or acts as custodian of a vicious animal constituting such nuisance shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to punishment as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4027; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2; Ord. of 4-5-88, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-21. - Staking animals on or near streets. 
No person shall tie, stake or fasten any animal within any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place within the county or in such manner that the animal has access to any portion of any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4010(a); Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-22. - Nuisances. 
Any animal that is declared a public nuisance animal by the definition appearing within this article shall be impounded if the owner of said animal is not known. If the owner is known, a citation may be issued. The animal will be held in accordance with section 2-5-34 of this Code unless the owner redeems the animal in accordance with section 2-5-35 of this Code. In addition to all other provisions of this chapter, any violation of this chapter is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by any application for injunction in the superior court or any other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4031(b); Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2; Ord. of 9-12-06) 
Sec. 2-5-23. - Same—Specific conditions constituting. 
The owner of any animal which habitually barks, whines, howls or causes other objectionable noise; or which is at large, chases or runs after persons or vehicles; or which destroys or damages any property of another person; or which causes serious annoyance to a neighboring resident and interferes with reasonable use and enjoyment of the person's property; or which is otherwise offensive so as to create a nuisance shall be deemed to be committing an act in violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4026; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Cross reference— For similar provisions enforced by the health officer, see § 2-11-6(5). 
Sec. 2-5-24. - Sanitary conditions. 
It shall be the duty of the owner of property to maintain in a clean and sanitary condition and free from extreme and unreasonably objectionable odor all structures, pens, yards and areas adjacent thereto wherein any animal is kept. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4011; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Cross reference— Minimum distances from occupied buildings and minimum area for each animal, § 2-11-6(5). 
Sec. 2-5-25. - Rabies control—Inoculation; tag. 
(a)  (1)  All cats and dogs owned, possessed, harbored or residing within the county shall be inoculated for the prevention of rabies by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, using only those vaccines prescribed and/or approved by the state department of human resources. 
(2)  All cats and dogs shall be vaccinated against rabies once reaching three (3) months of age. All cats and dogs shall be revaccinated within twelve (12), twenty-four (24) or thirty-six (36) months as specified by the type of vaccine used. Any cat or dog found not to be vaccinated once reaching three (3) months of age must have the consent of a licensed veterinarian stating the reason why such cat or dog should not be vaccinated. 
(3)  Any person keeping, owning, harboring or having any other type of animal, excluding cats and dogs, is not required to have the animal vaccinated against rabies unless required by the laws of this state, but such failure to have such animal vaccinated is at the risk of such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor or allow to be kept or harbored any cat or dog without a collar which shall have attached thereto a valid vaccination tag as required by rabies control rules and regulations of the county board of health and by the laws of this state. 
(c)  The identification and collar prescribed in subsection (a) of this section shall be worn at all times by any cat or dog except when the cat or dog is participating in a pet show or exhibit. However, any cat or dog being shipped or transported through the county or any cat or dog entering the county only for the purpose of a temporary stay not exceeding fourteen (14) days shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, but shall be subject to all other rules and regulations of the county board of health. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination or owner's license tag to the collar of any animal for which such tag was not issued, or to remove such tag from any animal without the consent of such animal's owner, possessor or custodian. 
(Code 1979, §§ 2-4008(a), 2-4009; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2; Ord. of 9-12-06) 
State Law reference— Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-5-26. - Same—Animal bites and biting dogs. 
(a)  Any person having information that an animal has bitten or attacked a person shall immediately report such information to the director of the animal control department and to the county board of health. 
(b)  Upon notice or complaint to the director that an animal has bitten a person, an animal control officer shall conduct an investigation of the incident and prepare a report. If the officer determines that a person has been bitten by an animal and the officer then makes a reasonable identification of the animal, the animal's owner shall be required to immediately confine the animal so that it is segregated and isolated for observation at the animal control center or at the premises of a licensed veterinarian in the county for a period of ten (10) days from the date of the incident; provided, however, that in the discretion of the investigating officer, the owner may be allowed to confine, segregate and isolate the animal on the premises of the owner for a period not to exceed the first seventy-two (72) hours of the required ten-day confinement. The investigating officer may also allow a vaccinated female which is nursing offspring to be confined, segregated and isolated on the premises of the owner for the required ten-day confinement. Whenever an animal is confined on the premises of the owner pursuant to the requirements of this subsection, the confinement shall be subject to daily inspection by an animal control officer. Prior to requiring the confinement of an animal, the investigating officer may require an affidavit from the person or guardian of the person bitten. 
(c)  Whenever it becomes necessary to confine an animal pursuant to this section and the owner fails or refuses to confine the animal as required by this section, the owner shall be cited by the investigating officer and the animal shall be immediately impounded into the custody of the animal control department. The animal shall be impounded for a period of ten (10) days or until the end of the tenth day following the incident, whichever shall occur first. The owner of any animal impounded pursuant to this section shall have the opportunity to redeem the animal at any time during the impoundment provided the owner causes the animal to be confined as required under subsection (b). No animal shall be impounded pursuant to this section unless the investigating officer first obtains an affidavit from the person or guardian of the person bitten. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4013; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2; Ord. of 11-9-92, §§ 1, 2; Amend. of 7-27-99, § 1) 
Sec. 2-5-27. - Same—Rules and regulations. 
Insofar as the control of rabies is concerned, this chapter shall be construed and enforced consistently with any rules and regulations promulgated by the county board of health. The director of the animal control department and chief of police are authorized and directed to enforce any such rabies control rules and regulations which may now or hereafter be promulgated by the county board of health. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4008(b); Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Secs. 2-5-28, 2-5-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 2-5-30. - Alternative in event owner known. 
To the extent practicable, an animal running at large unattended, the owner of which is known, shall be taken to the owner's residence, unless no adult person shall be present, in which event it shall be taken to the animal control center. In either event, a redemption fee shall be paid by the owner in an amount as set forth in section 2-5-9. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4030(c); Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-31. - Duty of officers in event owner is not known. 
In the event that the owner of any dog or other animal is not known and such dog or other animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds, or other public places or premises or upon the property of another without that property owner's permission as prohibited by this chapter, upon complaint made to, or information made known to, the animal control department, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer or such officer's authorized representative to take possession of the dog or other animal and impound it in the animal control center. Such impoundment shall be regulated as hereinafter set out. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4030(d); Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-32. - Causes for taking up; action by private persons; notice to owner. 
(a)  Subject to those provisions of this chapter relating to rabies control and to the rules and regulations of the board of health, any animal found running at large or otherwise engaged in an activity or existing in a condition prohibited by this chapter shall be taken and impounded at the animal control center. 
(b)  Any person may take up and place with the animal control department any animal running at large in violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Any such person and any person in whose custody the animal may, in the meantime, be placed may deliver such animal to the animal control center without fee or charge or house the animal while attempting to locate and contact the owner. The animal control department shall hold and dispose of such animal in the same manner as though such animal had been found running at large and impounded by officers of the animal control department. 
(d)  Upon receipt of any animal impounded wearing a tag, the animal control department shall immediately make diligent efforts to ascertain the identity of the animal's owner and shall, within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt, telephone the owner to give notice of the impoundment. If the animal control department shall be unsuccessful in reaching the owner by telephone, it shall send notice of the impoundment to the owner by mail. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2014; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-33. - Medical treatment for animals. 
When in the opinion of the director of the animal control department a diseased or injured animal in the custody of the animal control center is in need of immediate treatment so as to lessen the animal's suffering or to prevent the spread of communicable disease to other animals, such director shall immediately obtain the service of or place the animal with a licensed veterinarian practicing in the county for the purpose of administering necessary treatment. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4019; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-34. - Period of impoundment or confinement; disposition of wild animals; voluntary surrender of animals. 
All periods specified herein shall be deemed to commence at 12:01 a.m., of the day following the day of impoundment or confinement: 
(1)  All impounded animals shall be kept at the animal control center for a period not less than seventy-two (72) hours unless redeemed within such period. 
(2)  A wild animal which has been captured by or placed within the custody of the animal control department shall not be deemed impounded and need not be retained for any minimum length of time. Such animal shall be returned to a park or wild area or to some other location as may be designated by the county manager. However, if there is probable cause to believe that the animal has an owner, the provisions of section 2-5-32 shall apply and the animal shall be considered impounded. The animal shall be retained for a period of seventy-two (72) hours to allow redemption by the owner, at the expiration of which period the animal shall be returned to such park, wild area or place designated. 
(3)  Any animal which is voluntarily surrendered to the animal control department shall be deemed permanently abandoned to the department and may be immediately adopted, destroyed or otherwise disposed of as though it had been impounded. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4015; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-35. - Redemption. 
(a)  In order for an owner to redeem an animal the owner must have the animal fully vaccinated for rabies if it has not been vaccinated within one (1) year from the redemption date and shall pay all applicable fees specified in section 2-5-9. Such redemption shall not effect any criminal liability of the owner which may exist with respect to any violation of this chapter and shall not preclude proceedings against the owner for the purpose of pursuing sanctions under this chapter. 
(b)  Any animal not redeemed within the period specified in section 2-5-34 shall be considered abandoned to the animal control department, in which event all rights of ownership shall be vested in the animal control department; and the owner shall have no further claim to such animal. 
(c)  Any dog or other animal not redeemed in accordance with this article may be released or adopted to the humane society. Any dog or other animal not redeemed in accordance with this section or not adopted by the humane society shall be destroyed in a humane manner. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4016; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2; Ord. No. 2000-004A, § 1, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 2-5-36. - Adoption. 
(a)  The animal control department shall endeavor to locate an adopter for adoptable animals. No adoption shall become final until the termination of such impoundment or confinement. 
(b)  As a condition precedent to adoption, all fees pursuant to subsection 2-5-9(a) shall be paid. 
(c)  The receipt given by the animal control department shall be title to any person adopting an animal. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4017; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2) 
Sec. 2-5-37. - Spaying and/or neutering of adopted animals. 
(a)  Any and all animals adopted from the animal control shelter shall be spayed or neutered by a licensed veterinarian. 
(b)  Any person adopting an animal from the animal control shelter must enter into a written agreement guaranteeing that a licensed veterinarian will perform sterilization within thirty (30) days after acquisition of such animal in the case of any sexually mature animal (one hundred eighty (180) days or six (6) months of age or older). In the case of a sexually immature animal (younger than one hundred eighty (180) days or six (6) months of age), the person adopting said animal would be given thirty (30) days from the date said animal reaches sexual maturity to have a licensed veterinarian perform sterilization. 
(c)  All costs of sterilization shall be the responsibility of the person acquiring such animal. 
(d)  Any person acquiring an animal from the animal control shelter shall submit a signed statement from the licensed veterinarian performing the sterilization within seven (7) days after such sterilization attesting that such sterilization has been performed. 
(e)  Any person failing to comply with this section will be guilty of a misdemeanor and if convicted will be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Code 1979, § 2-4020; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2; Amend. of 11-8-94, § 1; Ord. of 9-12-06) 
Sec. 2-5-38. - Destruction of animals. 
Any animal within one (1) of the following categories may be destroyed in the discretion of the director of the animal control department in as humane a manner as possible: 
(1)  Any animal not redeemed within the period specified in section 2-5-34; 
(2)  Any animal which is suffering excessively, without regard to whether the period of confinement designated in section 2-5-34 has expired; 
(3)  Any animal which presents a real danger to persons or other animals, without regard to whether the period of confinement designated in section 2-5-34 has expired. 
(Code 1979, § 2-4018; Ord. of 6-25-85, § 2; Ord. No. 2011-009A, § 1, 12-13-11) 
Sec. 2-5-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 2-5-40. - Investigations by animal control officers; notice of classification as a dangerous dog. 
Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within Floyd County, the animal control officer shall conduct an investigation in order to carry out the provisions of this article. If the dog is classified as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner pursuant to the provisions of section 2-5-41 of this Code. Such notice shall be complete upon its mailing. 
(Ord. of 9-12-06, § 1) 
Sec. 2-5-41. - Procedures for classification as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; notice; hearing. 
(a)  Applicability for enforcement purposes. As applied to the owners of potentially dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section must be carried out as a necessary condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this article against such owners. As applied to the owners of dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section shall not be an essential element of any crime provided for in this article or in the Code of Ordinances of Floyd County, Georgia. 
(b)  Notice of classification required. When a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is classified as such, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner of such classification. 
(c)  Contents of notice of classification. The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and delivered in person by an animal control officer or mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within ten (10) days after the date shown on the notice, has the right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the animal control board; 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this article on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the animal control board and will advise the owner that failure to appear at the requested hearing will be deemed a withdrawal of the appeal and consent to the classification. 
(d)  Hearing. When the animal control board receives a timely request for a hearing as provided for in subsection (c) of this section, it shall schedule such hearing within thirty (30) days after receiving the request. Animal control shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the owner of the dog at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the board shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination to sustain, modify or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(e)  Notice of determination by animal control board. Within ten (10) days after the date of the hearing, the board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(Ord of 9-12-06, § 1) 
Sec. 2-5-42. - Restrictions on permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs to be outside a proper enclosure. 
It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or substantial leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(Ord. of 9-12-06, § 1) 
Sec. 2-5-43. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. 
(a)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal control officer if the: 
(1)  Owner of the dog does not secure the liability insurance or bond as required by subsection 2-5-44(c); 
(2)  Dog is not validly registered as required by subsection 2-5-44(a); 
(3)  Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(4)  Dog is outside a proper enclosure and in violation of section 2-5-42. 
(b)  A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: 
(1)  Not validly registered as required by subsection 2-5-44(a); 
(2)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(3)  Outside a proper enclosure in violation of section 2-5-42. 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of subsections (a) or (b) of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this section and upon payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within ten (10) days of the date the dog was confiscated, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner in accordance with section 2-5-38. 
(Ord. of 9-12-06, § 1) 
Sec. 2-5-44. - Requirements for possession of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(a)  Certificate required. It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued by the county in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Conditions for issuance of certificate. Subject to the additional requirements of subsection (c) for dangerous dogs, the animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the director sufficient evidence of the following: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; and 
(2)  The posting at the premises with a clearly visible dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog sign warning that there is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on the property. 
(c)  Dangerous dogs. In addition to the requirements of subsection (b), the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the animal control director evidence of: 
(1)  Insurance . A policy of insurance in the amount of at least fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of a dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog, and: 
a.  It shall be the continuing and sole duty of the owner to provide the director of animal control proof of an updated and effective policy; 
b.  The owner shall notify the director of animal control of any changes, renewals, and/or cancellations by certified written notice at least thirty (30) days prior to any change, renewal and/or cancellation; 
c.  The county shall have the right to rely on the representations of the owner that he will maintain the required insurance when he qualifies for the insurance of the certificate of registration. 
(2)  Surety bond. A surety bond in the amount of at least fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person injured by the dog. 
(3)  Fees. An annual fee to register dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs as listed in the fee schedule book, referenced in section 2-5-9. 
(d)  Right to inspect. The animal control director or his designee shall have the right to inspect randomly and without notice a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog which is required to be confined pursuant to this section. Permission of the owner or person in custody of the animal confined shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. of 2006-006A, § 1, 9-12-06) 
ARTICLE IV. - FERAL CAT REQUIREMENTS AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 2-5-45. - TNR (trap-neuter-return) of feral cats. 
The county desires to specifically outline the responsibilities of owners of domesticated cats and responsibilities of feral cat colony caregivers and to further provide sponsor requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003A, 11-24-15) 
Sec. 2-5-46. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular, words in the singular number include the plural, and words in the male gender include the female gender. 
Abandoned cat means a domesticated cat that an owner has forsaken entirely or neglected or refused to provide care and support. 
Domesticated cat means a cat socialized to humans and appropriate as a companion for humans. 
Ear-tipping means straight-line cutting of the tip of the left or right ear of a cat while the cat is anesthetized. 
Feral cat means a cat that: (a) is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned or feral cat and is not socialized, (b) is a formerly owned cat that has been abandoned and is no longer socialized, or (c) that may live on a farm. 
Feral cat caregiver means any person other than an owner who provides food, water or shelter to or otherwise cares for a feral cat. 
Feral cat colony means a group of cats that congregates, more or less, as a unit. Although not every cat in a colony may be feral, any non-feral cats that congregate with a colony shall be deemed to be a part of it. 
Feral cat colony caregiver means any feral cat caregiver who is approved by a sponsor to care for a feral cat colony. 
Nuisance, for purposes of this article, means conduct by stray or feral cats that disturb the peace. Stray or feral cats may create a nuisance by: (a) habitually or continually howling, crying or screaming; (b) habitually and significantly destroying, desecrating or soiling property against the wishes of the owner of the property; or (c) any other action that may prevent a reasonable person other than the colony caregiver from enjoyment of their property. 
Owner means any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or harbors an animal, or who has in his care, acts as it's custodian or knowingly permits an animal to remain on any premises occupied by him or her. "Owner" does not include a feral cat colony caregiver. 
Sponsor is any agency licensed by the Georgia Department of Agriculture for the purposes of animal rescue or boarding or any non-profit group with knowledge and experience with animal welfare that agrees to comply with the requirement of this article for sponsor and provides written notice to the department that it will serve as a sponsor. 
Stray cat means a cat that is regularly off the property of the owner, is not under the physical control and restraint of the owner and is not regularly provided with food by it's owner. 
TNR means trap, neuter and return. 
TNR program means feral and stray cats are trapped, neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies and returned to the location where they congregate, per this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003A, 11-24-15) 
Sec. 2-5-47. - Responsibilities of owners of domesticated cats. 
(a)  Owners of domesticated cats shall provide appropriate and adequate food, water and shelter for their cats and veterinary treatment for any condition that may cause pain or suffering. 
(b)  The owner of a domesticated cat shall exercise reasonable care to guard against the cat creating a nuisance. 
(c)  Owners of domesticated cats shall not permit their cats to roam unsupervised off their property. 
(d)  An owner shall not abandon a domesticated cat. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003A, 11-24-15) 
Sec. 2-5-48. - Feral cat colonies. 
(a)  Feral cat colony caregivers shall be entitled to maintain and care for feral cats by providing food, water, shelter and other forms of sustenance, provided that the feral cat colonies are registered with a department-approved sponsor, as defined in subsection (b), and that the feral cat colony caregiver takes all appropriate and available steps to meet the terms and conditions of this article. 
(b)  Sponsorship of colony TNR programs. Any agency licensed by the Georgia Department of Agriculture for the purposes of animal rescue or boarding, or any non-profit group with knowledge and experience with animal welfare that agrees to comply with the requirements of this article for sponsors shall be eligible to act as a sponsor. Any humane society intending to undertake the responsibilities of sponsor shall so advise the department in writing and provide it's address, telephone number and e-mail address if applicable. 
(c)  Sponsor requirements. It shall be the duty of the sponsor to: 
(1)  Review and, in its discretion, approve of feral cat colony caregivers; 
(2)  Help to resolve any complaints over the conduct of a feral cat colony caregiver or of cats within a colony; 
(3)  Maintain records provided by feral cat colony caregivers on the size and location of the colonies as well as the vaccination and spay and neuter records of cats in the sponsor's colonies; 
(4)  Provide, at a minimum, written educational training for all caregivers, addressing uniform standards and procedures for colony maintenance; 
(5)  Report annually to the department on the following: 
a.  Number and location by street name or venue of colonies for which it acts as a sponsor in the county; 
b.  Total number of cats in each of its colonies; and 
c.  Number of cats from its colonies vaccinated, spayed and neutered pursuant to the TNR program, and number of cats and kittens from its colonies placed in permanent homes. 
(6)  Use due consideration to prevent feral cat colonies from being maintained on lands managed for wildlife or other natural resources, such as, but not limited to, nature preserves, where the presence of a feral cat colony is a proven threat, and to avoid the taking of rare, threatened or endangered species, as identified under the Georgia Endangered Species Protection Act; 
(7)  Provide any forms or other documentation necessary to allow feral cat colony caregivers to receive any public or private subsidies, medical care or other forms of assistance for their feral cat colonies which may be available to them; 
(8)  Provide to the department the location, by address, of feral cat colonies where feral cat colony caregivers have regularly failed to comply with this article or where the sponsor has been unable to resolve a nuisance behavior situation; and 
(9)  All funding for the activities described in this chapter shall be procured and maintained by the sponsoring agency and/or cat colony caregiver. 
(d)  Feral cat colony caregiver responsibilities. In order to be an approved managed feral cat colony caregiver, said caregivers shall be responsible for the following: 
(1)  Registering the colony with the sponsor; 
(2)  Taking all appropriate and available steps to spay or neuter colony cats and vaccinate for rabies; 
(3)  Ear-tipping the left or right ear of a colony cat that has been spayed or neutered and received a rabies vaccine so that colony cats can be readily identified; 
(4)  Providing the sponsor with descriptions of each colony cat and copies of documents demonstrating the cats have been vaccinated, spayed or neutered; 
(5)  Providing food, water and, if feasible, shelter for colony cats; 
(6)  Obtaining proper veterinary attention for any colony cat that appears to require it; 
(7)  Observing the colony cats at least twice per week and keeping a record of any illness or unusual behavior noticed in any colony cat; 
(8)  Obtaining approval of the owner of any property, or any authorized representative of the owner, to which the caregiver requires access to provide colony care; 
(9)  Taking all responsible steps to: (1) remove kittens from the colony after they have been weaned; (2) place the kittens in home or foster homes for the purpose of subsequent permanent placement; and (3) capture and spay the mother cat; 
(10)  Reporting semi-annually in writing to the sponsor on: (1) the location of the colony; (2) the number and gender of all cats in the colony; (3) the number of cats that died or otherwise ceased being a part of the colony; (4) the number of kittens born to colony cats and their disposition; (5) the number of cats placed in animal shelters or in permanent homes as companion cats; and (6) the number of cats spayed or neutered; and 
(11)  No condition of this article shall prevent any person from filing a complaint about any certified colonies. All caregivers and sponsors hold responsibility for the control of a colony to prevent unwanted nuisance or public safety violations of the Floyd County Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Withdrawal of feral cat colony caregiver or sponsor. In the event that a feral cat colony caregiver is unable or unwilling to continue in that role, he or she shall notify his or her sponsor. In the event a sponsor is unable or unwilling to continue to perform it's role, it shall so advise the department. The sponsor shall work with the department to obtain a replacement sponsor. If no new sponsor is found within thirty (30) days, the sponsor shall notify the department. 
(f)  Disposition of feral cat colony cats. 
(1)  An animal control officer who has trapped a cat whose ear has been tipped or which bears some other distinguishing mark, such as, but not limited to, a tattoo, indicating it belongs to a feral cat colony, shall take reasonable steps to notify the sponsor of the description and sex of the cat and, if available, the address or location where the cat was trapped. The sponsor shall then take all appropriate and available steps to identify the feral cat colony caregiver of this cat or a feral cat colony caregiver who will take responsibility for managing this cat; 
(2)  If the feral cat colony caregiver is not able to immediately take custody of the cat or if the animal control officer cannot identify the colony caregiver immediately, the officer shall transport the cat to the animal control facility. The feral cat colony caregiver shall be responsible for retrieving the cat from the shelter within three (3) business days or advising the shelter if he or she does not intend to retrieve the cat; and 
(3)  The department, its designee or a licensed veterinarian, in accordance with the following section, shall be the only persons permitted to destroy a feral cat. No person may cause the destruction by any means of a feral cat. The only exception will be by written permit from the Georgia Department of Agriculture for the purpose of controlling diseases transmissible to humans or other animals and only when all other methods and means have been exhausted. Any drugs used for the euthanasia shall be by or under the direction of a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003A, 11-24-15) 
Sec. 2-5-49. - Article enforcement. 
(a)  The department or its designee, in order to encourage the stabilization of the feral cat population in Floyd County and address complaints made by the public, shall have the following rights: 
(1)  The right to trap, in a humane manner, and remove any cats: (1) which are demonstrating signs of rabies; (2) that are not spayed or neutered; (3) that are not identifiable as belonging to a feral cat colony that has a sponsor and a feral cat colony caregiver; (4) for public health or public safety concerns; or (5) that pose a nuisance to the public; and: 
a.  If no issue of public health or safety exists or if any issues of public health and safety can be addressed by the removal and relocation of the cat to another area, a sponsor can arrange to have the cat spayed or neutered, ear-tipped and vaccinated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. The sponsor may then arrange for the cat to be adopted or placed in a feral cat colony; and 
b.  If a feral cat is demonstrating signs of having rabies, has an illness or injury that presents an imminent danger to the public health, safety or to its own person, that cat shall be humanely destroyed. 
(2)  The right to direct that a sponsor remove a feral cat that is creating a nuisance if the sponsor has failed to adequately resolve the nuisance within fourteen (14) days after being given written notice thereof. In the event that the department directs the sponsor to remove the cat, the sponsor shall have fourteen (14) days to do so. Failure of the sponsor to remove the cat within said time period (or such longer time as the department may specify) shall constitute grounds for the department to remove the cat. 
(b)  Animal control officers or police officers shall investigate any nuisance complaint allegedly caused by a feral cat. 
(l)  In the event that an animal control officer or police officer finds that a feral cat or feral cat colony has created a nuisance, the animal control officer or police officer shall advise the department and sponsor in writing of the nuisance; and 
(2)  The sponsor shall have the right to review the matter with the director of the department. If the sponsor is not able to satisfy the director that a nuisance is not occurring, the sponsor shall have fourteen (14) days to comply with the director's direction with respect to correcting the nuisance. If the sponsor fails to correct the nuisance, the department shall have the right to remove the cat or issue summons for the violations. 
(c)  If a sponsor fails to perform its responsibilities as defined in subsection 2-5-48(c) of this article, the department may notify the sponsor that it must comply with the requirements of this article within fourteen (14) days. If the sponsor fails to do so, the department may remove this sponsor from the list of department approved sponsors and may reassign the feral cat colonies from this sponsor to another sponsor or remove the colony. 
(d)  If a feral cat colony caregiver regularly fails to comply with this article, the sponsor may notify the feral cat colony caregiver that he or she has thirty (30) days to make all reasonable efforts to fulfill the responsibilities defined in subsection 2-5-48(d) Feral cat colony caregiver responsibilities, of this article. If the feral cat colony caregiver fails to comply within that time period, the sponsor may identify and obtain replacement feral cat colony caregivers for the feral cat colonies of the non-compliant feral cat colony caregiver. If no other feral cat colony caregiver can be found within thirty (30) days, the sponsor shall notify the department and the department may humanely remove all, or parts of, the feral cat colonies and dispose of them in accordance with the enforcement of this article. 
(e)  Feral cats who were spayed or neutered and vaccinated for rabies prior to the date on which this article became effective, shall be deemed to be in compliance with this article if all other requirements in section 2-5-48, Feral cat colonies, are being met by their feral cat colony caregivers. Feral cat colony caregivers shall take all appropriate and available steps to bring these cats into compliance with the provisions of this article within six (6) months of its enactment. 
(Ord. No. 2015-003A, 11-24-15) 
Secs. 2-5-50—2-5-70. - Reserved. 
Chapter 2-6 - BUILDINGS; CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED ACTIVITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-6-1. - Enforcement; organization. 
(a)  The building inspection department, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Code, shall enforce all provisions of this chapter including inspection and permit issuance under the subdivision and zoning regulations, and each building, plumbing and other technical code adopted in this chapter. 
(b)  The chief building inspector or a designee thereof shall be the enforcement official for each technical code adopted in this chapter. The qualifications and organization of inspectors or other enforcement personnel shall be established under rules and regulations of the department or county notwithstanding the requirements of any technical code adopted in this chapter. 
(c)  The permit fee for each permit required in this chapter shall be as set from time to time by the board of commissioners and be of record in the office of the building inspection department. 
(d)  Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person: (i) to design, construct, erect, build, alter any building; (ii) to install wiring, electrical apparatus or fixtures used in connection with electricity; (iii) to install, extend, alter or work with consumer gas piping or certain gas appliances; (iv) to install or repair plumbing or plumbing appliances; or (v) to install or maintain mechanical equipment used in conjunction with structures and buildings, unless such person complies with the regulations and restrictions in this chapter. Any person or entity violating this chapter may be punished as provided in section 2-1-8. Each day any such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1001; Ord 2007-003A, § II, 6-26-07) 
Cross reference— Building inspection department created, § 2-2-24; building permit required, § 2-19-7(5); enforcement of zoning regulations, § 2-19-15. 
Sec. 2-6-2. - Board of adjustments and appeals. 
The board of adjustments and appeals under this chapter shall be as provided in the building code adopted herein except: 
(1)  Delete section B101.2.2 Qualifications and replace with the following: 
(2)  B101.2.2 Qualifications. The board of appeals shall consist of five members and one alternate who are qualified by experience and training to review matters pertaining to building construction. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1021, Mo. of 7-23-85; Ord. No. 2014-001A, § 1, 3-25-14) 
Sec. 2-6-3. - Adoption of technical codes and supplements. 
(a)  One- and two-family dwelling code. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health, welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard code known as the International Residential Code, and all subsequent amendments thereto, as adopted by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended in this article. Chapter 1 and Appendix G of such code are also hereby adopted. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. The provisions of this section shall be controlling in construction of one- and two-family dwelling buildings within the unincorporated limits of the county. 
(b)  Energy code. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health, welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard codes known as the International Energy Conservation Code, and all subsequent amendments thereto, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended in this article. Chapter 1 of such code is also hereby adopted. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. 
(c)  Building code. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health, welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard codes known as the International Building Code, and all subsequent amendments thereto, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended in this article. Chapter 1 of such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. The provisions of this section shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and structures within the unincorporated limits of the county. Provided, however, that the following shall be added as subsection (14) to Section 105.2 of such code: § 105.2(14) Structures which are built for agricultural purposes and are located in Agricultural-Residential ("A-R") and Suburban Residential ("S-R") zoning districts shall not require a building permit so long as such structures meet all of the following criteria: 
(1)  The structure is to be used only for the storage of agricultural products, farm equipment and machinery, or as shelter for farm animals and/or livestock, and the structure shall not be used for human habitation; and 
(2)  The structure shall be served by not more than one hundred twenty-five (125) AMP of electricity; and 
(3)  The structure shall not contain toilet facilities; and 
(4)  Prior to beginning construction, the owner shall complete a zoning compliance form verifying, under oath, that the structure meets the criteria set forth herein; and 
(5)  Should the structure be altered or converted to a use which is inconsistent with the criteria outlined herein, this exemption shall not apply to such alterations and the owner must apply for a building permit and otherwise comply with all of the requirements of the Unified Land Development Code and the International Building Code before proceeding with such alteration; and 
(6)  The structure shall not be greater in size than four thousand (4,000) square feet, nor shall it be taller than one (1) story; provided, however, that such story shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in clearance height; and 
(7)  Regardless of whether or not a building qualifies for a permit exemption, all structures must be built according to the standards as laid out in this code. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Electrical code. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health, welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard codes known as the National Electrical Code, and all subsequent amendments thereto, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended in this article. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. 
(f)  Gas code. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health, welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard codes known as the International Fuel Gas Code, and all subsequent amendments thereto, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended in this article. Chapter 1 of such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. 
(g)  Plumbing code. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health, welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard codes known as the International Plumbing Code, and all subsequent amendments thereto, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended in this article. Chapter 1 of such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. 
(h)  Mechanical code. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health, welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard codes known as the International Mechanical Code, and all subsequent amendments thereto, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended in this article. Chapter 1 of such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. 
(i)  Property maintenance. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health, welfare and safety, that certain state minimum standard codes known as the International Property Maintenance Code, and all subsequent amendments thereto, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia, except such portions as are deleted, modified or amended in this article. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. The provisions of this section shall be controlling with regard to all existing buildings and structures within the unincorporated limits of the county. 
(j)  Swimming pool code. There is hereby adopted for the purpose of the public health, welfare and safety, the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, and all subsequent amendments thereto, as the Swimming Pool Code of Floyd County, Georgia. Such code, including the adopted modifications and amendments, is hereby incorporated by reference, and made a part of this article as if fully set forth herein. Amendments shall be construed as superseding only that part of the section with which there is a conflict. Copies of such specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the building inspection department. The provisions of this section shall be controlling for the purpose of establishing specifications, rules and regulations for the design, construction, alteration and repair of swimming pools within the unincorporated limits of the county. 
(Code 1979, §§ 6-1011—6-1015; Mo. of 7-23-85; Ord. of 9-26-89, § I; Ord. of 11-14-89, § I; Ord. of 9-24-91, §§ 1—12; Ord. of 5-14-96, § 1; Ord 2007-003A, § II, 6-26-07; Ord. No. 2007-005A, § I, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 2007-005A, § I, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 2009-004A, § I, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 2014-001A, § 2, 3-25-14) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention code, § 2-10-1. 
Sec. 2-6-4. - Moving of buildings. 
(a)  No house, structure or building shall be moved on any public street of the unincorporated area of the county without obtaining a permit for these movements from the building inspection department of this county. 
(b)  The chief building inspector shall furnish any applicant with a form of application which shall be designed to elicit among other information the following: 
(1)  The name of the person performing the moving; 
(2)  The origin and destination of the moving; 
(3)  The names of the owners of the property from which removed and of the property to which moved and a detailed outline of the route to be followed and the equipment to be used; and 
(4)  An estimate of the time involved, including the time of the day when said operation shall be conducted. 
(c)  The fee for such a permit shall be fixed from time to time by the board of commissioners, with the amount of said fee being of record in the building inspection department. 
(d)  Any application for a permit must be made at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the proposed moving. The building inspection department is authorized to withhold said permit if the movement of said house, structure or building would unduly interfere with the safety, general welfare or convenience of the general public. If the permit is issued, the chief building inspector is authorized to prescribe the conditions of operation, including the time of moving of such houses, structures or buildings on the streets of the unincorporated area of the county. 
(e)  In addition to a fee charged for said permit, the mover of any house, building or structure shall deposit with the chief building inspector the sum of four hundred dollars ($400.00) for each house, structure or building to be moved. Said sum shall be returned to the mover within five (5) days after such moving if no damage is done to public property. In case of such damage, the amount of the refund will be the total deposit, less the actual damages, including replacement, repair and labor. If damage cost exceeds the deposit, the mover will be liable to the county for the additional costs. 
(f)  When permits are granted, the chief building inspector shall notify the county chief of police, and notify such chief of the time and location of the proposed movement. The chief of police shall furnish at the time of movement such necessary police escort to the mover as the police chief deems necessary to ensure the safety of the public, and shall notify the chief building inspector by the next working day of any damage to public property resulting from the movement. 
(g)  Nothing herein shall relieve any person engaged in the operation of moving a house, structure or building from such person's responsibility therefor, or from the requirement imposed upon such person by law to take all due precaution during the operation. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1016) 
Sec. 2-6-5. - Miscellaneous permits required. 
A permit shall be required and obtained from the chief building inspector for any of the following work to be done in the county: 
(1)  Installation of swimming pools; 
(2)  Construction of signs; 
(3)  Tie-down of mobile homes; 
(4)  Grading; and 
(5)  Installation of underground storage tanks. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1017) 
Sec. 2-6-6. - Rules and regulations for swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks. 
(a)  Chapter 290-5-57 entitled Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreational Water Parks of the Rules of Georgia Department of Human Resources Public Health shall be adopted in its entirety by Floyd County and made a part of the Floyd County Code as Floyd County's Rules and Regulations for Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreational Water Parks. 
(b)  Under section 290-5-57.01 of the Rules and Regulations of the Georgia Department of Humans Resources concerning swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks, the definition of "public swimming pool" as set out in subsection 2 therein shall be amended to also include country club pools, subdivision pools and any other pools where swimming lessons are given by an individual hired and/or paid to give said lessons. Subsection 2 shall be further amended in that there shall be no requirement for the payment of a daily fee as set out in the definition of "public swimming pool". 
(c)  Subsection (3) of section 290-5-57.02 shall be stricken in its entirety from the Rules and Regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources for swimming pools, spas and recreational water parks and shall not be made a part of the new section 2-6-6 of the Floyd County Code. 
(d)  Chapter 511-3-5 entitled Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreational Water Parks of the Rules of Georgia Department of Human Resources Public Health shall be adopted in its entirety by Floyd County and made a part of the Floyd County Code as Floyd County's Rules and Regulations for Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreational Water Parks. 
(e)  Under 511-3-5, as officially adopted in subsection (d) above, the following amendments are made: 
(1)  Under 511-3-5-.01 Definitions, the following changes are made to existing definitions: 
(71)  "Public Swimming Pool" means any structure, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water shared and used by the public for swimming, diving, wading, recreation or therapy, together with buildings, appurtenances and equipment used in connection with the body of water, regardless of whether a fee is charged for its use. The term includes municipal, school, hotel, or motel pools and any pool to which access is granted in exchange for payment of a daily fee. The term shall also include pools and spas operated by or servicing camps, churches, day care centers, group home facilities of twelve or more clients, institutions, parks, state agencies, condominiums, mobile home parks, recreational vehicle parks, associations, health clubs, special purpose pools, apartment complexes. subdivisions, country clubs and recreational water parks. Public swimming pools are divided into the following classifications: 
(2)  Under 511-3-5.02 Scope, the following amendments are made: 
(3)  These rules shall not apply to private swimming pool and hot tubs or spas serving a single family dwelling and used only by the residents of that dwelling and their guests, therapeutic pools operated by a licensed medical facility or a licensed physical therapist, therapeutic chambers which are drained, cleaned, and refilled after each individual use, or religious ritual baths used solely for religious purposes. 
(6)  Public swimming pools constructed prior to December 31, 2016, shall continue to be governed by the 2013 version of the Department of Public Health, Rules and Regulations for Public Swimming Pools, Spas and Recreational Water Parks, chapter 511-3-5 version with regard to design and construction requirements. Any such pool that is remodeled after 31 December, 2016 shall be required to comply with the current version of this Ordinance. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all pools shall be required to meet the current requirements of this Ordinance related to the abatement of suction hazards. 
(3)  Under 511-3-5-.16 Disinfectant Equipment and Chemical Feeders, the following amendment is made: 
(5)  Elemental (Gaseous) Chlorine. Chlorine in the gaseous form may not be used as a disinfectant in pools constructed after 31 December 2016. Facilities that currently use gas chlorine systems may continue to use them if they follow subsections (a) - (p) below. 
(4)  Under 511-3-5-.18 Specific Safety Features, the following amendments are made: 
(7)  Water Agitation. The agitation system on spas constructed after 31 December 2016 shall be connected to a minute timer that does not exceed fifteen minutes and shall be located out of reach of a bather in the spa. 
(14)  In all swimming pools built prior to December 31, 2016 which have floor slopes greater than that allowed in this chapter or which have other construction variances to this chapter, the health authority may require a warning sign stating the possible hazard to be posted in public view. 
(18)  Class C multi-family residential housing pools are exempt from the requirements of (16) and (Il) of the rule if the facility is only open to residents and their guests. 
(Amend. No. 2002-002A, § 1, 5-28-02; Ord. of 11-28-17) 
Sec. 2-6-7. - Construction site waste control. 
Construction site operators shall implement and install whatever procedures and/or practices necessary to control, store and dispose of waste at the site. Those items that must be controlled under this paragraph include discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, sanitary waste, and any other construction site waste that may cause adverse water quality impacts. 
(Ord. No. 2014-002A, § 1, 7-22-14) 
Secs. 2-6-8—2-6-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 28, 2017, deleted Art. II §§ 2-6-20—2-6-29 entitled "Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control," which derived from Ord. No. 2010-002A, § I, adopted Sept. 28, 2010. See Chapter 2-20 for similar provisions. 

Secs. 2-6-20—2-6-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-03A, § I, adopted Sept. 22, 2009, deleted the former Art. III, §§ 2-6-30—2-6-49, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 

Sec. 2-6-30. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a), have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of Floyd County, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Floyd County Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(d)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2009-003A, § I, 9-22-09) 
Sec. 2-6-31. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this article applies. This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Floyd County Georgia. 
(b)  Basis for area of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Floyd County, Georgia, are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: 
Rome/Floyd County Inspection Department  Environmental Compliance Section  607 Broad Street, Room 211  Rome, Georgia 30161. 
(c)  Establishment of flood area permit. If development or construction is proposed within or affecting a special flood hazard area (SFHA), approval of a flood area permit application shall be required. An application for a flood area permit may be included with and reviewed as part of a land development permit application. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. Upon adoption this article shall replace article 6, section 6.14, flood damage prevention of the "Unified Land Development Code of Floyd County and the City of Rome, Georgia". 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of Floyd County and or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both, or be sentenced to community service and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Floyd County from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-003A, § I, 9-22-09) 
Sec. 2-6-32. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of article administrator. The chief building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the jurisdiction, the chief building official, may designate a technical official to administer the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedures. Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to the chief building official or designee on forms furnished by the community or chief building official PRIOR to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsection 2-6-33(b)(2); and 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the chief building official or designee an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The chief building official or designee shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. Duties of the chief building official or designee shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 2-6-31(b), then the chief building official or designee shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of section 2-6-33. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the chief building official or designee shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection (b)(1)(c) and subsection 2-6-33(b)(2) or (d)(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the chief building official or designee shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the offices of the Rome/Floyd County Building Inspection Department and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2009-003A, § I, 9-22-09) 
Sec. 2-6-33. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In ALL areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include ANY fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and, 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(b)  Specific standards. In ALL areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4) of this section entitled, "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Sufficient fill shall be placed, if necessary, to provide at least fifteen (15) feet of clearance at the ground surface between all faces of any building containing a dwelling unit and the base flood limits. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in Al-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 2-6-32(c)(6). 
a.  Sufficient fill shall be placed, if necessary, to provide at least thirty (30) feet of clearance at the ground surface from the face of the building, at its principal entrance, and the base flood limits. 
(3)  Flood storage capacity and impediments. Any cut or fill within the floodplain must be graded to provide positive drainage to the main watercourse. Fill placed within the floodplain shall be limited such that at no point is the cross-sectional area of the floodplain outside the floodway, and below the base flood elevation, as measured perpendicular to the direction of the watercourse, reduced by more than sixty (60) percent. 
(4)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two (2) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Reference subsection (a)(6) above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(i)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
(ii)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
(iii)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection 2-6-33(b)(4), above. 
(5)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 2-6-31(b), are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  ONLY if subsection (b)(4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of section 2-6-33. 
(c)  Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 2-6-31(b), where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), OR where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 2-6-31(b), then the chief building official or designee shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 2-6-33. ONLY if data are not available from these sources, then the following subsections (2)(3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one (1) foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated two (2) feet above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4) of this section entitled, "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than two (2) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The chief building official or designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(d)  Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 2-6-31(b), where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). Areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 2-6-31(b), may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4) of this section entitled, "elevated buildings". 
The chief building official or designee shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsection 2-6-32(b)(1)c and (b)(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(5)  All subdivision proposals within a residential zoning district shall have lots with no less than seventy (70) percent of the minimum lot size, as established in article 3, section 3.5 of the Unified Land Development Code of Floyd County and the City of Rome. 
(6)  All subdivision proposals within a nonresidential zoning district shall have lots with no less than forty (40) percent of the minimum lot size, as established in article 3, section 3.5 of the Unified Land Development Code of Floyd County and the City of Rome. 
(g)  Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-003A, § I, 9-22-09) 
Sec. 2-6-34. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of appeals as established by the City of Rome and Floyd County shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. An application for an appeals request including all supporting technical documentation must be submitted to the Rome/Floyd County Department of Planning and Zoning. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the chief building official or designee in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Floyd County, as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if ANY increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this article and all subdivision and project standards found within article 6 of the Unified Land Development Code of Floyd County and the City of Rome (ULDC) including the following: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
(2)  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. 
(3)  Susceptibility of the facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage to the individual owner. 
(4)  Importance of the services provided to the community. 
(5)  Necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in cases of a functionally dependant facility. 
(6)  Availability of alternate locations not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(7)  Compatibility of the use with existing and anticipated development. 
(8)  Relationship of the use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area. 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in times flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effect of wave action, if applicable to the site. 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, streets and bridges. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued ONLY when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The chief building official or designee shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-003A, § I, 9-22-09) 
Sec. 2-6-35. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article it's most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the chief building official's or designee's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 2-6-31(b). 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before: 
September 15, 1978 - City of Rome 
May 19, 1987 - Unincorporated Floyd County 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before: 
September 15, 1978 - City of Rome 
May 19, 1987 - Unincorporated Floyd County 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood-proofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is; 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after [September 15, 1978 within City of Rome] or [May 19, 1987 unincorporated Floyd County] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after [September 15, 1978 within City of Rome] or [May 19, 1987 unincorporated Floyd County] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after [September 15, 1978 within City of Rome or [May 19, 1987 unincorporated Floyd County]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision the division of a single lot into two (2) or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief approved by the Rome/Floyd County Board of Appeals from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2009-003A, § I, 9-22-09) 
Sec. 2-6-36. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-003A, § I, 9-22-09) 
Secs. 2-6-37—2-6-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MANUFACTURED HOMES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Inclusion of the provisions of §§ 1—8 of an ordinance adopted June 12, 1990, as Ch. 2-6, Art. IV, §§ 2-6-60—2-6-67, was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance being nonamendatory of the Code. 

Sec. 2-6-60. - Jurisdiction and authority. 
These regulations shall govern the use and operation of all manufactured homes used for resi- dential purposes and manufactured home communities within the county. It is the intent of these regulations to empower the Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission, the fire department, the county health department, and the building inspection department to review the development of manufactured home sites and parks within the county for the purposes stated in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, § 1) 
Sec. 2-6-61. - Purpose. 
These regulations are being promulgated to project the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the county. The county recognizes that manufactured housing meets the needs of many county residents for affordable housing. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, § 2) 
Sec. 2-6-62. - Definitions. 
Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular. The word "person" includes firm, organization, association, partnership, trust or corporation as well as individual. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." The word "mobile home" is construed to mean "manufactured home" and vice-versa unless the context in which the word is used dictates otherwise. 
Building code: The Standard Building Code, as published by the Southern Building Code Congress and as adopted by separate ordinance by the county commission. 
Building inspection department: The building inspection department and its authorized agents in charge of enforcing building codes and other ordinances as specified by the governing body of the County. 
Building permit: A written authorization issued by the building inspection department which permits the new construction or the alteration or expansion of existing structures within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
County: The government of Floyd County, Georgia. 
County engineer: The director of the Floyd County Public Works Department or his authorized representatives. 
Developer: The owner of land proposed to be subdivided or developed for the placement of manufactured housing. This designation may also include the person(s) designated by the owner with actual responsibility to develop the property. 
Dwelling: Any building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used for permanent living quarters for one (1) or more persons. 
Dwelling unit: One (1) or more habitable rooms designed to be occupied by one (1) family with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation. 
Family: One (1) or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit. 
Fire department: The City of Rome Fire Department. 
Grading permit: Authorization obtained from the building inspection department subsequent to the approval of the development plans for the proposed manufactured home development. This authorization includes permission to begin grading, storm drainage construction, water and sewer line construction, curbing construction, and base and paving construction in pursuance of these requirements. 
Ground anchor: Any device at the manufactured home space designed to secure a manufactured home to the ground. 
Health department: The Floyd County Health Department. 
Lot: A portion of land intended for the placement of a manufactured or mobile home. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel" and may include by definition that space within a manufactured home community reserved for the placement of a manufactured or mobile home and intended for the private use of its occupants. 
Lot frontage: That side of a lot measured along a street right-of-way line abutting the lot and ordinarily considered the front of the lot, but it shall not be considered as the ordinary side of a corner lot. 
Manufactured home: A structure that is transportable in one (1) or more sections which are built on a permanent chassis and has been designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation. This structure, when connected to the required utilities, which includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein, bears a label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards act (42 U.S.C. 5401 et seq.), U.S. Public Law 93-383. This definition is different than that of a "mobile home" below. 
Manufactured home development: A general category of development that includes manufactured home subdivisions and manufactured home parks. 
Manufactured home lot/site: A plot of ground within a manufactured home park designated for the placement of not more than one (1) manufactured or mobile home of single-family occupancy. 
Manufactured home owner: The person who has legal title to the manufactured home. 
Manufactured home park: A parcel of land under single ownership which has been planned and improved for the placement of three (3) or more manufactured homes for residential use. 
Manufactured home park street: A street which affords principal means of access to manufactured home lots/sites or auxiliary buildings from any adjacent county-maintained street. 
Manufactured home skirting: Installation of approved material from the exterior base of the manufactured home to the ground, which may or may not provide support to the home. Acceptable materials include masonry, brick, rock, materials manufactured for such purposes or other appropriate durable materials. The materials shall be secured, as necessary, to assure stability, to minimize vibrations, to minimize susceptibility to wind damage, and to compensate for possible frost heave. An access opening not less than eighteen (18) inches in any dimension and not less than three (3) square feet in area shall be provided and shall be located so that any water supply and sewer drain connections located under the home are accessible for inspection. Such access panel or door shall not be fastened in a manner requiring the use of a special tool to remove or open same. 
Manufactured home stand: That part of an individual lot which has been reserved for the placement of one (1) manufactured or mobile home unit. 
Manufactured home subdivision: A subdivision designed and/or intended for the sale of lots for the placement of two (2) or more manufactured homes. 
Manufactured home underpinning: See definition for "manufactured home skirting" above. 
Mobile home: A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976. In many cases, mobile homes were built to a voluntary industry standard of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) - A119.1 Standards for Mobile Homes. This definition differs from that of a "manufactured home" above. 
Mobile home inspection: An inspection conducted according to the requirements set forth in this article. 
National Electrical Code: Standard 70 of the National Electrical Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association and as adopted by separate ordinance by the county commission. 
Street: The word "street" means, relates to, and includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, highways, expressways, lanes, courts and other vehicular ways. For the purposes of this regulation, streets are divided into the following categories: 
(1)  City- and county-maintained: vehicular ways that are on the official city and/or state department of transportation county road system; 
(2)  Private county streets: within the county, these roads serve as access to lots within an approved minor county subdivision; 
(3)  Manufactured home park streets: A street which affords principal means of access to manufactured home lots/sites or auxiliary buildings from any adjacent county-maintained street. 
Travel trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight (8) feet. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, § 3) 
Sec. 2-6-63. - General standards. 
(a)  An annual location decal is required and shall be filed by the owner of the manufactured home in the office of the tax commissioner for each manufactured home that is henceforth located on an individual lot, in a manufactured home park, or in a manufactured home subdivision in the county; however, those homes having filed for homestead exemption in the property tax assessor's offices are excluded from such requirement. 
(b)  Permanent additions may be built onto or become a part of any manufactured or mobile home provided such addition or modification meets the requirements of the building code and the separation provisions of section 2-6-65. 
(c)  An exception to the provisions of this article may be granted based on medical hardship by authorized staff of the Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission. An application for extension shall contain an affidavit of a physician showing that present facilities are inadequate and that a hardship condition exists requiring the use of a manufactured home for the health care of a dependent of the occupant of the premises. The application shall have attached a separate statement by the applicant that he recognizes the exception, if granted, is to last only as long as the health condition exists. The applicant shall also state that he shall cause the removal of the manufactured housing on the termination of the exception and that upon his failure to do so irrevocably grants the county the right to use equipment to remove the manufactured home from the premises at the applicant's expense. A manufactured home placed in this manner is not to be used as rental property. 
(d)  Any mobile home constructed prior to July 1, 1976 (a pre-HUD unit) being brought into the county or being relocated from a site within the county shall be required to have a mobile home inspection prior to being allowed to connect to public utilities and electric power, whether temporary or permanent. The cost of such inspection shall be borne by the owner of the mobile home. Pre-permitting inspections shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Structural inspection by the building official or a locally registered contractor to assure integrity of outside structural items such as windows, doors and siding. 
(2)  Heating and/or air conditioning inspection conducted by a licensed contractor or an authorized gas company employee: 
a.  Gas piping systems shall stand a pressure of six (6) inches mercury or three (3) psi gauge for a period of not less than ten (10) minutes without showing any drop in pressure. 
b.  When appliances are connected to the gas piping system, the entire system shall be pressurized to not less than ten (10) inches' nor more than fourteen (14) inches' water column and the appliance connections tested for leakage with soapy water or bubble solution. 
(3)  Electrical inspection shall be conducted by a licensed contractor or the building official: Wiring of the home shall be subject to conditions set forth in the National Electrical Code (latest edition). 
(4)  Testing of smoke detectors: If detectors are not present or if detectors are powered only by batteries, new detectors shall be installed and such shall be powered by the home's electrical system. At the minimum, a detector shall be located in the hallway(s) leading to the sleeping area(s). Detectors shall be Underwriters' Laboratories labeled and be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. Where proper electrically powered detectors exist but are not operational, they shall be replaced with new detectors as set forth herein. 
(e)  Any manufactured or mobile home which is damaged by fire, flood, explosion, wind or other catastrophe in any amount equal to or greater than sixty (60) percent of its replacement value shall be removed and disposed of or repaired by the owner within ninety (90) days after said damage occurred unless a variance has been granted. Units having been repaired shall have passed the requirements of the manufactured home inspection outlined above prior to receiving permission to reconnect utilities from the building inspection department. 
(f)  Manufactured and mobile homes placed after the date of this article shall be required to have the following improvements at the manufactured home stand: 
(1)  Tiedowns: Each manufactured home shall be secured to ground anchors or other devices securing the stability of the manufactured home based on the requirements of Appendix H of the building code. 
(2)  Foundations: Foundations shall be installed in accordance with the standards set forth in Appendix H of the building code. In no instance will a manufactured or mobile home be allowed to be placed on a site which results in the first floor elevation being lower than the elevation of the 100-year floodplain. 
(3)  Steps: Steps are required to be placed within ninety (90) days of installation for all doors into the manufactured home and shall be at least thirty-six (36) inches in width. If more than three (3) steps are required, the steps shall be equipped with a hand railing. The steps with regard to treads and risers shall comply with the provisions of the building code. 
(4)  Any manufactured or mobile home located within the county shall be skirted, as defined above, within ninety (90) days after installation. 
(g)  Nonconforming manufactured home sites, parks or subdivisions lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this regulation may be continued; but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of one (1) year, the manufactured home site, park or subdivision shall be made to conform with the requirements of these regulations prior to its being occupied again. Any expansion or addition to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be in compliance with these regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, § 4) 
Sec. 2-6-64. - Location standards. 
(a)  Individual manufactured home sites: Manufactured homes situated on individual lots in the county shall be required to meet the following lot standards: 
(1)  With public water and public sewage, a minimum lot size of 7,200 square feet or 0.165 acre. 
(2)  With public water and a private on-site sewage disposal system, a minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet or 0.34 acres. 
(3)  With a private water source (well, spring, etc.) and a private on-site sewage disposal system, a minimum lot size of one (1) acre. 
(4)  Health department approval will be required for every manufactured and/or mobile home on a lot not connected to public sewer systems. Percolation tests and/or soil data as provided by a registered soil scientist shall be required and shall be approved by the health department, which may require additional lot area depending on soil, slope and density conditions. No septic tanks shall be allowed if public sewerage is available. All dwellings shall connect to public sewer when such sewer is within three hundred (300) feet of the property being subdivided. The city will be responsible for extending public sewerage to the property being subdivided. 
(5)  All lots shall comply with Article III of this chapter. Each lot shall have thereon a viable homesite above the 100-year floodplain. 
(6)  No two (2) dwellings shall be placed upon a parcel of land unless the parcel of land meets the requirements of this article for placement of both dwellings. 
(7)  The manufactured or mobile home residential building setback lines shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line on lots abutting local or residential streets and forty (40) feet from the front property line on lots abutting collector and arterial streets. Where private sewage disposal systems are to be placed in front yard areas, setbacks shall be established by the health department but shall not be less than forty (40) feet. 
(8)  A plot plan shall be submitted to the building inspection department or an affidavit signed by the owner stating that the site complies with the provisions of this article concerning the placement of individual manufactured homes. 
(b)  Manufactured home parks: 
(1)  Manufactured home parks shall front on a publicly maintained street and shall have a minimum frontage of sixty (60) feet. 
(2)  Any park of fifteen (15) units or more must be located on a road classified as a collector or a minor arterial as specified in the county road maintenance register or otherwise be on a state highway. 
(3)  Manufactured home parks shall be served by a public water source, if available. If a public water source is not available, the park development shall meet all health department requirements for water and sewerage connections. Any extensions of public water lines shall meet the requirements of the governing water authority. The water lines shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements specified in the development plans for manufactured home parks found in this article. 
(4)  Each manufactured or mobile home shall be located on a manufactured home lot having the following minimum dimensions: 
a.  With public sewer available, lot area of five thousand (5,000) square feet and minimum building line width of forty (40) feet; 
b.  With private septic systems, fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, with a lot width of eighty (80) feet at the building line. 
(5)  All manufactured home parks shall be served by a garbage collection system. Collection facilities may be provided for the entire community or at individual lots within each manufactured home park. The design for these facilities must be approved at the time of development plan approval. 
(6)  Manufactured and mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least sixteen (16) feet. Porches and decks without opaque tops or roofs shall, for the purposes of separation requirements, be excluded from this requirement. 
(7)  Accessory storage building(s) are allowed on an individual lot. The maximum size of any one (1) storage building shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet. 
(8)  There shall be a minimum building line required for all exterior park boundaries which abut a publicly maintained street. This building line shall be twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line on lots abutting local or residential streets and forty (40) feet from the front property line of all lots abutting streets which are classified by the public works department as collector and arterial streets or along a state highway. 
(9)  No building within a manufactured home park shall be placed closer than ten (10) feet to an exterior property boundary line nor adjacent to a publicly maintained street. 
(10)  One (1) or more recreation areas shall be provided within those manufactured home parks having fifteen (15) or more units. Such recreation area shall constitute a minimum of five (5) percent of the space designated for residential lots. All such recreation areas shall be so designated on the development and final plats for the park and shall not be converted to use as a manufactured home lot. Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic and safety hazards. At least fifty (50) percent of the recreational open space land shall be of a character suitable for active recreation, such as playgrounds or ball fields. 
(11)  A minimum of two (2) parking spaces shall be provided for each manufactured home lot/site. Each parking space shall measure nine (9) feet by twenty (20) feet and shall be located off the street servicing the lot/site within the park. All off-street parking areas shall have direct access to an interior street; no direct driveway access shall be permitted from any manufactured home lots to an exterior street. 
(12)  All interior roadways are to be surfaced with a material such as asphalt, chert, gravel, etc., to a width of twelve (12) feet for one-way streets or to a width of eighteen (18) feet for two-way streets and maintained by the manufactured home park owner. 
(13)  Areas not surfaced or built over shall be planted in grass or other suitable vegetative cover. 
(14)  Adequate security lighting shall be provided for the manufactured home park. 
(15)  The location of electrical cables, gas piping, water piping, and sewer lines buried underground along the periphery or within four (4) feet of the perimeter of the site's largest planned manufactured home shall be indicated by an aboveground sign(s) or underground marker tapes identifying the proximity of the lines. A plot plan showing the as-built location of underground utility lines shall be available for installations in multiple-site facilities. 
(c)  Manufactured home subdivision: Manufactured home subdivisions shall be required to meet the standards of the Rome-Floyd County Subdivision Regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, § 5) 
Cross reference— Subdivision regulations, App. A. 
Sec. 2-6-65. - Procedures for developing a manufactured home park. 
The development of a manufactured home park is required to be approved by the planning director prior to the inspection of any individual site within the park by the building inspection department. 
(a)  For Minor Manufactured Home Parks of Fourteen Units or Less: 
(1)  The developer must submit five (5) copies of the development plans and supporting data to the planning commission. The development plans may be approved by the planning director; however, the plans shall have the prior written approval of the health department, the applicable public water authority (Floyd County, the City of Rome, or the City of Cave Spring), and the fire department at the time of submittal. The requirement for health department approval may be waived subject to receipt of written approval of the plans from a public sewer authority (City of Rome, City of Cave Spring). 
(2)  The development plans, prepared by a registered land surveyor, shall meet the location standards set forth in these regulations and the requirements of the Georgia Plat Act of 1985, as amended, and shall include the information specified in subsection (c) below. 
(b)  For Parks of Fifteen Units or More: 
(1)  Following the preapplication review of a proposed development, the developer shall submit on or before the tenth day of the month prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission eight (8) copies of the development plans and supporting data. 
(2)  The development plans, prepared by a registered land surveyor, shall meet the location standards set forth in these regulations and the requirements of the Georgia Plat Act of 1985, as amended, and shall include the information specified in subsection (c) below. 
(c)  Requirements of Development Plans for Manufactured Home Parks: 
(1)  General: 
a.  Proposed name of the manufactured home park. 
b.  Name and address of person to be notified of action. 
c.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of date of plat drawing and space for revision dates. 
d.  Location sketch map showing the relationship of the manufactured home park to the surrounding area. 
e.  Location (land lot and district) and gross acreage of tract. 
f.  Exact boundary lines of the tract indicated by a heavy line, giving lengths and bearings. The boundary lines shall include the entire tract to be eventually developed, and data as required herein shall apply to the entire tract. In the event that the entire tract to be developed is not submitted, the planning commission may require additional data to support immediate development in order to ensure proper overall planning. 
g.  The development plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet on a sheet or equal-sized sheets. If the complete development plan cannot be shown on one (1) sheet, several sheets with an index map on each sheet shall be used. In no case shall sheet size be less than eight and five-tenths (8.5) inches by eleven (11) inches. 
h.  Name of former subdivision if the development has been previously subdivided. 
i.  Water and sewer availability in accordance with EPD regulations. 
(2)  Existing conditions: 
a.  Topography by contours shall be required as follows: 
1.  On land with less than approximately two (2) percent slope, show contours at intervals of not more than two (2) feet. 
2.  On land with slopes greater than approximately two (2) percent, show contours with an interval of not more than five (5) feet. 
3.  Contours shall be based on the datum plane of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey. 
b.  Zoning district classification of land to be developed and adjoining lands. 
c.  Recorded deed names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
d.  Location of significant features, streams, lakes, swamps and land subject to flood, including any area having an elevation below the 100-year floodplain. No sites shall be developed where a viable homesite cannot be shown to exist above the elevation of the 100-year floodplain. (Any site having no such viable area shall be properly filled in accordance with U.S. Corps of Engineers requirements prior to the placement of a manufactured home thereon.) 
e.  Location of existing adjoining property lines and buildings on the property to be developed. 
f.  Location, names, and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads and utility lines either on or adjacent to the property to be developed. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or rights-of-way and show location of poles or towers. 
g.  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts and location of easements for other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown. 
h.  The acreage of each drainage area affecting the proposed development. 
i.  All elevations shall refer to the mean sea level datum where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed. 
j.  Preliminary soil erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the specifications and requirements of Article V of this chapter, and specifically being section 2-6-23(a)—(d); section 2-6-24(a)—(d); and section 2-6-27(a)—(c). 
(3)  Proposed conditions: 
a.  Plan and profile of streets and roads showing widths and road names and typical road sections. 
b.  Topography by contours of proposed streets, drainage ditches and other improvements as provided in paragraph (2)a of this subsection (c). 
c.  Layout of all lots, including building setback lines; scaled dimensions on lots; utility easements with width and use; acreage of each lot, lot numbers and block numbers and drainage. No lot numbers shall be duplicated. 
d.  Plan of sanitary sewers (if applicable) with grade, pipe size and points of discharge. Show the elevation contour line below which a manufactured home lot cannot be served by the city or county sewer system. 
e.  Plan of storm sewer system with grade, pipe sizes and location of outlet. 
f.  Plan of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants. The water supply shall be designed to provide a minimum of twenty-five (25) pounds per square inch (psi) and a minimum demand flow of fifteen (15) gallons per minute to each building. All water mains shall be at least six (6) inches in diameter. Fire hydrants shall be provided along park streets or public ways and shall be readily accessible for fire department use. Hydrants shall be located so that each home or building in the park is within five hundred (500) feet of a hydrant. Hydrant hose connections shall have treads compatible with those of the fire department. Any extensions of public water lines shall meet the requirements herein and other applicable requirements of the governing water authority. 
g.  Designation of all land to be reserved or dedicated for recreational use. 
h.  Proposed unit division or stage development, if any, as proposed by the manufactured home park development. 
i.  Site grading plan with soil sediment control structures, as required. 
(4)  Certificates. Each development plan submitted shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped thereon as follows: 
Preliminary Surveying Certificate 
I hereby certify that this proposed development plan has been prepared in compliance with the minimum standards of the Floyd County Manufactured Home Regulations and correctly represents data compiled or verified through a survey completed by me on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 19 ____________ , of property shown and described. 
By ____________ Registered Georgia Land Surveyor  No. ____________  Date ____________ 
Development Plan Approval Certificate 
All requirements of the Floyd County Manufactured Home Regulations relative to the preparation of submission of a development plan having been fulfilled, approval of this plat is hereby granted subject to further provisions of said regulations. This certificate shall expire ____________ . 
____________ Date ____________ / ____________ / ____________  Secretary, Planning Commission 
(5)  Development plan review and approval. Within thirty (30) days after the submission of the development plans, the planning commission shall review and approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the plan. One (1) copy shall be returned to the developer with notice of the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval and the reasons therefor. 
(6)  Failure to act: Failure of the planning commission to act within thirty (30) days shall be deemed approval and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the planning commission on demand; however, the applicant requesting the planning commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent in writing to the extension of such period. 
(7)  Effective period of development plan approval: Approval of the development plan shall lapse unless all or part of the area shown on the development plan is developed within two (2) years from the date of such approval unless an extension of time is requested by the developer and approved by the planning commission. Approval of the development plans shall lapse and have no force and effect unless actual construction of required improvements has been commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of the approval. 
(8)  Hearing. No development plan shall be acted upon by the planning commission without affording a hearing thereon, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by registered or certified mail not less than five (5) days before the date fixed therefor to the address shown on the plat. 
(9)  Required construction permit: A permit shall be required before any work commences. It is available from the building inspection department and will cover the following construction phases: 
a.  Grading. 
b.  Storm drainage construction. 
c.  Water and sewer line construction. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, § 6) 
Sec. 2-6-66. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of any provision of these regulations shall constitute a misdemeanor, and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. The county may, upon notice that a violation of any of these provisions is taking or has taken place, institute suit and prosecute the same to final judgment. 
(b)  Any violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a nuisance, and any person aggrieved thereby may abate the same or the same may be abated as a public nuisance. Continuous violation thereof may be restrained in a court of equity having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, § 7) 
Sec. 2-6-67. - Variances, amendments. 
(a)  Variances: 
(1)  Where the developer can show that a provision of these regulations would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and/or where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, and/or where, in the opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without otherwise nullifying the manufactured home regulations and the intent of these regulations, the planning commission may authorize a variance. Any variance thus authorized shall be noted on the approved plans. 
(2)  If the requested variance involves property located only in the unincorporated area of Floyd County and not in the City of Rome, and if the variance is denied by the planning commission, the developer and/or applicant may appeal the decision of the planning commission denying the variance directly to the board of county commissioners. The board shall have the authority to either accept the recommendation of the planning commission denying said variance or to, in fact, grant the variance. 
(b)  Amendments: The board of commissioners may amend these regulations on their own motion or on recommendation of the planning commission, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendations. Before enacting an amendment to these regulations, the county commission shall give public notice and hold a public hearing thereon, as required. Legal notice of the public hearing shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation within the county in which are carried legal advertisements of the county by advertising the date, time and place of the public hearing at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. 
(Ord. of 6-12-90, § 8.A, B; Ord. of 6-10-97, § 1) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted June 10, 1997, set out provisions intended for use as subsection 2-6-67(a)(1). At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as subsection 2-6-67(a)(2) in order to group the existing provisions of subsection 2-6-67(a) as subsection 2-6-67(a)(1). 
Secs. 2-6-68—2-6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 26, 1991, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as Art. V, Divs. 1—3, §§ 2-6-81—2-6-89, 2-6-101—2-6-104, and 2-6-116—2-6-119, at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— County utilities and services, Ch. 2-7. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-6-81. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety and general welfare in the county by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts associated with stormwater runoff, enhance broader social and economic objectives and protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and water resources. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. A, § 1)) 
Sec. 2-6-82. - Conflicting provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall be deemed as additional requirements to standards required by other ordinances of the county. In case of conflicting requirements, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. A, § 2)) 
Sec. 2-6-83. - Separability. 
The provisions and sections of this article shall be deemed separable, and the validity of any portion of this article shall not affect the validity of the remainder. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. A, § 3)) 
Sec. 2-6-84. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the following definitions describe the meanings of the terms used in this article: 
Agricultural land management practices means those methods and procedures used in the cultivation of land in order to further crop and livestock production and conservation of related soil and water resources. 
Applicant means any person, firm or governmental agency who executes the necessary forms to procure official approval of a project or a permit to carry out construction of a project. 
Clearing means the removal of trees and brush from the land but shall not include the ordinary mowing of grass. 
Detention facility means a permanent structure for the temporary storage of runoff and its subsequent gradual discharge. 
Develop land means to alter the characteristics of a parcel of land in conjunction with residential, commercial, industrial or institutional construction or modification. 
Developer means any person owning and proposing to develop or construct on a piece of property. 
Development review committee means the committee whose members are the county manager, director of the water division, superintendent of public works, and the director of community development division. 
Drainage area means that area contributing runoff to a single point measured in a horizontal plane, which is enclosed by a ridge line. 
Drainage structures means any storm drains, collection basins, inlets, berms or other physical construction or provision for the storage or conveyance of stormwater runoff. 
Easement means a grant or reservation by the owner of land for the use of such land by others for a specific purpose or purposes, and which must be included in the conveyance of land affected by such easement. 
Exemption means those land development activities that are not subject to the stormwater management requirements contained in this article. 
Grading means any act by which soil is cleared, stripped, stockpiled, excavated, scarified, filled or any combination thereof. 
Off-site stormwater management means the design and construction of a facility necessary to control stormwater from more than one (1) development. 
On-site stormwater management means the design and construction of systems necessary to control stormwater within an immediate development. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Retention structure means a permanent structure that provides for the storage of runoff by means of a pool of water. 
Site means any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of tracts, lots or parcels of land which are in one (1) ownership, or are contiguous and in diverse ownership where development is to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision or project. 
Stormwater management means: 
(1)  For quantitative control, a system of vegetative and structural measures that control the increase in volume and rate of surface runoff caused by man-made changes to the land; and 
(2)  For qualitative control, a system of vegetative, structural and other measures that reduce or eliminate pollutants that might otherwise be carried by surface runoff. 
Stormwater management plan means a set of drawings and supplementary documentation submitted by a person as a prerequisite to obtaining a stormwater management approval, which contains all of the information and specifications pertaining to stormwater management. 
Stripping means any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover, including tree removal, clearing, grubbing and storage or removal of topsoil. 
Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements for the specific circumstances when strict adherence to the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. 
Waiver means the relinquishment from stormwater management requirements by the board of adjustments and appeals for a specific development. 
Watershed means the total drainage area contributing runoff to a single point. 
(b)  Terms not herein specifically defined shall be construed in the manner commonly accepted, and the interpretation of the same will be furnished by the superintendent of public works upon application. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. A, § 4)) 
Sec. 2-6-85. - Applicability and exemptions. 
(a)  All persons proposing development or construction in the county shall prepare a stormwater management plan. No final subdivision plat shall be approved and no building permit shall be issued until and unless the stormwater management plan has been reviewed and approved by the superintendent of public works, except as provided in this section. 
(b)  The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this article and the requirement of providing a stormwater management plan: 
(1)  Agricultural land management; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family, detached residential structures; 
(3)  Developments with a total land area of four-tenths (0.4) acre, or less; 
(4)  Construction of single-family housing for a personal residence. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. A, § 5)) 
Sec. 2-6-86. - Variance and waiver procedure. 
(a)  The board of adjustments and appeals, as established by the county through its adoption of the Standard Building Code as provided in section 2-6-3 of this Code, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances, or waiver from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board of adjustments and appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the public works department in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section. 
(d)  The application for variance or waiver shall be filed by the developer or his agent with the public works department, which shall refer it to the board of adjustments and appeals for decision. 
(1)  The application for variance shall state the specific variances sought and reasons for their granting. 
(2)  The application for a waiver of the requirements provided in the remainder of this article shall so state and reasons for granting the waiver. 
(3)  It shall be the applicant's responsibility to provide sufficient justification for granting the variance or waiver. 
(e)  The public works department shall prepare an evaluation statement concerning each application for variance. The evaluation shall consider the circumstances and supporting documentation supplied by the applicant and other generally available technical information pertaining to the variance requested. The evaluation statement may include recommendations of the disposition to the board of adjustments and appeals. 
(f)  In passing upon such applications, the board of adjustments and appeals shall consider all technical evaluations and relevant factors presented and standards specified in other sections of this article. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the board of adjustments and appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose of this article. 
(h)  Variances and waivers may be granted under the following conditions: 
(1)  Variances shall be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff. 
(2)  Variances and waivers shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; and 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance or waiver would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance or waiver will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(i)  The public works department shall maintain the records of all board actions. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. A, § 6)) 
Sec. 2-6-87. - Violations and penalties—Bond forfeitures. 
(a)  In the event that the developer continues in noncompliance with the stormwater management plan following the issuance of a stop-work order, the county manager shall substantiate that the developer is in noncompliance and nonresponsive. 
(b)  If the county manager concludes that the issuance of additional correction notices would be futile, then the performance bond posted shall be forfeited. The proceeds of such security shall be used for completion of the stormwater management plan as approved or to return the site to pre-development conditions. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. D, § 1)) 
Sec. 2-6-88. - Same—To constitute misdemeanor. 
Any violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 2-1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. D, § 2)) 
Sec. 2-6-89. - Same—Prosecution by county. 
Whenever it shall come to the attention of the county that any provision of this article has been or is being violated within its jurisdiction, the county may immediately institute suit for injunction. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. D, § 3)) 
Secs. 2-6-90—2-6-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN; CRITERIA 

Sec. 2-6-101. - Review and approval authority. 
(a)  A stormwater management plan or an application for a variance or waiver shall be submitted to the public works department by the developer for review and approval for any proposed development, unless otherwise exempted. The stormwater management plan shall contain supporting computations, drawings, and sufficient information describing the manner, location and type of measures which will be employed to conduct stormwater runoff from the site. The public works department will review the plan to determine the compliance with the requirements of this article prior to approval. The plan shall serve as the basis for all subsequent construction and maintenance activities. 
(b)  Notification of approval or reasons for the disapproval or modification shall be issued within five (5) regular business days after submission of the completed stormwater plan. The stormwater management plan shall not be considered approved without the inclusion of the signature and date of signature of the superintendent of public works on the plan. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. B, § 1)) 
Sec. 2-6-102. - Stormwater management plan—Minimum requirements. 
The stormwater management plan shall be prepared under the supervision of, and certified by, a professional engineer or land surveyor registered in the state. The plan shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed development on water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff. The developer shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, construction and development shall be conducted in strict accordance with the plan. The minimum information submitted for support of a stormwater management plan or application for a variance shall be as follows: 
(1)  Provide a site plan drawn to a scale of not less than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet with the following characteristics and information: 
a.  Graphic scale, north arrow and date. North arrow shall be identified as magnetic, true or grid north. 
b.  Vicinity map showing the site location relative to surrounding landmarks, highway intersections, rivers and streams. 
c.  Topography showing existing and proposed elevations in accordance with the following: 
1.  For sites smaller than one (1) acre in size, show the direction of drainage and spot elevations at all breaks in grade and along drainage channels or swales at selected points not more than one hundred (100) feet apart. 
2.  For sites one (1) acre and larger with slopes less than approximately two (2) percent, show contours at intervals of not more than two (2) feet and spot elevations at all breaks in grade along drainage channels or swales at selected points not more than one hundred (100) feet apart. 
3.  For sites one (1) acre and larger with slopes more than approximately two (2) percent, show contours with an interval of not more than five (5) feet. 
4.  Elevations shall be based on the datum plane established by the U.S. Coastal and Geodetic Survey. 
d.  Delineation of property lines and deed record names of adjacent property owners. 
e.  Location of existing structures. 
f.  Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads and utility lines, either on or adjacent to the property to be developed. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or rights-of-way and show location of towers and poles. 
g.  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown. 
h.  Proposed conditions: 
1.  Layout of streets, roads, alleys, drives and paved areas, public crosswalks, with widths, road names or designations. 
2.  Location of structures. 
3.  Preliminary plans of storm sewer system with grade, pipe size and location of outlet. 
4.  Certification by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer attesting that the site plan has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards of this article. 
(2)  Provide computations and supporting documentation of hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. 
a.  Except as noted in b below, analyses shall be performed in accordance with the publication entitled "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," which is on file in the offices of the public works department. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Committee of Georgia, is incorporated by reference in this article. 
b.  Analyses for sites twenty (20) acres and less in size may be performed using the rational method. 
(3)  The stormwater management plan shall provide the following information for pre-development and post-development conditions: 
a.  The composite runoff curve number or runoff coefficient for the site; 
b.  The peak runoff rate at the point, or points, of discharge for the ten-year, twenty-four-hour storm; and 
c.  The capacity of storm sewers, ditches and other hydraulic structures. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. B, § 2)) 
Sec. 2-6-103. - Same—Completed plan. 
In addition to the minimum requirements described in section 2-6-102, the stormwater management plan must conform to the following: 
(1)  Provide detailed design drawings and specifications for all facilities, temporary and permanent, required by the stormwater management plan. 
(2)  Provide a construction schedule for both temporary and permanent facilities. Reference the schedule to other development activities such as clearing, rough grading, construction, final grading, and vegetation establishment. 
(3)  Provide a plan for maintenance of the stormwater facilities. Describe specific actions and a recommended schedule of maintenance required to maintain the facilities at a satisfactory level of service. 
(4)  Provide a cost estimate for construction of the stormwater management facilities. Provide a separate estimate of the annual cost for maintenance of the proposed facilities. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. B, § 3)) 
Sec. 2-6-104. - Minimum design criteria. 
(a)  The design of temporary and permanent facilities shall be based on the criteria established herein and the procedures, materials and methods of construction found in the publications "Rome and Floyd County Standard Design Specifications", "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia", and the "Georgia Stormwater Management Manual", which are on file in the office of the public works department. The "Rome and Floyd County Standard Design Specifications" and the "Georgia Stormwater Management Manual" are incorporated by reference in this article. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive basis of design shall apply unless deemed otherwise by the superintendent of public works. 
(b)  Rainfall intensities used in hydrologic analyses shall not be less than those shown by applicable rainfall curves published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for the Rome and Floyd County area. These curves are on file and available for inspection in the public works department offices. 
(c)  The controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required for all developments or construction in order to prevent an increase in the pre-development rate of runoff in excess of ten (10) percent, or one (1) cubic foot per second for a ten-year frequency storm for all durations, whichever is greater. 
(d)  Where the controlled release is required by subsection (c) above, such release shall prevent any increase in the pre-development rate of runoff for less frequent storms up to and including the fifty-year storm. 
(e)  Storm drainage systems, including piping and detention facilities, shall be provided in conjunction with subsection (c) above to handle the runoff of a fifty-year, twenty-four-hour storm. Detention facilities and other drainage structures shall be located and designed to ensure the protection of adjacent public and private property. 
(f)  Upon written request by the developer, the superintendent of public works shall determine if the development and construction projects in an area are small enough, or that engineering and economic factors make off-site retention or other drainage facilities more practical, and may authorize the joint construction of these facilities to serve two (2) or more properties by two (2) or more developers. This authorization shall be granted by the development review committee upon application for approval being submitted through the superintendent of public works. Where off-site stormwater facilities serving two (2) or more properties are approved for construction, no use of land or occupancy of buildings within the properties served by these facilities shall be permitted until completion of the retention and drainage structures, except upon approval of the committee. 
(g)  The following requirements shall apply to the installation, development and maintenance of all detention facilities designed for temporary storage of stormwater runoff: 
(1)  Permanent fencing at least four (4) feet in height shall be required around all facilities having a maximum water or undercut depth of more than four (4) feet or a bank slope greater than 1.5:1 (horizontal to vertical). This fencing shall be designed, installed and maintained to allow the free flow of runoff and sediment into the facility. The fence shall include a gate of sufficient size to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities. Fencing may be waived by the superintendent of public works in other than areas zoned residential and where the pond is more than five hundred (500) feet from a residential district. 
(2)  Facilities shall be located on tracts of land, designated for this use on the recorded plat, with sufficient area around the perimeter to provide access for maintenance purposes and shall be immediately adjacent to, or be provided with an access easement to, a public street. The access easement shall provide at least ten (10) feet of width clearance from aboveground obstructions including trees, headwalls, weirs or other structures. 
(3)  Easements shall be provided for detention facilities serving single-family residential subdivisions and subject to county maintenance as provided in section 2-6-119. Such easement shall be of sufficient width to permit access to and maintenance of the facility. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. B, § 4); Ord. No. 2014-002A, § 1, 7-22-14) 
Secs. 2-6-105—2-6-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERFORMANCE BOND; ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 2-6-116. - Performance bond. 
(a)  Upon approval of the stormwater management plan, but before the issuance of a building permit or subdivision plat approval, the applicant shall be required to post a performance bond, cash escrow, certified check or other acceptable form of performance security. 
(b)  The amount of the security shall not be less than the total estimated construction cost of the facilities required by the stormwater management plan. 
(c)  The performance bond or other securities shall not be released until the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The county engineer shall perform a final inspection of the facilities and determine that they have been constructed in compliance with the stormwater management plan; and 
(2)  Shall determine that all provisions of the stormwater management plan have been faithfully executed. 
(d)  A provision may be made for partial release of the amount of the bond pro rata upon completion and acceptance of various stages of development as specifically delineated, described and scheduled in the stormwater management plan. The applicant shall notify the county engineer upon completion of each stage that is ready for inspection. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. C, § 1)) 
Sec. 2-6-117. - Inspection. 
(a)  The superintendent of public works shall be responsible for determining whether development is proceeding in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. Periodic inspection of the development site shall be made by the county engineer to ensure that the stormwater management plan is properly implemented. 
(b)  The county engineer and other duly authorized employees bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation and management in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. C, § 2)) 
Sec. 2-6-118. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In the event that work performed does not conform to the provisions of the approved stormwater management plan and inspection, a written notice to comply shall be served upon the owner. Such notice shall set forth the nature of the correction required and the time within which corrections shall be made. 
(b)  Failure to comply with such notice shall result in the issuance of a stop-work order applicable to all construction activity except that necessary for correction of the violation. Upon correction of the violation, the stop-work order shall be voided and construction may resume. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. C, § 3)) 
Sec. 2-6-119. - Maintenance responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the developer to maintain all facilities required by the stormwater management plan during construction. The developer shall be responsible for removing temporary structures or facilities on the completion of construction. The developer and all subsequent owners shall also be responsible for maintaining the permanent facilities identified by the stormwater management plan to remain after construction is complete. 
(b)  Should an owner fail to maintain the stormwater management facilities in a state of service intended by the stormwater management plan, then the superintendent of public works shall notify the owner in writing of such deficiencies and specific minimum maintenance requirements to remedy such deficiencies. 
(c)  If the owner fails to perform the required maintenance work within a reasonable period of time (thirty (30) days maximum), then the owner shall be in violation of the provisions of this section and shall be punished as prescribed in section 2-1-8 of this Code. 
(d)  In the case of single-family residential subdivisions approved after March 26, 1991, the county shall assume responsibility for the functional maintenance of facilities one (1) year after the release of the performance bond required by this article. At the end of the developer's maintenance period, all retention structures shall have a positive slope to the outlet in order to facilitate complete drainage. 
(e)  Retention facilities in single-family residential subdivisions constructed prior to March 26, 1991, will not be accepted for county maintenance as provided in subsection (d), unless individually approved by and at the discretion of the county commission and unless suitable access easements are provided. 
(Ord. of 3-26-91 (Art. C, § 4)) 
ARTICLE VI. - PERSONAL WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2014-003A, § 1, adopted Aug. 26, 2014, deleted Art. VI, §§ 2-6-120—2-6-136 entitled "Personal Wireless Communication Facilities", which derived from Ord. No. 2011-002A, § 1, adopted Mar. 22, 2011. 
Editor's note— At the direction of the county, § 2-6-128 was added to the Code, per Ord. 2015-004A, subsequently the title of previously deleted art. VI, was added back. 

Secs. 2-6-120—2-6-127. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-6-128. - Telecommunications permit application requirements. 
(a)  General. The person, company or organization that will own, operate, rebuild or extend the height of a telecommunications facility shall make application for a telecommunications permit for any communication tower and/or antenna to the building official. Applications shall be made on such special forms, if any, as may be required by the building official or the building official's agent and shall contain such additional information as the building official may reasonably require. Applications for a telecommunications permit shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the person preparing same and with knowledge of the contents and representations made therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the information. The landowner, if different than the applicant, shall also sign the application. At the discretion of the county building official, any false or misleading statement on the application may subject the applicant to denial of the application without further consideration or opportunity for correction. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The holder of a telecommunications permit shall notify the building official of any intended rebuilding or extension in height of a telecommunications facility and shall apply with the county through the building official to relocate, rebuild or extend the height of a telecommunications facility. When an application is complete, it shall be processed upon payment of a one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) application fee to the governing body and shall be either granted or denied within sixty (60) days by the building official and/or agent. There will be no delay from the sixty (60) days time limit unless special circumstances exist that justify an extension of time not to exceed sixty (60) additional days for a decision to be made, if reasonably possible. A telecommunications permit shall be required for each telecommunications facility to be installed. Any and all representations made by the applicant to the building official or his designee on the record during the application process, whether written or verbal, shall be deemed a part of the application and may be relied upon in good faith by the governing body. 
(b)  No telecommunications facility shall be installed or constructed until the application is reviewed and approved by the building official and the telecommunications permit has been issued. 
(c)  The application shall include a statement in writing: 
(1)  That the applicant's proposed telecommunications facility shall be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all conditions of the telecommunications permit, without exception, unless specifically granted relief by the county building official in writing, as well as all applicable and permissible local codes, ordinances and regulations, including any and all applicable county, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(2)  That the construction of the telecommunications facility is legally permissible, including, but not limited to, the fact that the property is properly zoned for a telecommunications facility. 
(d)  An application for the construction or installation of a new, relocated, rebuilt or extended in height telecommunications facility shall contain the information hereinafter set forth. When a certification is called for in this section or article, such certification shall bear the signature of a professional engineer licensed in this state. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, mail address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable, of the applicant, property owner and/or person preparing the report. 
(2)  The type of personal wireless service to be provided by the communications facility. 
(3)  Site plan or plans specifying the location of communications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences and adjacent land uses, as well as the size of the property both in square feet and lot line dimensions showing compliance with required setbacks. 
(4)  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network, as well as all other suitable existing telecommunications facility within five (5) miles of the location of any proposed new telecommunications facility, unless the applicant can show that some other suitable distance is more reasonable and demonstrate conclusively why any existing telecommunications facility or other suitable structure cannot be used. A description of the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. A description of how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
(5)  A full description of the adjacent properties and the location, including any residential structures and districts, listed or eligible structures and sites on the National Register of Historic Places, floodplain, wetlands, listed threatened or endangered species or critical habitats, wildlife management areas, protected river corridors and state waters. 
(6)  The location of the nearest residential structure and the name and address of all landowners whose property is located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any property line of the lot or parcel on which the new telecommunications facility is proposed to be located. 
(7)  The location, size and height of all structures on the property which is the subject of the application. 
(8)  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the communications facility, including frequency of service, personal needs, equipment needs and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
(9)  Report from a qualified independent professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia that documents the following: 
a.  Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical engineering, economic and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
b.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
C.  Evidence of structural integrity of the telecommunications tower structure; 
d.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility; 
e.  The location, size and height of all proposed and existing antennas and all appurtenant structures; 
f.  Certification that the proposed antennas will not cause interference with other telecommunications devices with specific reference to the Floyd County Public Safety Communications System; 
g.  The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing landscaping and fencing; 
h.  The number, type and design of the tower(s) and antenna(s) proposed and the basis for the calculations of the tower's capacity to accommodate multiple users; 
i.  The make, model and manufacturer of the tower(s) and antenna(s); 
j.  A description of the proposed tower(s) and antenna(s) and all related fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above pre-existing grade, materials, color and lighting; and 
k.  A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the telecommunication facility. 
(10)  The applicant shall submit a written report demonstrating the applicant's review of colocation and the locations in order of priority as shown in section 2-6-126, demonstrating the technological reason for the site selection. If appropriate, based on selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed written explanation as to why sites of higher priority were not selected shall be included with the application. 
(11)  Notarized statement that the applicant and owner shall allow other future personal wireless service companies, including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to co-locate antennas, equipment and facilities on a telecommunications facility unless specific technical constraints prohibit said co-location. 
(12)  The applicant must provide any other information that may be requested by the building official to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(13)  The decision of the county building official approving the application shall be final if the application is granted. If the application is not granted and the applicant takes issue with any part of the application process or the decision by the county building official, the applicant may appeal directly to the Floyd County Board of Commissioners within thirty (30) days of the decision by the local county building official denying the application. The hearing thereon shall be open to the public and evidence may be presented by the applicant and the county building official as to the appeal. 
(e)  There shall be a pre-application meeting. The purpose of this pre-application meeting will be to address issues that will help to expedite the review and permitting process. A pre-application meeting shall also include a site visit if there has not been a prior site visit for the requested site. Costs of the county's consultants, if needed, to prepare for and attend the pre-application meeting will be borne by the applicant. 
(f)  The holder of a telecommunications permit shall notify the building official of any intended relocation, rebuilding or extension in height of a telecommunications facility and shall apply with the county for a new telecommunications permit through the building official to relocate, rebuild or extend in height a telecommunications facility. 
(g)  The applicant will provide a written copy of an analysis, completed by a qualified individual or organization, to determine if the telecommunications facility or exiting structure intended to suppolt wireless facilities requires lighting under Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Regulation Part 77 or any other subsequent FAA requirement. This requirement shall be for any new telecommunications facility or for an existing structure or building where the application increases the height of the structure or building. If this analysis determines that the FAA must be contacted, then all filings with the FAA, all responses from the FAA and any related correspondence shall be provided in a timely manner. 
(Ord. No. 2015-004A, 11-24-15) 
Secs. 2-6-129—2-6-150. - Reserved. 
Chapter 2-7 - COUNTY UTILITIES AND SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Water and sewer department created, § 2-2-22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-7-1. - Regulation of privately owned fire, burglary and/or robbery alarm systems. 
(a)  Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to establish requirements for the monitoring and/or receiving of fire and burglar alarm signals, and fire equipment trouble alarms at the 911 Center. 
(b)  Definitions: Unless the context demands otherwise, the words and terms used in this section shall have the following definitions: 
(1)  False alarm is a fire alarm signal or police signal from a privately owned fire or police signal device or system that is caused or created by anything other than an actual fire or burglary/robbery, respectively, in the premises where the device or system is located. 
(2)  False alarm penalty is an administrative fee imposed by the county to defray the expense to the county for responding to false alarms. The amount of the fees shall be as set out in the fee schedule as provided in subsection (i) of this section. 
(3)  Fire alarm signal is a signal indicating an emergency requiring immediate action of the fire department, including but not limited to an alarm from a manually operated fire alarm box, a water flow alarm, or an alarm from an automatic fire/smoke detection system or device. 
(4)  Fire equipment trouble alarm is an alarm indicating some form of malfunction or trouble with the fire protection or fire detecting system or device being monitored. Such trouble alarm does not indicate the need for emergency fire department response to the site, but only that the person responsible for maintenance of the system being monitored is to be notified of the trouble alarm signal. 
(5)  Police signal is a signal from a manually operated or automatic device which indicates an emergency requiring immediate response by the police department. 
(c)  Connections: No emergency signal other than a fire alarm, burglary and robbery or intrusion alarm, and no trouble alarm other than a fire equipment trouble alarm shall be connected to any alarm signal receiving equipment in the 911 Center. 
(d)  Automatic Dialers: It shall be unlawful to key automatic dialer fire or burglar alarms to the county emergency numbers or to the 911 Center. These types of alarms shall be keyed to a private service that can then notify the 911 Center. 
(e)  Automatic Cutoff System: All audible alarms, sirens, bells or horns shall have an automatic cutoff system so that the alarm shall not operate for more than thirty (30) continuous minutes. 
(f)  Transmission of False Alarms: The transmission of false alarms to the 911 Center of the county, as the case may be, in excess of the allowable alarms as contained in the fee schedule shall authorize the imposition of a false alarm penalty as provided in said fee schedule as set out in subsection (i) of this section. 
(g)  Accounting of False Alarms: The 911 Center shall maintain an accounting of false alarms on a monthly and quarterly basis. Each calendar year shall constitute a new accounting period for determining the imposition of false alarm penalties as established in the fee schedule. 
(h)  Termination of Services: Service will be terminated as provided in the fee schedule. Service will be reinstated only after appropriate action has been taken to correct user deficiencies and the user receives approval from the appropriate chief. 
(i)  Fee Schedule and False Alarm Penalty: The following schedule of penalties shall apply for the purpose of determining the administrative fees to be imposed on a yearly basis for false alarms as established in subsections (a) through (h) of this section: 
(1)  One (1) to four (4) false alarms per year, no penalty. 
(2)  Fifth false alarm, written warning from the director of the 911 Center shall be sent advising the violator that next false alarm will result in the imposition of an administrative fee. 
(3)  Sixth false alarm, twenty-five dollars ($25.00) fee. 
(4)  Seventh false alarm, fifty dollars ($50.00) fee. 
(5)  Eighth false alarm, seventy-five dollars ($75.00) fee. 
(6)  Ninth false alarm and any number thereafter, one hundred dollars ($100.00) fee per false alarm. 
(7)  Tenth false alarm, termination of services after tenth false alarm, if not remedied. 
(Ord. of 3-28-89, §§ I, II) 
Editor's note— Inclusion of the provisions of §§ I, II of an ordinance adopted March 28, 1989, as § 2-7-1 was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance being nonamendatory of the Code. 
Secs. 2-7-2—2-7-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— See also Art. IV of this chapter, § 2-7-80 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-7-20. - Department's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The water and sewer department, hereinafter referred to as "department," shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. 
(b)  The department may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render the service. 
(c)  The department may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the department's option, on the customer's property within three (3) feet of the property line. 
(d)  The department reserves the right to refuse service unless the customer's lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or backflow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions the customer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service. Failure to notify the customer of service interruptions will not create a liability for the department. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1005; Ord. of 4-23-91) 
Sec. 2-7-21. - Customer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the department shall be used for consumption by the customer, members of the customer's household and employees only. The customer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use the water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, or other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this requirement shall be sufficient cause for a refusal or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a customer, a suitable place shall be provided by the customer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The customer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the customer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The customer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the customer at the customer's expense in a safe and efficient manner. The line or piping shall be installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or backflow. (For more information regarding cross-connections or backflow, see Article IV, section 2-7-80 of the County Code.) 
(e)  In order to be received as a customer and entitled to receive water from the department's water system, all applicants shall offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the county's water system, and all applicants, by becoming customers of the county, covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be customers of the department they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the department's water system. 
(f)  Under Southern Standard Plumbing Code Section 1211, specifically 1211-9-1, the customer is required to install a pressure reducing valve on the customer's side of the meter where water main pressure fluctuates or when the static (no-flow) supply pressure at any fixture would exceed eighty (80) psi. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1006; Ord. of 4-23-91) 
Sec. 2-7-22. - Access to premises and extensions of systems. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the department shall have access at all hours to the premises of the customer for the purpose of installing or removing department property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the customer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the county a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water or sewer lines. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1007) 
Sec. 2-7-23. - Suspension of service. 
The department reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for any of the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Customer's willful disregard of departmental rules; 
(3)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the department's control; 
(4)  Emergency repairs; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood or unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1010) 
Sec. 2-7-24. - Application for service; deposit. 
The customer shall make application for water and sewer service at the offices of the department. Each customer shall make a deposit as outlined in the Fee Schedule Book; such deposit shall be refunded upon written request, less any sums due for charges, upon discontinuance or termination of service at the location served. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1002; Ord. of 4-23-91) 
Cross reference— Permit to connect, § 2-7-43. 
Sec. 2-7-25. - Charges for initial connections. 
Each customer subscribing to use the water service shall pay at the time of application a deposit and connection fee times the number of connections desired for water service. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. (Connecting fees can be found in the "Floyd County Water and Sewer Rates Schedule" as provided in section 2-7-26.) 
(Code 1979, § 5-1003; Ord. of 4-23-91) 
Sec. 2-7-26. - Rates schedule on file. 
Rates for water and sewer service shall be provided in a document entitled "Floyd County Water and Sewer Rates Schedule" which document is hereby incorporated by reference herein. Copies thereof shall be available for public inspection in the county clerk's office. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1001) 
Sec. 2-7-27. - No free water. 
Under no circumstances shall the county furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1004) 
Sec. 2-7-28. - Billing and nonpayment. 
(a)  Bills to water and sewer service customers shall be mailed on a monthly basis on such dates as determined necessary and convenient by the board of commissioners. Bills shall be paid in person or by mail at the water billing office or in person at any such other location as may be designated for this purpose. 
(b)  Failure to receive a bill shall not prevent such bill from becoming delinquent and shall not relieve the customer from the obligation to pay. The failure to pay a duly imposed bill shall automatically result in the following: 
(1)  Nonpayment by the due date shown on the bill shall result in the imposition of a penalty equal to ten (10) percent of the full amount billed. 
(2)  Nonpayment of the bill, plus the imposed penalty, by the fifteenth day following the due date shall result in the water service being disconnected without further notice. 
(c)  Water service disconnected for nonpayment will be restored only after the bill, plus the imposed penalty, is paid in full and a reconnection fee is paid for each meter requiring reconnection. 
(Amend. of 4-26-94, § 1) 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted April 26, 1994, set out a new § 2-7-28 and repealed the old § 2-7-28, which pertained to "meter reading; billing; delinquent charges; collecting—general" and derived from Code 1979, § 5-1009 and an ordinance adopted April 23, 1991. 
Sec. 2-7-29. - Same—Change of occupancy. 
In the case of water and sewer service provided to rental property, the responsibility for charges for services provided shall be upon the tenant, and the landlord or owner of the property shall not be liable for delinquent bills owed by the tenants. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1008; Ord. of 2-25-92) 
Sec. 2-7-30. - Complaints and adjustments. 
(a)  If the customer believes such customer's bill to be in error, the customer shall present the claim, in person, at the department's business office, before the bill becomes delinquent. The claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The customer may pay the bill under protest and that payment shall not prejudice the claim. 
(b)  The department will make a special water meter reading at the request of a customer. 
(c)  If the seal of a meter is broken, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the customer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of such customer's previous bills or from any other proper data. 
(d)  In the event of a verified leak in the line on the customer's side of the meter which results in an abnormally high consumption record, the department may make an adjustment to the customer's bill in accordance with the following: 
(1)  The customer's last three (3) consumption readings shall be averaged; and 
(2)  To the average arrived at above shall be added one-half of the difference between the average and the reading reflecting the leak. 
(e)  Following application for service, payment of the required connection fee, and actual installation of the meter, the customer shall be billed the minimum rate for service even if no water is consumed. 
(f)  Where by petition, or otherwise, residents of the county request extension of the water distribution system and the county deems it feasible to make such an extension, the petitioners or others requesting service shall be required to pay one-half of the connection fee prior to the start of construction. Upon completion of construction and being advised that service is available, the balance of the connection fee is due and payable. Whether or not paid, the minimum rate shall become effective, just as if the total connection fee had been paid and the meter installed. The charges so incurred shall be paid before any service is thereafter provided. 
(Code 1979, § 5-1011; Ord. of 4-23-91) 
Sec. 2-7-31. - Water conservation, restrictions, rationing and bans—Compliance required. 
(a)  Restriction on outdoor water of landscape. Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the unincorporated area may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(b)  Required. Whenever the county and the residents thereof are subject to the imposition of any greater or lesser conservation measures, restrictions, rationing or bans, or any combination thereof, concerning the consumption and usage of water, the same having been legally imposed by any governmental authority, whether federal, state or local, and applicable to the county, all residents, persons, corporations, firms, businesses and entities within the county shall comply with all rules, regulations, orders and directions promulgated pursuant to all laws, ordinances and plans pertaining to such consumption and usage of water. 
(c)  Enforcement. 
(1)  No person, corporation, firm, business or other entity shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
(2)  The Floyd County Police Department shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The county manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(3)  Upon information being made known to the police department that any violation of this section is occurring, there shall cause a citation to be issued requiring the violator to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain then and there to stand trial for violation of this section. 
(4)  Citations issued hereunder shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 15-10-63, and shall be personally served upon the person accused. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(d)  Penalty. 
(1)  Any person violating the terms of this section or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto may be punished by fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. Separate offenses shall be deemed to be committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. A third violation will result in water services being discontinued. 
(2)  In addition to all other provisions hereof, any violation of this section is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction in the superior court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. of 6-28-88, §§ 1—3; Ord. No. 2011-001A, § I, 2-8-11) 
Sec. 2-7-32. - Same—Imposed; exemptions, etc. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(b)  Prohibited residential installations. On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the unincorporated areas of the county for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type flushmeter-valve, or flushmeter-tank toilet that uses more than an average of one and six-tenths (1.6) gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of two and one-half (2.5) gallons of water per minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one (1.0) gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two (2.0) gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two and one-half (2.5) gallons of water per minute. 
(c)  Prohibited commercial installations. On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the unincorporated areas of the county for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections (b)(1) through (5) above. 
(d)  Applicability. The requirements of subsection (b) above shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(e)  Exemptions. New construction and the renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) of this section when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilet, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; or 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this section were installed; or 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; or 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
The owner or his agent of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (2), (3) or (4) of this subsection shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the Rome-Floyd County Building Inspection Department. 
(f)  Enforcement; penalty. 
(1)  This section shall be enforced by the Rome-Floyd County Building Inspection Department. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector of the building inspection department. 
(2)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this section shall be tried before the magistrate court of the county. Upon conviction, a violation of this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or sixty (60) days imprisonment or both and shall not exceed the maximum punishment specified by ordinance (as set out in O.C.G.A. section 15-10-60). 
(Ord. of 3-26-91) 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Mar. 26, 1991, not specifically amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 2-7-32 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-7-33—2-7-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF SEWERS 

Sec. 2-7-40. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this division shall be as follows: 
Administrator: The person designated as such by the board of commissioners, or a representative of that designee. 
BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five (5) feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Building sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
Combined sewer: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
Properly shredded garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer: A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
Sanitary sewer: A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage: A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm waters as may inadvertently be present. 
Sewage treatment plant: Any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works: All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer: A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal operation. 
Storm drain (sometimes termed "storm sewer"): A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
Suspended solids: Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2001) 
Sec. 2-7-41. - Illegal discharges in other than public sewers; illegal facilities; required connection. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit, or permit to be placed or deposited, in any unsanitary manner on public or private property, within any area under the jurisdiction of the county, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, within any area under the jurisdiction of the county, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this division. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the jurisdiction of the county and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer, is hereby required at such owners' expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within two hundred (200) feet of the property line. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2002) 
Sec. 2-7-42. - Private sewage disposal; permit. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 2-7-41, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the administrator. The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the department, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as is deemed necessary by the administrator. A permit and inspection fee of an amount currently set by the department shall be paid to the department at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the administrator. The administrator shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the administrator when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within forty-eight (48) hours of the receipt of notice by the administrator. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, and the county health department. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities unless approval of that method has first been obtained from the county health department. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 2-7-41, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this division, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. The connection shall be made within sixty (60) days of the availability of the public sewer. 
(f)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the county, unless arrangements in writing have been made with the department for such operation and maintenance. 
(g)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the county health department. 
(h)  When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected to the sewer within sixty (60) days and the private sewage disposal system shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with clean back-run gravel or dirt. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2003) 
Sec. 2-7-43. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer, or appurtenance thereof, without first obtaining a written permit from the administrator. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (1) for residential and commercial service, and (2) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or the owner's agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the department. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the administrator. A permit and inspection fee of an amount currently set by the board of commissioners for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and an amount currently set by the board of commissioners for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the department at the time the application is filed. 
Cross reference— Application for service; deposit, § 2-7-24. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the department for any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer will be provided for every building, residence or other facility, designed or used for human occupancy or congregation; except that where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the administrator, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the county building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the department. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged into the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the county building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the department. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the administrator before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the administrator when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the administrator or the administrator's representative. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the department. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2004) 
Sec. 2-7-44. - Restricted and prohibited discharges to public sewer; testing, etc. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the administrator. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the administrator, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. All cooling waters containing chemicals shall go into the sanitary sewer only after necessary pretreatment as required by the administrator or by this division. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two (2) mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than five and five-tenths (5.5), or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works; 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes and cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(d)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the administrator that the wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming the opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the administrator will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit sixty-five (65) degrees centigrade); 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) degrees and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit; 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the administrator; 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such a degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the administrator for such materials; 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the administrator as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies having jurisdiction over such discharge to the receiving waters; 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the administrator in compliance with the applicable state or federal regulations; 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH that will cause the waste entering the sewage treatment plant, at any time, to be in excess of nine (9.0); 
(9)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, any textile fibers, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions); 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; or 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting "slugs" as defined in section 2-7-40. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (d) of this section, and which in the judgment of the administrator may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the administrator may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of subsection (j) of this section. 
If the administrator permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the administrator, and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws. 
(f)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the administrator, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the administrator and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(g)  Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at such owner's expense. 
(h)  When required by the administrator, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer, to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. The manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the administrator. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at such owner's expense, and shall be maintained by such owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods, to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH is determined from periodic grab samples.) 
(j)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the department and any industrial concern, whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the department for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the industrial concern, and subject to any other applicable contractual restrictions with the City of Rome or otherwise. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2005) 
Sec. 2-7-45. - Protection from damage to system. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest for the destruction of same, as by law provided, where public property is so damaged or destroyed. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2006) 
Sec. 2-7-46. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The administrator and other duly authorized employees of the department bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this division. The administrator or representatives thereof shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, textile or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) above, the administrator or duly authorized employees of the county shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the county employees. The county shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by county employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 2-7-47. 
(c)  The administrator and other duly authorized employees of the county bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the county holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2007) 
Sec. 2-7-47. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this division except section 2-7-43 shall be served by the department with written notice, stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for above, shall be prosecuted by the department for a misdemeanor, under the proper state laws applicable thereto. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be liable to the department for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the department by reason of the violation. 
(Code 1979, § 5-2008) 
Secs. 2-7-48, 2-7-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL 

Sec. 2-7-50. - Definitions. 
In the construction of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Commercial hauler: Any person who collects and/or transports solid waste for a fee or as a business. 
Commercial residential hauler: A commercial hauler who collects and/or transports domestic refuse. 
Commercial wastes: All waste by-products of manufacturing or commercial establishments, cinders and ashes from commercial boilers, and cardboard and wooden boxes, crates and barrels. 
Director: The director of the solid waste department of the county or such director's authorized repre]sentatives. 
Disposal facility: Any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Disposal site: The location at which the final disposition of solid waste occurs. 
Domestic refuse: Household solid waste, and putrescible and nonputrescible waste originating from a residential unit, and consisting of paper, cans, bottles, food wastes, and including yard and garden waste. 
Hazardous waste: A solid waste, or combination of solid wastes, which because of the quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: (1) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or (2) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Incidental hauler: Any person who transports solid waste as part of a business activity but who make not more than six (6) trips to the landfill annually. 
Industrial hauler: Any person who transports commercial wastes from the manufacturing, commercial or industrial establishment owned or operated by such person. 
Litter: Garbage, trash, commercial waste or other waste which is scattered about or accumulated in an untidy manner. 
Nuisance: Anything which: 
(1)  Meets that definition of the term as defined by O.C.G.A. section 41-1-1; and 
(2)  Occurs during or as the result of the handling or disposing of solid waste. 
Cross reference— As to such nuisances, see also § 2-11-1; littering at recreational facilities, § 2-13-7. 
Other waste: Animal, fowl and fish excrement, entrails, bones, carcasses, in whole or in part, and dead animals. 
Person: As defined in section 2-1-2, and specifically including the state or any agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, political subdivision, public or private corporation, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association, or other entity. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, or public or private corporation. 
Private collector: Any person who collects and/or transports solid waste as an adjunct to a business. 
Scavenger: Any person who salvages or collects for resale or use, any garbage, paper, cardboard, boxes, crates or other waste which is being disposed of. 
Solid waste: Putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except water-carried body waste, and shall include garbage, rubbish (paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, stumps, tires, furniture, appliances, metal, tin cans, glass, crockery, or dunnage), ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manure, industrial waste (waste material generated in industrial operations), residue from incineration, food processing waste, demolition waste, abandoned automobiles, dredging waste, construction waste, and any other waste material in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this section. 
Solid waste handling: The storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste, or any combination of such activities. 
Stump: The lower portion of the trunk of a tree or shrub six (6) inches in diameter, or larger, and including portions of the root system. 
Tire: Any tire or tire carcass that has not been shredded or cut into portions less than half its original size. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2001; Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86; Ord. of 2-27-90, § I) 
Sec. 2-7-51. - Administration. 
The director is authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The director shall have control of solid waste facilities, equipment and personnel and shall organize and operate a publicly owned solid waste collection, transportation and disposal system; and shall inspect and regulate the operations of private collectors and private transportation and disposal systems to the end that such operations shall be in compliance with this article. All actions of the director shall be subject to the review of the county manger. Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or fee charged by, the director shall have the right to appeal to the board of commissioners, which may, upon hearing, confirm, modify or revoke such requirement or fee. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2002; Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86) 
Sec. 2-7-52. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon information made known to the chief of police, or the chief's authorized representative, that any person is in violation of this article, the chief or authorized representative shall cause a citation to be issued requiring said person to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for violation of this article. 
(b)  Citations issued hereunder shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 15-10-63 and shall be personally served upon the person accused. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2015, Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86) 
Sec. 2-7-53. - Advisory committee—Created; composition. 
(a)  Created. There is hereby created an advisory committee. 
(b)  Composition. This committee shall consist of the following who, after their initial appointment, shall serve for a period of two (2) years: Two (2) members who are private collectors. The initial term for these two (2) collectors shall expire on December 31, 1991, and new appointees shall serve for two (2) years thereafter. Three (3) interested citizens shall also serve, and their initial term shall expire on December 31, 1992, and new appointees shall serve for two (2) years thereafter. All five (5) individuals selected to serve on the committee shall be selected and appointed by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Ex officio membership. The ex officio member shall be the director. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2003; Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86; Ord. of 3-26-91) 
Sec. 2-7-54. - Same—Powers and duties. 
In addition to such other powers and duties as may be set forth in this article, the advisory committee shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Hold hearings and recommend to the board of commissioners regulations and amendments to this article concerning solid waste control. 
(2)  Recommend to the board of commissioners guidelines for the operation and maintenance of the sanitary landfills. 
(3)  Supply to the board of commissioners semi-annual reports as to any recommendations provided for herein or at such other intervals or times as may be designated, for inspection by the public. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2004; Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86) 
Sec. 2-7-55. - Precollection. 
No person shall keep or store refuse outside of any residence or building within the county except if it be in proper containers for collection or otherwise prepared as set forth herein and under the express prior approval of the director of. Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is prohibited. The director by written notice shall notify the owner or occupant of any premises with such solid waste accumulation to remove same. Failure to remove such accumulation within two (2) weeks of the date of such written notice to do so shall be deemed a violation of this Code and subject to penalties herein set forth, and each day's failure to remove such accumulation shall be a separate violation. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2005; Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86) 
Sec. 2-7-56. - Scavenging. 
No person other than the owner or authorized collection personnel shall sift the contents of or remove anything from any container, box or bundle. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2006; Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86) 
Sec. 2-7-57. - Hazardous waste. 
It shall be a violation of this article to place or cause to be placed in any container, box or bundle, or otherwise for disposal in the county, any hazardous waste of any kind. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2007; Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86) 
Sec. 2-7-58. - Collection vehicles. 
(a)  Vehicles used for collection and transportation of solid waste shall be kept in good repair. They shall be constructed in such a manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked or blown from the vehicle. Commercial hauler vehicles and private collector vehicles shall be readily identifiable by letters painted on the door of the vehicle cab or in any equally conspicuous place, showing the owner's name, telephone number, truck number, truck permit number, and rated load capacity in cubic yards. The rated load capacity shall be specified by the director following such director's measurement on the load-carrying portion of the truck body. 
(b)  All such vehicles at all times shall be subject to inspection by the director, the chief of police, or the duly authorized representatives of either. If in the judgment of the person making the inspection a vehicle is found to be defective or unfit for use, the owner or operator shall be notified of such defects and shall have four (4) calendar days to correct same, and thereafter the director or police chief is empowered to prevent the use of the same within the landfill area until put in proper condition to comply with the terms of this article. 
(Code 1979, §§ 2-2008, 2-2009; Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86) 
Sec. 2-7-59. - License—Required. 
Commercial haulers shall not transport solid waste to the county landfill without having first applied for and received a license for such activity from the licensing authority of the county. Incidental haulers shall not transport solid waste to the county landfill without having first registered with the licensing authority of the county. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2010; Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86) 
Sec. 2-7-60. - Same—Application; fee; transfer; suspension; revocation. 
License applications shall be filed with the director not less than fifteen (15) days prior to any critical date. Applications shall state thereon, or in accompanying documentation which shall be a part of the official application, the name of applicant or applicant's company, the principal owners, their residence addresses and business addresses, the number, type and size of waste collection vehicles to be used, the name and location of commercial and industrial establishments and the number of residences to be served, the types of waste to be collected, the state permit number of each disposal site to be used and such other information as may be deemed necessary. Applications shall be considered by the director within two (2) weeks of receipt; the director shall evaluate the accuracy of data submitted and the applicant's capacity to perform the proposed solid waste op eration within the requirements of this article and in a satisfactory manner. The application with appropriate signed recommendation shall then be forwarded by the director to the county manager who shall take such action upon the application as such manager may deem advisable. The applicant shall thereupon be notified of action taken and, in case of denial, the reasons therefor. The license fee for approved applications shall be one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per calendar year for commercial haulers or private collectors, payable at the time the initial license is issued and on or before the first day of January thereafter, except that such payment may be prorated at ten dollars ($10.00) per month or fraction of month for the remainder of the calendar year in which the permit is first approved for commercial haulers or private collectors. The registration license for incidental haulers shall be free. The registration license shall authorize the holder thereof to use the landfill on six (6) separate occasions. The registration license shall have six (6) small squares shown thereon and the attendant shall punch one (1) square each time the hauler uses the landfill. After the expiration of six (6) punches, the holder must thereafter acquire a commercial hauler's license. Licenses shall not be transferable nor rebatable, but shall be subject to suspension or revocation for violation of this article, provided that prior to suspension or revocation the county manager shall afford to alleged violators an opportunity to be heard as to reasons, if any, why such order for suspension or revocation should not be issued. Following such hearing the county manager shall take such action as such manager may then deem to be fit and proper. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2011; Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86) 
Sec. 2-7-61. - Disposal sites—Use required; prohibited deposits. 
(a)  All disposal of solid waste shall be at the disposal sites operated in accordance with state laws and with rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources. Waste deposited during operating hours at any site operated by the county shall be placed as designated by the attendant on duty. Operating hours shall be conspicuously posted at the entrance gates. 
(b)  Motor vehicle bodies or major parts thereof, major appliances and stumps, logs, or brush shall not be deposited in the county's sanitary landfills. Stumps, logs or brush shall be either delivered to permitted inert landfill sites for burial, disposed of by permitted burning on site, or delivered to a Georgia EPD permitted air curtain destructor site for incineration. Scrap metals and appliances will be accepted only at permitted landfill disposal sites and shall not be delivered to or accepted at any remote collection site. Commercial and industrial waste or other waste from private collectors shall not be deposited at publicly operated disposal sites except by prior arrangement with the director. Fees for such disposal shall be determined by reference to section 2-1-12 of this Code and shall be billed and collected as hereinafter set forth. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2012; Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86; Ord. of 10-27-92, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-62. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2-7-62, pertaining to landfill disposal fees, derived from the Code of 1979, § 2-2013, and was amended by Ord. of Nov. 12, 1985, Ord. of Mar. 25, 1986 and Ord. of Feb. 27, 1990, § II. Ord. of Oct. 27, 1992, § 2, deleted § 2-7-62 in its entirety. 
Sec. 2-7-63. - Same—Billing. 
For use of disposal sites the attendant shall make in duplicate a record of each time a vehicle discharges waste at the site. Such record shall show the date, the time of day, the vehicle owner's name, the truck number and its rated load capacity in cubic yards. The record shall be signed by the driver of the truck and by the site attendant. One (1) copy of the record shall be given to the driver and the original copy shall be retained by the attendant and filed daily with the director who shall tabulate records according to the owners and assess charges according to the rated load capacity schedule and who shall deliver them monthly to the finance office of the county for billing and collection. The billing will be sent to each licensee not later than the fifth day of each month and payment must be received by the fifteenth of that same month. Payment may be made by check or cash to the finance office at the county government building or may be mailed to P.O. Box 946, Rome, Georgia. A five (5) percent penalty will be added for each month that the balance remains unpaid. The failure of any person to pay such accrued charges by the fifteenth day of the month shall be sufficient reason to deny such person or such person's employees or agents the right to continue using the disposal sites until all such charges are paid in full. 
(Code 1979, § 2-2014; Ord. of 11-12-85; Ord. of 3-25-86) 
Sec. 2-7-64. - Penalties. 
Any person violating the terms of this article, or the rules or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, may be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days; provided, however, that any commercial hauler or commercial residential hauler in violation of this article, or the rules or regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, shall be fined in an amount not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. of 6-8-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-7-65. - Definitions. 
Load shall mean twenty-two (22) cubic yards of yard debris. 
Property owner shall mean any individual or entity owning real property which is adjacent to a Floyd County right-of-way. 
Yard debris shall include tree limbs, tree trunks, tree branches or cuttings, shrubs and bushes so long as the same do not exceed twelve (12) feet in length and were removed from the yard area immediately surrounding the property owner's dwelling house. Yard debris shall not include solid waste, trash or other household garbage nor shall yard debris include pine straw, grass clippings or stumps. 
(Ord. No. 2009-002A, § I, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 2-7-66. - Removal of yard debris. 
Yard debris removal shall be at a time and in a manner prescribed by the department and as provided for hereinafter. 
The property owner shall place all yard debris in neat, separate piles immediately behind the county right-of-way which is adjacent to the road or street on which the property owner's dwelling house is situated. In no event shall yard debris be placed in the gutters or drainage ditches. At no time shall yard debris be placed in such a manner as to obstruct gutters, drains, walkways, streets or roads. All tree limbs, tree trunks and tree branches shall be placed with the butt ends in the same direction. 
The property owner shall contact the department to schedule the removal of yard debris. The department's agent shall inspect the yard debris and shall inform the property owner of the fee for removal, if any, as provided for in section 2-7-67 hereinafter. The department may refuse to remove any materials which do not constitute yard debris as defined in section 2-7-65 hereinabove and which have not been placed for removal by the property owner as provided for in this section. The department shall schedule the collection on a "first come first serve" basis. Free pickups are limited to one (1) per quarter for each property owner. 
The department shall remove yard debris only from property which is adjacent to Floyd County right-of-way. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to scatter or allow to be scattered any yard debris placed for removal by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2009-002A, § II, 4-14-09) 
Sec. 2-7-67. - Fee for removal. 
There shall be no charge for the removal of yard debris consisting of less than three (3) cubic yards. 
Yard debris exceeding three (3) cubic yards shall be charged on a per load basis. The fee for any load exceeding three (3) cubic yards but less than ten (10) cubic yards shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). The fee for any load larger than ten (10) cubic yards shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). The fee for any additional loads, regardless of size, shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per load. 
All payments due for yard debris removal shall be made in advance and payable to the department. Yard debris removal will be scheduled by the department. 
(Ord. No. 2009-002A, § III, 4-14-09) 
Secs. 2-7-68—2-7-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Formerly, this article is derived from §§ 1—11 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 10, 1985, which was adopted in order to implement a program recommended by Williams, Switzer and Barnum, Inc., dated Sept. 16, 1989. Parts of the ordinance adopted parts of "A Guide to Selection and Installation of Cross-Connection-Control Devices". These sections will be identified by an editor's note at the appropriate place. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-004A, § I, adopted Aug. 28, 2007, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 2-7-80—2-7-91, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to Cross connections and derived from Ord. of 12-10-85, §§ 1, 2, 11; Ord. No. 2001-004A, § 1, adopted 10-23-01. 

Sec. 2-7-80. - Short title and objectives. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "The Backflow Prevention Ordinance" of Floyd County, Georgia. The objective of the article is to protect the potable water supply. This objective will be accomplished by requiring the use of appropriate backflow protection methods. The possibility of contamination will be minimized by confining within the customer's private water system those contaminates or pollutants which could, under adverse conditions, backflow through uncontrolled cross connections into the public water system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 2-7-81. - Definitions. 
Air gap separation means the unobstructed vertical distance through the atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood level rim of the receptacle. An "approved air-gap separation" shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe. In no case shall the air gap separation be less than one (1) inch. 
Approved means in reference to backflow prevention assemblies or methods, those assemblies or methods which have been accepted by the manager as an effective means or method to prevent backflow. 
Backflow means any flow of water, liquid, gas or other substances, or any combination thereof, into the distribution piping of a potable water supply from any source or sources. 
Backflow prevention assembly means an approved assembly or method used to prevent backflow from occurring in the potable water supply. 
Backpressure backflow means backflow caused by a pump, elevated tank, boiler, or other means that could create pressure within the system greater than the supply pressure. 
Back-siphonage backflow means a reversal of the normal direction flow in the pipeline due to a negative pressure (vacuum) being created in the supply line with the backflow source subject atmospheric pressure. 
Certified tester means a person who has proven his/her competency to test, repair, overhaul and prepare reports on backflow prevention assemblies as evidenced by certification of successful completion of a training program approved and accepted by the State of Georgia. 
Consumer/customer means any person, firm, or corporation using or receiving water from the county water department. 
Containment means prevention of possible contamination from a private water system by approved backflow prevention assembly. 
Contamination means prevention degradation of the quality of water so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of water. 
Cross-connection means any physical connection between the county's water supply system and any other source. This includes piping systems, sewer fixtures, containers, or devices whereby water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances may flow into or enter the county's water supply system. 
Cross-connection inspector means an employee of the county water department designated by the manager to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
Degree of hazard means derived from an evaluation of the health risks, systems, plumbing, or pollution hazards. 
Double check valve assembly means an assembly composed of tow sings, independently-acting approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly, and suitable connection for testing the water-tightness of each check valve. 
High hazard means an actual threat of contamination to the public water system or to a private water system to such a degree or intensity that there could be danger to health. 
Imminent hazard means an actual threat of contamination that presents a danger to the public health with consequences of serious illness or death. 
Manager means the manager of the county water department. 
Moderate hazard means one that presents foreseeable and significant potential for pollution, nuisance, aesthetically objectionable, or other undesirable alterations of the drinking water supply. 
Owner means any person, firm or corporation owning fee simple interest in property served by the county water department. 
Point of delivery means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, i.e. where the manager loses sole jurisdiction over the water; the point where water leaves the public water system and enters a private water system. This point is defined physically as the connection or coupling on the outlet of the water meter; for grandfathered fire line systems, the inlet flange of an approved backflow prevention device on an unmetered fire service connection. 
Potable water means water from any source which has been approved for human consumption by the environmental protection division (EPD) of the state. 
Private water system means a system of pipes or other associated facilities that is not part of the county's public water system and is used to move or receive water, regardless of the source of the water in such system. 
Reduced pressure principal assembly means an assembly containing within its structure a minimum of two independently acting, approved check valves, together with an automatically operation pressure a differential relief valve located between the check valves. The first check valve reduces the supply pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow and at cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the checks shall be less than the supply pressures. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharge to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checks shall be less than the supply pressures. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief valve, by discharge to the atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. The assembly must include property located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves at each end of the assembly. 
Standards means official printed standards for water systems for county water department adopted by the board of commissioners. 
Water supply (approved) means any public potable water supply which has been investigated and approved by the environmental protection division (EPD) of the state. The system must be operating under a valid permit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 2-7-82. - Elimination of cross-connections. 
No private water system may be or remain connected in any manner to the public water system unless the requirements of this article and other applicable laws have been satisfied. Only an approved device can be installed to meet the requirements of this article. Any backflow prevention assembly, or the installation of any backflow prevention assembly, which is not approved must be replaced with an approved backflow assembly. All costs associated with such backflow prevention assembly and its installation shall be borne by the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 2-7-83. - Installation, testing and maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and the standard adopted by the county water department. Such standards shall be available in the county water department office and shall be certified as the currently adopted version by the manager of the county water department. Only backflow preventers approved by the county shall be installed. All backflow preventions assemblies required by this article must be installed and maintained on the customer's premises as part of the customer's water system. Ownership, testing and maintenance of the backflow prevention assembly will be the responsibility and the expense of the customer. Each assembly required in this article must be functioning properly at all times. Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be conducted by a certified tester at the customer's expense. Tests shall be conducted upon installation and annually thereafter with a record of all testing and repairs retained by the customer. A copy of the certified record for each test or repair must be sent to the county water department by such customer within thirty (30) days after the completion of each test or repair. Such records must be maintained on forms approved by the county water department. Each backflow prevention assembly required under this article must be accessible to the county water department. When it is not possible to interrupt water service, the customer shall provide for the parallel installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly. The manager will not accept an unprotected bypass around a backflow preventer when the assembly is in need of testing, repair or replacement. Any repair to backflow assemblies deemed necessary, whether through annual testing or routine inspection by the owner or by the county, must be completed within a time specified in accordance with the degree of hazard. Repairs on a private water system considered to be an imminent hazard shall be completed within twenty-four (24) hours, high hazard shall be completed within ten (10) days, and all other repairs within twenty (20) days. Failure to comply can result in termination of a customer's water service. Upon determination that a backflow prevention assembly is required to be installed on a customer's water service, the customer will be notified in writing of the approved backflow assembly which is required. On existing systems, the customer will have the following time periods within which to install the specified backflow prevention assembly: 

 
(b)  The manager may require the installation of the required backflow prevention assembly immediately or within a shorter time period than specified above if he determines that any condition poses a threat of contamination to the public water supply system. All new construction plans and specifications shall be made available to the manager for approval and to determine the degree of hazard. All devices required for new construction shall be installed, tested and inspected by a certified tester prior to release of certificate of occupancy by Rome-Floyd Building Inspection. The manager shall be notified by the customer when the nature of the use of property changes so as to change the hazard classification of the property if necessary. 
(c)  The customer shall install an approved thermal expansion relief device in his water system whenever a backflow prevention device is installed. 
(d)  All non-testable dual check valves are to be replaced every ten (10) years. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 2-7-84. - High hazard facilities and methods of correction. 
(a)  All high hazards facilities must have an approved reduced pressure principal assembly as a minimum containment device. High hazard facilities include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Any private water system using or designed to use a pump or which may become pressurized for any reason to the extent that back pressure may occur; 
(2)  Any private water system which contains water which has been or is being re-circulated; 
(3)  A building with five (5) or more stories above ground level; 
(4)  Bottling plant; 
(5)  Brewery; 
(6)  Canneries; 
(7)  Chemical plant; 
(8)  Dairies; 
(9)  Dentist office; 
(10)  Dry cleaning plant; 
(11)  Dye works; 
(12)  Exterminators; 
(13)  Fertilizer plant; 
(14)  Fire sprinkler or standpipe system with chemical additives; 
(15)  Hospital, clinic, medical building; 
(16)  Irrigation system with chemical additives; 
(17)  Laboratory; 
(18)  Commercial laundry (except self-service laundry); 
(19)  Metal processing plant; 
(20)  Morgue or mortuary; 
(21)  Nursing home; 
(22)  Power plant; 
(23)  Veterinary hospital or clinic; 
(24)  Wastewater treatment plant; or 
(25)  Water treatment plants. 
(b)  If Floyd County staff does not have sufficient access to every portion of a private water system to permit the complete evaluation of the degree of hazard associated with such private water system an approved reduced pressure principal assembly must be installed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 2-7-85. - Moderate hazard facilities. 
(a)  Moderate hazard facilities include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Fire sprinkler systems without chemical additives; 
(2)  Connections to tanks, lines and vessels that handle non-toxic substances; 
(3)  All industrial and most commercial facilities not identified as high hazard facilities. 
(b)  All moderate hazard facilities must have a double detector check valve assembly as a minimum containment device. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 2-7-86. - Imminent hazards. 
If the manager determines that a customer's private water system constitutes an imminent hazard, such customer shall install a backflow prevention assembly as may be specified by the manager within twenty-four (24) hours after notice of the manager's determination. If the customer fails to take corrective measures or refuses to install the specified assembly, water service to the customer's private water system may be terminated. If the manager is unable to give notice to such customer or his representative within twenty-four (24) hours after the determination that an imminent hazard exists despite reasonable efforts to provide such notice, the director may terminate water service to the private water system until the specified corrected measures are taken. Upon correction of the existing problem and with the manager's approval, water service will be continued. All such corrective actions in this paragraph shall be at the customer's expense. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 2-7-87. - Right of entry. 
The manager or his authorized agent shall have the right to enter any building, structure or premises during normal working hours to perform any duty imposed upon him by this article. Duties may include sampling and testing water, or inspections and observations of all piping systems connected to the public water supply. Prior notice will be given unless an imminent hazard has been reported. Refusal to allow entry for these purposes may result in termination of the water service. At the request of the manager, the customer shall furnish any pertinent information regarding the piping system and chemical storage on such property where cross-connections are deemed possible. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 2-7-88. - Responsibility of customer. 
The customer shall be responsible for the elimination of or protection against all cross-connections on the customer's premises. The customer shall maintain any backflow prevention assembly within the customer's premises in good operating condition. The customer shall correct any malfunction of the backflow preventer which is revealed by periodic testing. The customer shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for annual testing, re-testing in the case that the assembly fails to operate correctly and repairs. A customer must immediately notify the county if the customer has reason to believe that backflow has occurred from the customer's private water system to the public water system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 2-7-89. - Unapproved source of supply. 
No person shall connect or cause to be connected any supply of water not approved by the state and the county to the public water supply system. Where a connection to a county water line is made, and the property owner continues to have a well or other source of water, it shall be unlawful for the plumbing servicing any building upon such property to be so connected that any water outlet within the building may be served with water from any source other than the county connection and it shall also be unlawful to have plumbing cross-connected or so installed that water from the county water system or the private water system may in any way become intermingled. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 2-7-90. - Violations. 
(a)  At the manager's option, a written notice of violation may be given to any person who is determined to be in violation of any provision of this article, which shall set forth the violation and the time period within the violation must be corrected and after which the customer may be cited for such violation. If the manager determines that the violation is occurring on a customer's private water system and that such violation has created or contributed to the existence of an imminent hazard, the customer may be required to correct the violation immediately. Water service may be terminated to a customer if the customer fails to correct a violation or to pay any fine or expense. Termination of water service will be without prejudice to the county's ability to assert any other remedy available to the county against the customer or any other person responsible for the violation. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished for each offense according to law. Each subsequent day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense, with the maximum fines as set out on the following schedule: 
(1)  Unprotected cross-connection involving a private water system which is an imminent hazard, one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. 
(2)  Unprotected cross-connection involving a private water system which is a high hazard, seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per violation. 
(3)  Unprotected cross-connection involving a private water system which is a moderate hazard, five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. 
(4)  Unprotected cross-connection for which no civil penalty is prescribed, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation. 
(5)  Falsifying records which are required to be submitted by this article, tester may be removed from the approved certified tester list and five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. 
(6)  Submitting incomplete records or failing to submit records which are required by this article, tester may be removed from certified tester list and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per violation. 
(7)  Failing to test backflow prevention assemblies as required, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. 
(8)  Failing to maintain backflow prevention assemblies as required, one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. 
(b)  Any other violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by up to the maximum extent provided for by law. 
(c)  Water service may be terminated after a second violation of the same provision within a two-year period. Water service may also be terminated if the customer responsible for the violation fails to pay to the county all expenses incurred by the county in repairing any damage to the public water system caused in whole or in part by such violation, any expense incurred by the county in investigating such violation and any fines levied against the county by regulatory agencies which arise from the actions of such customer. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 2-7-91. - Right of appeal. 
Upon notice of the backflow prevention method required, the owner may request a hearing to review the selection process with the county water department personnel. If the owner is dissatisfied with the results of this review, a written request for a hearing must be sent to the manager within ten (10) days of the departmental review. Within ten (10) days, a formal hearing with the manager will be scheduled. A written response will be issued within ten (10) days after the hearing. The owner shall thereafter have the right of further appeal to the county board of commissioners, for a period of thirty (30) days after the issuance of the manager's response. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 2-7-92. - Wellhead protection zone. 
(a)  Establishment of wellhead protection zone. There is hereby established a use district known as a "wellhead protection zone", identified and described as all area within a circle the center of which is the center of any county water supply wellhead and the radius of which is five hundred (500) feet. 
(b)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single family districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one (1) acre; and 
(2)  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(c)  Prohibited uses. The following uses of conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings and street, and driveways and walks serving building permitted under subsection (b) of this section; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Storm water infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; and 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a wellhead. 
(d)  Administration. The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this section, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the county, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. 2007-004A, § II, 8-28-07) 
Secs. 2-7-93—2-7-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 2-7-100. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
Dump: To throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 1 
State Law reference— 1 As defined in O.C.G.A. §16-7-51 
Manifest: A form or document used for identifying the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 2 
Note— 2 As defined in Section 391-3-4-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Person: The State of Georgia or any other state or agency or institution thereof, and any municipality, county, political subdivision, public or private corporation, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste management activities, individual, partnership, association, or other entity in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes any officer or governing or managing body of any municipality, political subdivision, solid waste authority, special district empowered to engage in solid waste activities, or public or private corporation in Georgia or any other state. This term also includes employees, departments, and agencies of the federal government. 3 
Note— 3 As defined in Section 391-3-4-.01 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
Retail tire dealer: A person actively engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 4 
Note— 4 As defined in Section 391-3.4.-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
Scrap tire: A tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 4 
Note— 4 As defined in Section 391-3.4.-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
Scrap tire carrier: Any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. 4 
Note— 4 As defined in Section 391-3.4.-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
Scrap tire generator: Any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county, and state governments. 4 
Note— 4 As defined in Section 391-3.4.-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
Scrap tire processor: Any person who is approved by the environmental protection division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 4 
Note— 4 As defined in Section 391-3.4.-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
Scrap tire sorter: Any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. 4 
Note— 4 As defined in Section 391-3.4.-.19(2) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management 
(Res. No. 2003-004A, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-7-101. - Scrap tire management—General. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all scrap tires on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in the county including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any public or private property in the county or any waters in the county unless such scrap tires originate in the county or other areas authorized by the county board of commissioners and: 
(1)  The property is designated by the board of commissioners or its duly designated agent and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division for collection or disposal of scrap tires and the person is authorized to use such property; and 
(2)  The scrap tires are placed into a receptacle or container, or confined to an area specifically for scrap tires on such property; and 
(3)  The property has a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification numbers, approvals and/or permits issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) when required. 
(c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in Chapter 391-3-4, et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-8-20, et seq. and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-3-4, et seq. applicable to solid waste, except where requirements of this article are more stringent. 
(Res. No. 2003-004A, 11-11-03; Amend. No. 2004-002A, § 1, 5-11-04) 
Sec. 2-7-102. - Accumulation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a residential zone to accumulate more than five (5) scrap tires on or around property, which they own or occupy. 
(b)  A retail tire dealer may hold up to one hundred (100) scrap tires per garage bay in storage, up to a maximum of one thousand (1,000) scrap tires. 
(c)  Scrap tires must be stored in covered or enclosed areas, or under an impermeable cover to prevent the accumulation of water. 
(Res. No. 2003-04A, 11-11-03; Amend. No. 2004-02A, § 1, 5-11-04) 
Sec. 2-7-103. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person(s), firm, or corporation violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the Magistrate Court of Floyd County, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense: By a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) 5 , or up to thirty dollars (30) days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the county from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the county to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area; 
State Law reference— 5 As provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43(b.1) 
(2)  For the second or more offense(s): The violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature punishable by a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or up to sixty (60) days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense; and/or 
(b)  The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this article; and/or 
(c)  The court may order the person to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation 6 ; and/or 
State Law reference— 6 As provided in O.C.G.A. §16-7-53(d) 
(d)  In case of a tire dump, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this article. Floyd County shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation; and/or 
(e)  The expenses incurred by the county for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this article. 
(f)  In addition to actions filed by Floyd County for violations of this article, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Res. No. 2003-004A, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-7-104. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the county board of commissioners, the county police department, the county environmental officer or his/her designee. 
(b)  Any person(s) authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this article, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this article must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon said person(s) having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this article, or by a judge's order upon said person(s) having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(c)  Appeals for the violation of this article may be made to the Magistrate Court of Floyd County, or higher court if the person so chooses. The person always has the right to consult his/her attorney at any time before the hearing is scheduled for court. 
(Res. No. 2003-004A, 11-11-03) 
Sec. 2-7-105. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  In the event that any person violates any provision of this article, the county or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation 7 . In addition, the county may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other county issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
State Law reference— 7 As provided in O.C.G.A. § §16-7-52, 16-7-53. 
(b)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer(s) in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court as defined in subsection 2-7-103(a)(2) of this article. 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this article, the court and/or the board of commissioners may cause written notice to be given, or incorporate into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this article for which said violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and in the event the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(d)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within twenty (20) days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the board of commissioners is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of scrap tires, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the ordinance on behalf of the county. The expenses incurred by the county shall be chargeable to the violator and the board of commissioners and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. 
(e)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within thirty (30) days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the board of commissioners shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the county, the dates of county action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(f)  This section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This section should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
(Res. No. 2003-004A, 11-11-03) 
Secs. 2-7-106—2-7-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS TO MUNICIPAL STORM SEWER SYSTEM 

Sec. 2-7-121. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environmental and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the municipal separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal; to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply to the unincorporated area of Floyd County. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other [article], ordinance, rule, regulation, [or] other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to any other ordinance, rule regulation, or other provision of law and where this any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The public works director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-007A, § 1, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 2-7-122. - Definitions. 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Clean water act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Emergency condition means any condition or circumstance which the public works director or chief building official judges to constitute an immediate threat or danger to the occupants of the building, structure, facility, or premises or to persons or property exposed to an illicit discharge to the municipal separate storm system, such as hazards associated with fire, explosion, contamination of public or private water supplies, or exposed to risks from some other hazardous condition or circumstance. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in 2-7-123 of this article. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(a)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(b)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the municipal separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, section 122.26(b)(14). 
Municipal separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, county streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(a)  Owned or maintained by Floyd County, Georgia; 
(b)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(c)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Stormwater Discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, form, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county, or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents, petroleum hydrocarbons, automotive fluids, cooking grease, detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers, cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that some may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical, or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substances into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such water harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish, and other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks, and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release, or the velocity of the flow. 
(Ord. No. 2006-007A, § 2, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 2-7-123. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, individual residential and non-commercial car washing, de-chlorinated swimming pool water, street wash water, diverted stream flows, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains, crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the public works director as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision above shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order, and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance, or continued existence of any illegal connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under laws or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of the connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the municipal separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the water and sewer division. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the public works director requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be documented and provided to the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 2006-007A, § 3, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 2-7-124. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the public works department prior to allowing discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2006-007A, § 4, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 2-7-125. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
(a)  Access to private property. The public works director or his duly authorized representative bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through Floyd County holds a duly established easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspections, observations, measurements, sampling, repairs, and maintenance of any portion of the municipal separate storm sewer system lying within such easement. 
(b)  Right-of-entry to conduct inspections. The public works director or his authorized representative may, to the extent permitted by law, have free access to and the right to enter at all reasonable times any facility or premises coming under the scope of this Code, for the purpose of conducting inspections and otherwise implementing the provisions of this Code. Before entering any facility or premises not normally open to the public, except when an emergency condition exists, or has occurred, the public works director or his representative shall obtain the consent of the occupant, owner or person in charge at the time. Where consent to enter is refused, the public works director may seek an order or an administrative search warrant from the Magistrate Court of Floyd County, or if deemed appropriate, from the Superior Count of Floyd County authorizing his entry or that of his representatives for the purpose of conducting the inspection or investigation. 
(Ord. No. 2006-007A, § 5, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 2-7-126. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a commercial, industrial, business or institutional facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for such a facility, activity or operation has information of any know or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from said facility, activity or operation into the municipal separate storm sewer system, or state waters, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. Said person shall notify the public works department within twenty-four (24) hours in person, by phone or facsimile concerning the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the public works director within three (3) business days of the phone or facsimile notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its reoccurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. Said persons shall also take immediate steps to prevent an reoccurrence of the discharge or spill. In the event that a discharge, spill, or other release contains hazardous material, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(Ord. No. 2006-007A, § 6, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 2-7-127. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may by subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section, restrained by injunction, or otherwise penalized in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Notice of violation and order of abatement. Whenever the public works director or his designated representatives find any violations of this Code or any indicators of a potential violation, as defined in this Code, they are authorized to issue or serve a written notice of the findings of an inspection as set forth in this section. 
(1)  Abatement order—Written. Whenever the public works director or his designated representatives find any violations of this Code, they are authorized to issue a written order to correct or abate the violations. Such order when issued shall set forth a reasonable and realistic timeframe or date limit for correction, abatement or compliance. The timeframe for correction, abatement or compliance established by or as directed by the public works director or his designated representative may be reasonably correlated by him to the seriousness or relative degree of violation, and or to the complexity of the means of correction or abatement. 
(2)  Same—Verbal. Where deemed necessary, due to the potential threat or danger to persons or property, the public works director may issue a verbal order for the immediate correction or abatement of a violation or fire hazard. This may be followed by a written order. 
(3)  Serving notices or orders. The service of notices or orders may be made by the public works director or his representatives upon the owner, occupant, or person in charge of the building, structure, facility, premises or portion thereof where the violations or indicators of a potential violation were found, or be delivering a copy of the notice or order to any or all of the persons noted. If such person cannot be served as noted, service may be accomplished by affixing a copy of the notice or order in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the building, structure, facility or premises, or by delivering or sending a copy of the notice or order to the known agent of the owner or occupant, or in the event of an absentee owner with no known agent, by sending a copy by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known residence, business or post office address. 
(4)  Same—To occupants of certain premises. If the building, structure, facility or premises is owned by one (1) or more persons and is occupied by one (1) or more other persons under lease or otherwise, the notice or order issued in connection with this section shall apply to the occupants thereof, except where the notice or order requires the addition to or changes in the building, structure, or premises such as would immediately become real estate and becomes the property of the owners and not the occupants unless it is otherwise agreed between or among the owners and the occupants. 
(c)  Appeal of notice or order. Any person receiving a notice of violation or order of abatement may appeal the determination of the public works director. The notice of appeal must be received within fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice of violation or order of abatement. Hearing on the appeal shall be conducted by the board of appeals and adjustments as provided in article 2.11 of the unified land development code. 
(d)  Enforcement measures. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of violations of this article and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate violations, as prescribed in subsection (b). 
(2)  Abatement measures. 
a.  Non-emergency. In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the violation in the time specified, or where the owner, agent or tenant cannot be served with notice, or where the nature of the violation is such, in the opinion of the judge, that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the public works director directing the violation be abatement. The public work director, in such case, shall keep a record of the expenses and costs of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for Floyd County revenues. 
b.  Emergency. The public works director shall have the authority to summarily abate any violation of this Code, which constitutes an emergency condition, as defined by this Code, and where following the provisions for obtaining corrective action or abatement as set forth elsewhere in this Code is not practical in his judgment. A record of expenses and costs and the recovery of those costs shall be as for a non-emergency abatement. 
(3)  Other Floyd County departments shall assist the public works department as is necessary in abating violations under this section. 
(e)  Cost of abatement of the violation. Within ninety (90) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. If the amount due is not paid within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the notice, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to Floyd County by reason of this violation. 
(f)  Penalties; separate violations. Any person who shall fail to comply with an order of abatement as set forth in this section, or who shall act in violation of this Code or of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved under authority of this Code in connection with any approval, certificate, or permit issued there under, or who shall perform any act deemed to create a serious potential for an illicit discharge or illegal connection and for which an issuance of an order to correct or abate is not adequate, and who is found guilty shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. A person found guilty under this section shall, for each violation and non-compliance, respectively, be subject to punishment by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than one hundred twenty (120) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and the responsible persons shall correct or abate such violation within a time limit as ordered by the court. When not otherwise specified, each day a prohibited condition or violation continues following an order of the court to correct or abate same shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)  Violations deemed a public nuisance. In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(h)  Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the public works director may seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2006-007A, § 7, 12-12-06) 
Chapter 2-8 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-8-1. - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, the term "emergency management" shall mean the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which the state and federal governments are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin, caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill, or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, or other hostile action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from striken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plan protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions in the county. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3001) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(1). 
Sec. 2-8-2. - Organization created; director, duties of. 
(a)  There is established for the county a local organization for emergency management in accordance with the state emergency management plan and program. 
(b)  The executive officer or governing body of the county is authorized to nominate a director for appointment by the governor who shall have direct responsibility for the organization, administration and operation of the county emergency management organization subject to the direction and control of the executive office and/or governing body of the county. The director shall: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist county officials in organizing county departments for emergency operation. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with other county departments, the plan for emergency functions set out in section 2-8-1. Such plan will be in accordance with the state emergency plan and shall be submitted to the board of commissioners for approval and thence to the state director for approval. 
(4)  Be charged with maintaining the emergency management office and carrying out the day-to-day administration of the emergency management program including the rendering of required reports to the state emergency management division office with copies to the board of commissioners. 
(5)  Further be charged with submitting such reports as financial, daily activity, etc., as required by governing officials in keeping with good business practice. 
(6)  During periods of declared emergency and under the supervision of the governing officials of the county, coordinate the activities of the county emergency operation center staff. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3002) 
State Law reference— Local organizations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 2-8-3. - Emergency plans. 
The executive officer of the county shall assign to the various departments of county government the emergency functions set out in section 2-8-1 and furnish a copy of the same to the board of commissioners and to the emergency management director. Heads of the department in said plan shall be responsible for developing specific plans to carry out their assigned emergency function, which plan shall be submitted to the executive officer, members of the board of commissioners and the emergency management director and shall be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3003) 
State Law reference— Plan and program, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-22. 
Sec. 2-8-4. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of an actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other disaster which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairman of the board of commissioners, or in the chairman's absence the legally appointed successor, may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise, for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management forces. 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any property for the protection of the public. 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any of such property or supplies among the inhabitants, to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary, to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3004) 
Sec. 2-8-5. - Compensation; volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3005) 
Sec. 2-8-6. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as set out and provided by the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Code 1979, § 2-3006) 
Secs. 2-8-7—2-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - IMPOSITION OF CURFEWS DURING TIMES OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER 

Sec. 2-8-21. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of Floyd County. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord. No. 2011-003A, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 2-8-22. - Definitions. 
Curfew. A "curfew" is a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this article from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, "exempt individuals" include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to the Floyd County "Ordinance to Require Registration of Building and Repair Services During a State of Emergency"), performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3, a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2011-003A, § 2, 2-22-11; Amend. of 2-28-12, § I) 
Sec. 2-8-23. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated Floyd County during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. No. 2011-003A, § 3, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 2-8-24. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 2011-003A, § 4, 2-22-11) 
Secs. 2-8-25—2-8-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBIT OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS, MATERIALS, SERVICES AND HOUSING DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 2-8-41. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which Floyd County has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in Floyd County to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004A, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 2-8-42. - Definitions. 
Overcharging. The term "overcharging" is defined as charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3, as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six (6) months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Floyd County. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004A, § 2, 2-22-11; Amend. of 2-28-12, § I) 
Sec. 2-8-43. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this article upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004A, § 3, 2-22-11) 
Secs. 2-8-44—2-8-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SUSPENSION OF PORTIONS OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES AND OTHER FORMALITIES DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 2-8-61. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting Georgia or the United States, the affairs and business of Floyd County may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of Floyd County, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within Floyd County. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two (2) members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Code of Ordinances of Floyd County, or any portion thereof, where: (a) the emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; (b) such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and (c) such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks permits in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the Floyd County Health Department and Floyd County Building and Inspections Department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six (6) months in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period of an additional six (6) months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2011-005A, § 1, 2-22-11; Amend. of 2-28-12, § II) 
Sec. 2-8-62. - Definitions. 
Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3, a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six (6) months. The state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Floyd County. 
Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 2011-005A, § 2, 2-22-11; Amend. of 2-28-12, §§ I, III—V) 
Secs. 2-8-63—2-8-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REQUIRE REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 2-8-81. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of Floyd County during a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006A, § 1, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 2-8-82. - Definitions. 
Building contractor. As used in this article the word or term "building contractor" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this article if: (a) he has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or (b) he performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3, as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The term "subsequent recovery period" is defined as that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three (3) months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006A, § 2, 2-22-11; Amend. of 2-28-12, § I) 
Sec. 2-8-83. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of Floyd County during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the Rome/Floyd County Building Inspectors Office or such other person designated by the governing authority. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006A, § 3, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 2-8-84. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this article at fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. Any contractor who is registered prior to a state of emergency will be exempt from the fifty dollar ($50.00) registration fee. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006A, § 4, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 2-8-85. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor that is required, in the event of a state of emergency, by this article to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county shall be in violation of this article. Violation of this article, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed sixty (60) days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006A, § 5, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 2-8-86. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this article is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006A, § 6, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 2-8-87. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006A, § 7, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 2-8-88. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this article is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this article or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-006A, § 8, 2-22-11) 
Chapter 2-9 - FINANCE; COUNTY PROPERTY; TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Tax commissioner, § 1-3-21 et seq.; finance generally, § 1-6-1 et seq.; budget, § 1-6-20 et seq.; audits, § 1-6-1; malt beverage excise tax, § 2-4-70; tax on financial institutions, § 2-12-20 et seq.; occupational license taxes generally, § 2-12-1 et seq.; solid waste hauler's license, § 2-7-59 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-9-1. - Maintenance of public facilities. 
The maintenance and repair of all public buildings and facilities of the county shall be performed by or under the direction of the public works department. 
(Code 1979, § 4-4001) 
Sec. 2-9-2. - Public vehicle maintenance. 
The maintenance and repair of all motor vehicles owned by the county shall be performed by or under the direction of the public works department. 
(Code 1979, § 4-4002) 
Sec. 2-9-3. - Local option sales tax. 
Pursuant to the authority granted in the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, as amended, specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., the local option sales tax as provided for in said law is hereby imposed and shall be levied within that special district, the geographical boundary of which is conterminous with the county. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2081) 
Sec. 2-9-4. - Regulation of vending machines on county property. 
(a)  The maintenance and operation of all public telephones, vending machines and other means of concessions for the sale of foods, drinks and all other consumer items to employees of the county and to the general public, which shall be located upon any property or facilities under the direct supervision and control of the county, shall be subject to the supervision and control of the board of commissioners. All such services, equipment and operations existing upon such county property or facilities shall so exist pursuant to the general authority, rules and regulations of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  All such public telephones, vending machines and concessions shall be maintained and operated according to the generally accepted procedures applicable thereto as promulgated by the finance department and purchasing department. 
(c)  Accurate records shall be maintained concerning such public telephones, vending machines and concessions as to purchases, receipts and disbursements. 
(d)  All rents, royalties, profits and other receipts derived from such public telephones, vending machines and concessions shall be the property of the county and shall be turned over and delivered to the county to go into the general fund of the same, not less than monthly. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything stated hereinabove, it is not the intention of this section to regulate, control or supervise such telephones, vending machines and other concessions located on property under supervision of authorities or operated as part of the enterprise fund. 
(f)  The sheriff shall operate a jail store for the benefit of assigned inmates. The sheriff shall have the overall responsibility for the operation of the jail store. The method of operation shall be as follows: 
(1)  The jail store shall be operated as a profit-making activity. 
(2)  The purchase of items sold in the jail store shall be handled through the purchasing department pursuant to accepted purchasing procedures. 
(3)  The financial records of the jail store shall be audited by the finance department. 
(4)  The profits derived from the operation of the jail store shall be used to purchase nonessential items for the benefit of all inmates. Such expenditures shall be authorized and approved by the sheriff and finance director. Profits derived from the jail store shall not be used to purchase any items for inmates which is normally the responsibility of the sheriff or the county to supply. Neither shall any of these funds be expended for any activity or purpose not wholly and entirely related to inmate welfare. 
(5)  The jail store shall not order, receive or sell any item which is classified by the sheriff as dangerous or contraband. Such items as nasal inhalators, after shave lotion with a high alcoholic content and bottled items are examples of those prohibited. 
(g)  Upon information being made known that any violation of this chapter is occurring, a citation shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 by any member of the sheriffs' department, or by any other agent of the county who is authorized to enact or enforce ordinances on behalf of the county requiring the violator to appear before the judge of the magistrates court on a day and time certain then and there to stand trial for violation of this section. 
(Ord. of 10-23-90, §§ 1—7) 
Editor's note— Inclusion of the provisions of §§ 1—7 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 23, 1990, as § 2-9-4 was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance being nonamendatory of the Code. 
Secs. 2-9-5—2-9-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PURCHASING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2012-001A, § 1, adopted Jan. 10, 2012, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 2-9-20—2-9-32, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1979 §§ 1-3004(a)—(m); Ord. No. 2005-001A, § 1, adopted June 28, 2005; and Ord. No. 2008-005A, adopted Sept. 23 2008. 

Sec. 2-9-20. - Scope. 
This article shall govern all acquisitions and dispositions by Floyd County of commodities, equipment, materials, supplies and services and all related contracts and agreements, including those that may generate revenue. The ordinance from which this article derives supersedes and appeals all previously existing ordinances to the extent they are inconsistent with the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001A, § 1, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 2-9-21. - Exemptions. 
The following supplies and services are exempted from this article: 
(1)  Works of arts for public places or other creative/artistic endeavors that require a particular and demonstrated skill or talent to include, but not limited to, artists, musicians and writers. 
(2)  Real property, real estate brokerage and appraising, abstracts of titles for real property, title insurance for real property and other related costs of acquisition of real property. 
(3)  Dues, memberships and board member fees. 
(4)  Subscriptions. 
(5)  Services provided directly to individual citizens and employees including reimbursements and other miscellaneous payments, including but not limited to, services provided in response to general liability insurance claims and instructor services. 
(6)  Utilities where there is no reasonable basis for competitive procurement, for example power, water and sewerage. 
(7)  Licensed health professionals. 
(8)  Legal services, litigation and related expenses. 
(9)  Marketing of bonds and other forms of debt or debt related services and management products for the purchase of certain investment assets and services and pension assets and services. 
(10)  Training, facilitators for meetings, travel, lodging or meal expenses, provided adherence to all county policies has taken place. 
(11)  Advertising and legal advertisements, including but not limited to, bid/proposal solicitations, planning commission, zoning board of adjustment and other boards that are required by law to publicly advertise their meetings or actions in the legal organ. 
(12)  Public works construction contracts to the extent covered by O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq. 
(13)  Material or services required for confidential and secure investigations, apprehensions and detentions of individuals suspected of or convicted of criminal offenses by law enforcement personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001A, § 1, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 2-9-22. - Purpose. 
This article shall be construed and applied to promote its underlying purposes and policies, which are: 
(1)  To obtain the best value in terms of quality, service and price when expending public funds. 
(2)  To foster effective, fair and broad based competition for public procurement within the free enterprise system. 
(3)  To provide safeguards for the maintenance of quality, integrity and equity in the purchase and disposition of county property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001A, § 1, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 2-9-23. - Application of law. 
It is intended that this article shall conform to all applicable provisions of the laws of the United States and the State of Georgia and the provisions hereof shall be so construed whenever possible. In the event any portion of this article shall be declared invalid for its failure to conform to state or federal law, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions hereof. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the county may enter into any contract, follow any procedure or take any action that is otherwise at variance with this article if necessary or convenient to receive funds from the Government of the United States or the State of Georgia. In the event of any direct conflict between this article and the Floyd County Board of Commissioners Purchasing Department Policies and Procedures as amended from time to time, this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001A, § 1, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 2-9-24. - Expenditures. 
All purchases shall comply with the Floyd County Board of Commissioners Purchasing Department Policies and Procedures adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Floyd County, as amended from time to time. To ensure that all purchases made are appropriate expenditures, each elected official or department head or director shall ensure that purchases made within his or her authority conform to the principals of the Floyd County Board of Commissioners Purchasing Department Policies and Procedures, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001A, § 1, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 2-9-25. - Purchasing department director. 
The Purchasing Department of Floyd County shall serve all of Floyd County Government by obtaining required commodities, equipment, materials, supplies and services and all rated contracts and agreements, including those that may generate revenue, in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia, this article and the Floyd County Board of Commissioner's Purchasing Department Policies and Procedures. The purchasing director shall, except as otherwise specified herein, be responsible for the administration of all transactions governed by the provisions of this article and the Floyd County Board of Commissioner's Purchasing Department Policies and Procedures and shall serve as the principal procurement officer of the county. Unless otherwise provided, any duties and powers of the purchasing director may be delegated by her/him to subordinate purchasing staff members and other employees. The purchasing director shall be subject to the authority and supervision of the county manager. 
(Ord. No. 2012-001A, § 1, 1-10-12) 
Secs. 2-9-26—2-9-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY TAXES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— See generally O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-9-40. - Ad valorem tax due date; interest on post due taxes. 
(a)  Ad valorem taxes due the state or the county shall be due and payable on or before November 15th in each year. 
(b)  Ad valorem taxes remaining unpaid after November 15th in each year shall bear interest specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 from November 15th. 
(c)  The minimum interest payment on unpaid taxes shall be one dollar ($1.00). 
(Code 1979, § 3-2011) 
Sec. 2-9-41. - Exemptions from ad valorem tax. 
The three (3) classes of the tangible personable property described below and as set forth in Georgia Constitution Article VII, section II, paragraph III, shall be one hundred (100) percent exempted from ad valorem taxes, that is, all of the values of such tangible personal property as defined in that section shall be totally exempted from ad valorem taxes. 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use of consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the county. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the county, in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on the first day of January, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the county from outside this state and stored for transhipment to a final destination outside this state. 
(Res. of 10-28-80) 
Editor's note— Inclusion of the provisions of a resolution adopted Oct. 28, 1980, as § 2-9-41 was at the discretion of the editor, the resolution being nonamendatory of the Code. 
Sec. 2-9-42. - Properties excluded from transfers of executions. 
(a)  The tax commissioner [is authorized] to exclude the following categories of properties from the transfer of executions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-3-19(d). 
(1)  Mapping problems being worked with the tax assessor; 
(2)  Property that has applied for exemption; 
(3)  Bankrupt taxpayer's property; 
(4)  Property involved in a year's support case; 
(5)  Extreme hardship cases; 
(6)  Property valuation under appeal; 
(7)  Title search and/or levy action in progress prior to tax sale; 
(8)  Property that has been advertised for public auction; 
(9)  Property that involves legal problems and/or questions as determined by the county attorney; 
(10)  Property that has received homestead exemptions; and 
(11)  Property that, in the opinion of the tax commissioner and as approved by a majority vote of the county commission, would not be in the best interest of the county to sell for tax execution collection. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the tax commissioner, as approved by a majority of the county commission, certain of the above exempted property is determined in the best interest of the county to be allowed for sale as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-3-19(c), then said tax executions may be transferred for sale pursuant to said Code section. 
(Mo. of 8-27-96) 
Editor's note— The language of the motion of Aug. 27, 1996, has been slightly modified by the editor in order to accomplish the presumed intent of the author. 
Secs. 2-9-43—2-9-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOBILE HOMES 

Sec. 2-9-50. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the term "mobile home" means a "manufactured home" or "relocatable home" as such terms are defined in Part 2 of Article 2 of Chapter 2 of Title 8 of O.C.G.A. (§§ 8-2-130 through 8-2-143); provided, however, that those mobile homes which qualify the taxpayer for homestead exemption under state law shall not be considered mobile homes nor subject to the provisions of this division. A "mobile home" is further defined as set out in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440(2). 
(Code 1979, § 3-2021; Amend. of 6-13-95(2)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440. 
Sec. 2-9-51. - Permit required. 
(a)  Before any person shall locate or relocate a mobile home within the limits of the county, such person shall apply for and obtain from the tax commissioner, a permit authorizing the location or relocation of the mobile home, if the mobile home is to be used as a residence by the owner thereof, as a residence for others, or for any other purpose. 
(b)  The owner of a mobile home used as a residence, which is located within the limits of the county, may not allow said mobile home to be relocated within the confines of the county or beyond such confines, without first obtaining a permit from the aforesaid tax commissioner authorizing the relocation. 
(c)  All persons owning a mobile home based in the county on January 1st of each year shall be required to obtain from the tax commissioner a decal before the first day of May of each year as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-493. This requirement pertains to all mobile homes, including those exempt from taxation by homestead exemption or other provisions of law. 
(d)  Such decals shall be affixed to the mobile homes in such manner as to cause the decal to be easily visible for inspection. 
(e)  Owners of mobile homes located in the county after January 1st of any year shall be required to report their mobile home to the office of the tax commissioner within ten (10) working days. 
(f)  The county building inspector shall not allow the location or relocation of a mobile home within the county without a current year decal. 
(Code 1979, §§ 3-2022, 3-2023; Amend. of 6-13-95(2)) 
State Law reference— Issuance of location permits, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. 
Sec. 2-9-52. - Proof of tax payment required. 
It shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any permit required by this division that the owner of the mobile home shall submit to the aforesaid tax commissioner proof that all state and county taxes theretofore accruing and payable with respect to the mobile home have, in fact, been paid; and if the mobile home which is to be located or relocated is then located within any portion of the county that lies within the limits of a municipality therein, the owner shall likewise submit proof that all applicable municipal taxes have been paid before a permit may be issued. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2024) 
State Law reference— So provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-494. 
Sec. 2-9-53. - Issuance of permit; decal. 
(a)  Any owner of a mobile home who has made application for the location or relocation of a mobile home and whose application meets the qualifications of this division shall be issued a permit and shall likewise be issued a decal. The decal to be issued with a permit authorizing location of a mobile home within the county shall be the same color as prescribed by state law and shall be affixed to the mobile home at all times it is being used as a residence within the confines of the county. The decal issued with the permit authorizing relocation of a mobile home shall be red in color and shall be affixed to the mobile home at all times the mobile home is being transported within the confines of this state. These decals shall be designed in such a manner and affixed to mobile homes in such a manner as to cause them to be easily visible for inspection. 
(b)  The issuance of a decal under the provisions of this article shall in no way be construed as waiving or superseding any zoning requirements for the location or relocation of mobile homes. 
(c)  No person shall initially locate any mobile home or relocate any mobile home within the county without having first obtained a current year decal from the office of the tax commissioner as required by section 2-9-51 of this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2025; Amend. of 6-13-95(2)) 
State Law reference— Color prescribed each year, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. 
Sec. 2-9-54. - Notice of relocation to another county. 
Whenever a permit authorizing the relocation of a mobile home is issued and the mobile home is to be relocated within the confines of another county in this state, the tax commissioner shall notify the tax commissioner of the other county of the date of issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2026) 
Sec. 2-9-55. - Moving permit fee. 
Each application for a moving permit required by this division shall be accompanied by a fee of three dollars ($3.00), which shall be paid to the tax commissioner before the permit shall be issued. All sums collected by the tax commissioner under provisions of this division shall be paid into the county treasury. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2027) 
Sec. 2-9-56. - Annual renewal of permit required. 
Each year, every mobile home subject to taxation under the provisions of this division shall, on or before April first, make application to the tax commissioner for a mobile home location permit and upon proof of payment of taxes shall be issued a location permit. The issuance of the permit by the tax commissioner shall be evidenced by the issuance of a decal, which shall reflect the county of issuance, and the calendar year for which the permit is issued. The decal shall be prominently attached and displayed on the mobile home by the owner. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2028) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-5-492(a)). 
Sec. 2-9-57. - Tax commissioner to prescribe forms. 
The tax commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered, subject to the specific provisions of this division, to prescribe application, permit and decal forms and thereafter to alter and change the same and the tax commissioner is empowered to require that the applicant furnish such information in writing as may be reasonably required to effectuate the purposes hereof. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2029) 
Sec. 2-9-58. - Dealer's list. 
All dealers in mobile homes shall furnish to the tax commissioner a list of all mobile homes in their possession, whether or not owned by them, on January first of each year. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2030) 
State Law reference— Tax on mobile homes held by dealers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-491. 
Sec. 2-9-59. - Ownership without permit prohibited. 
No person shall own or have located, within the limits of the county, any mobile home unless application for a permit shall have been made and a permit shall have been obtained as provided by this division. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2031) 
State Law reference— Failure to display decal; penalty, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-493. 
Sec. 2-9-60. - Location without permit prohibited. 
No person shall hereafter initially locate any mobile home or relocate any mobile home within the limits of the county without having made an application and having obtained a permit hereunder. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2032) 
Sec. 2-9-61. - Occupancy without permit prohibited. 
No person shall occupy any mobile home as a residence, nor permit any other person to occupy same as a residence, unless a permit shall have been obtained as provided by this division. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2033) 
Sec. 2-9-62. - Mobile home parks prohibited from containing mobile homes without permits. 
No owner or operator of a mobile home park shall permit any mobile home to be located or relocated within the confines of the park for residential use unless the permit required by this division shall have been obtained. No owner or operator of any mobile home park shall permit any mobile home, presently located within the limits of the park owned or operated by such person, to remain in the park after the effective date of the resolution from which this division is derived unless a permit authorizing the continued location as required by this division shall have been obtained. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2034) 
Sec. 2-9-63. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall do any act prohibited hereby or shall fail to do any act required hereby shall be deemed guilty of a violation hereof and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-493 as to failure to display decal. 
(b)  Or, any person who shall do any act prohibited hereby or shall fail to do any act required hereby shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. 
(c)  The county tax commissioner shall be appointed as ex-officio sheriff and is hereby given the authority to write citations pursuant to a violation of this article and the penalty provisions of this article and to collect the same. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2035; Amend. of 6-13-95(2)) 
Secs. 2-9-64—2-9-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 2-9-70. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
County: The unincorporated area of this county. 
Due date: From the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guestroom: A room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one (1) or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. It shall not include meeting rooms or exhibition halls. 
Hotel: Any structure or any portion of a structure including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention building or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. "Extended stay facilities" shall be included among the facilities subject to the hotel/motel tax. 
Monthly period: The calendar month of any year. 
Occupancy: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room or apartment. 
Occupant: Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any guestroom in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator: Any person operating a hotel in the county, including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident: Any occupant of a hotel other than the owner and/or operator once that occupant has stayed in the hotel for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. 
Person: As defined in section 2-1-2, except the United States of America, this state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent: The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return: Any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
Tax: The tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2083; Ord. of 12-10-85, § 1; Amend. of 9-22-98, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 6-26-01, § 1; Ord. No. 2009-001A, 3-24-09) 
Sec. 2-9-71. - Adminstration of article. 
(a)  Authority of clerk. The clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc.; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in this county to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the clerk may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The clerk or any person authorized in writing by the clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In the administration of the provisions of this article the clerk may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the clerk when required by the clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, and such other information as the clerk may require. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2091; Ord. of 12-10-85, § 1) 
Sec. 2-9-72. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon information made known to the chief of police, or the chief's authorized representative, that any person is in violation of this article, the chief or authorized representative shall cause a citation to be issued requiring said person to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for violation of this article. 
(b)  Citations issued hereunder shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 15-10-63 and shall be personally served upon the person accused. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2092; Ord. of 12-10-85, § 1) 
Sec. 2-9-73. - Violations. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 2-1-8. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator or any other person who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the clerk or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2093; Ord. of 12-10-85, § 1) 
Sec. 2-9-74. - Intent and proceeds. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to impose a tax pursuant to authority granted by the general assembly of this state, the funds from which taxation shall be used for public purposes and for the purposes of promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows in Floyd County in each fiscal year during which the tax is collected. 
(b)  The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. section 48-13-51(a)(3.3). An amount equal to sixteen and two-thirds (16 2/3 ) percent of the taxes collected shall be used for the marketing and promotion of the forum. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2082; Ord. of 12-10-85, § 1; Amend. of 6-13-95(3); Ord. No. 2005-002A, § 1, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 2-9-75. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There is hereby imposed and there shall be paid a tax of six (6) percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel or motel in the county. The tax shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after July 1, 1995, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease or other arrangement made prior to such date. The additional one (1) percent sales tax shall be used for the marketing and promotion of the forum. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2084; Ord. of 12-10-85, § 1; Ord. of 1-26-88, § 1; Amend. of 6-13-95(3)) 
Sec. 2-9-76. - Collection of tax by operators; receipt to occupant; rules for collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the county as provided in section 2-9-75 and renting guest rooms in this county, not exempt under section 2-9-77 or other sections herein, shall collect a tax of six (6) percent on the amount of rent from the occupant. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2085; Ord. of 12-10-85, § 1; Amend. of 6-13-95(3)) 
Sec. 2-9-77. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed hereunder: 
(1)  Upon a permanent resident; 
(2)  Upon a state or local government official or employee when traveling on official business. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2086; Ord. of 12-10-85, § 1; Ord. of 1-26-88, § 2) 
Sec. 2-9-78. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this county shall immediately register with the clerk of the board of commissioners, on a form provided therefor, but failure to register shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of the tax. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of such person's places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2087; Ord. of 12-10-85, § 1) 
Sec. 2-9-79. - Determination, returns and payment. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes shall be due and payable monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period as defined in section 2-9-70. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the clerk showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period and such other information as may be required by the clerk. 
(c)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if said amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2088; Ord. of 12-10-85, § 1) 
Sec. 2-9-80. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the clerk is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any person, the clerk may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within the clerk's possession or that may come into possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one (1) percent or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  Notice of determination, service of. The clerk or the clerk's designated representatives shall give to the operator written notice of the clerk's determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at the operator's address as it appears in the records of the clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2089; Ord. of 12-10-85, § 1) 
Sec. 2-9-81. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the clerk. Written notice shall be given by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the day of payment. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2090; Ord. of 12-10-85, § 1) 
Sec. 2-9-82. - Tax liability in event of sale or discontinuance of business. 
If any operator liable for any amount (of hotel/motel tax) under this article sells the business or quits the business, the successors or assigns thereof shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover the amount due the county until the former owner produces a receipt from the county clerk showing payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by the purchaser to the extent of the purchase price. In addition, all primary documents, including but not limited to, folios, registers, receipts, rate schedules, certificates of tax exemption and the like shall be retained on site for a minimum of thirty-six (36) months. 
(Amend. of 10-22-96, § 1) 
Secs. 2-9-83—2-9-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SALE OR CONVEYANCE OF COUNTY OWNED PARCELS OF LAND 

Sec. 2-9-101. - Purpose. 
Any parcel of land owned by the county which is so small or narrow, or so shaped or so small as to be incapable of being used independently as zoned or under applicable subdivision or other development ordinances or land use plans, or as streets, whether such parcel is owned by the county in fee or used by easement, may be sold or conveyed to abutting property owners where such sales and conveyances facilitate the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property without first submitting the sale or conveyance to the process of an auction or the solicitation of sealed bids; provided, however, that each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and shall have the opportunity to purchase said property, all as pursuant to and authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-9-3(h). 
(Ord. No. 2006-004A, § I, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-9-102. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this enactment are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section hereof shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this enactment, since the same would have been enacted by the board without the incorporation herein of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-004A, § II, 7-25-06) 
ARTICLE VI. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 

Sec. 2-9-103. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The Floyd County Commission finds and declares that within the unincorporated access of Floyd County there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, as well as, optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinances of Floyd County or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to health, safety and welfare of the people of Floyd County and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The Floyd County Board of Commissioners finds that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation, or commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of Floyd County, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(b)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this article shall comply with and does, comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the unincorporated area of Floyd County. 
(Ord. of 8-9-16) 
Sec. 2-9-104. - Declaration of unsafe buildings and systems as illegal; application to private property; continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
(a)  All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings, structures or service systems. 
All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  All the provisions of this article including method and procedure, may also be applied to private property where an owner or occupant of the property allows the property to become unsafe, to create a public health hazard or general nuisance or to endanger the health, safety and welfare of those persons working or residing in the vicinity of the property because of the accumulation of weeds, brush, vegetation, trash, junk, debris, filth and other unsafe or unsanitary conditions. 
A finding by a public officer that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prime facie evidence that such property is in violation of this article. 
(c)  It is the intent of the Floyd County Commission that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce any provisions of any local enabling Act, Charter, ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation or regulation. 
(Ord. of 8-9-16) 
Sec. 2-9-105. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means: (a) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. Title 8, Ch. 2, as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (b) any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. Title 25, Ch. 2; and (c) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Title 8, Ch. 2 after October 1; provided, that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
County means the unincorporated part of Floyd County. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-2, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The terms "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not be mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the Floyd County Board of Commissioners. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. "Interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgage of record. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings; or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, § 41-2-8 and §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, § 42-2-8, and §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by the ordinance codified in this article, or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. of 8-9-16) 
Sec. 2-9-106. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unheathy. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. It shall be unlawful for such owner to allow a dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to become unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city or otherwise become a nuisance as set forth under this Code or the laws of this state. 
(b)  It is further the duty of the every owner and occupant of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to maintain safe and sanitary premises and not to create, maintain or allow the accumulation of weeds, brush, vegetation, trash, junk, debris, filth and other unsafe or unsanitary conditions on or in said dwelling, building, structure, or property. It shall be unlawful for such owner or occupant to create, maintain or allow such unsafe or unsanitary conditions on said dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(c)  The Floyd County Board of Commissioners hereby appoints and designates the county code enforcement officer, city fire marshal, Floyd County Police Chief, and the Chief Building Inspector of the Rome/Floyd County Building Inspection Department and their respective designees, as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(d)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of Floyd County, charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure or property. 
(1)  If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(2)  The complaint shall identity the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the Floyd County Magistrate Court at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appeal in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(3)  Floyd County Magistrate Court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all such complaints. 
(e)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served, upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order which: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove, such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost" in relation the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. The income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraiser's with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. Title 41, Ch. 39A, qualified building contractor's, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(f)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. Such abatement action by the county shall commence within three hundred (300) days after the expiration of time specified in the court order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall not be counted toward the three hundred (300) days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
 "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(g)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(h)  The public officer's designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in any court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(i)  In addition to any other power or authority granted in this article to the court, the court shall have full jurisdiction and authority to punish persons found to have created, allowed or maintained a nuisance or other dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary condition, and who have refused to abate the same, as provided for in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(j)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare nuisances and to summarily and without notice order the abatement of or abate any nuisance or dangerous condition where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. of 8-9-16) 
Sec. 2-9-107. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinance, dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures whose interior or exterior bearing walls, or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such extent as to weaken the structural support of such member or members below the minimum required by the building codes of the city and/or county. 
(2)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures, which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose for which it is used, or intended to be used. 
(3)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures, which have visible soil erosion adjacent to or under any structural support. 
(4)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures, which have parts that are so attached that they are likely to fall and injure persons or property. 
(5)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures, which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities. 
(6)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures having inadequate facilities for egress in the event of a catastrophe, such as windstorm, fire, earthquake or panic because of inadequate stairways, elevators, escalators or fire escapes, such that such defect is likely to cause injury to persons or property in the event of such a catastrophe. 
(7)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures which, have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and welfare of the occupants thereof or the people of the city. 
(8)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures which have become so dilapidated, decayed, damaged, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living such as effective and adequate ventilation, plumbing, sanitation facilities, running water, light or other facilities such that such conditions render the dwellings, buildings, or structure dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or welfare of either those living therein, those who may live therein, or the people of the county. 
(9)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures where an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions shall create a public health hazard or general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. 
(10)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures which exist in violation of any ordinances of the county such that said building, dwelling or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, business or industrial use due to conditions existing in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such building, dwelling or structure, of the occupants of the neighborhood buildings, dwellings or structures, or of other residents of the county. 
(11)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. of 8-9-16) 
Sec. 2-9-108. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the county in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To investigate property in Floyd County in order to determine which properties therein contain accumulations of weeds, trash, junk, filth or unsafe or unsanitary conditions; 
(3)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(4)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(5)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the article; and 
(6)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. of 8-9-16) 
Sec. 2-9-109. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three (3) business days of filing the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appeal at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 8-9-16) 
Sec. 2-9-110. - Notice of lis pendens; costs; creation of lien; appeals. 
(a)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Floyd County at the time of filing the complaint in the Floyd County Magistrate Court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(b)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(c)  The lien provided for in this Code section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Floyd County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). The clerk of Superior Court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Floyd County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(d)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this Code section shall transmit to the appropriate county tax commissioner or the office of the Floyd County Manager who is designated as the county revenue officer and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within ninety (90) days of completion of the repairs, demolition or closure. It shall be the duty of the appropriate county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer, who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of municipal taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A., Title 48, Ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this article in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner or revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to Floyd County. 
(e)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this Code section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner or municipal tax collector or city revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this Code section. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(f)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this Code section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this Code section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, municipal tax collector, or city revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(g)  The county may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(h)  Any person affected by an order requiring the abatement of a nuisance, including the closure, repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure issued by the Floyd County Magistrate Court may petition the Superior Court of Floyd County by direct appeal under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. of 8-9-16) 
Sec. 2-9-111. - Emergency closing of unfit dwellings, buildings and other structures. 
(a)  In addition to having a dwelling, building, or structure closed pursuant to an order under this article, a public officer may bring an immediate, emergency action ordering the closing of a dwelling, building, or structure in urgent cases where such property is found to be unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses. Such emergency petition may be bought prior to issuing a complaint for the abatement of a nuisance under this article. 
(b)  A petition requesting an emergency closing may be brought under the following conditions: 
(1)  After inspection of a dwelling, building, or structure, a public officer may proceed with filing an emergency petition to close the property upon finding that the dwelling, building, or structure constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of those persons visiting, working or residing within such dwelling, building, or structure, and that imminent harm to the occupants thereof has occurred or is likely to result from the continued use of such dwelling, building or structure. 
(2)  The public officer shall prepare a petition which shall identify subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and known residents or users of the subject property; identify the exact nature of danger and all applicable codes relevant to such danger. The complaint shall also contain a statement requesting the closure of the dwelling, building, or structure and may place such conditions as are reasonable on the opening of such property, including the repair of the dwelling, building, or structure. 
(3)  A hearing shall be scheduled by the Floyd County Magistrate Court as soon as practicable, given the nature of the danger and the likelihood of injury alleged in the complaint. 
(4)  The owner of the property and any person in possession of said property and premises shall be served personally with a copy of the complaint whenever possible. The public officer, any officer of the Floyd County Police Department, and any person authorized by the State of Georgia as a process server may attempt to make such personal service. Failure to perfect personal service shall not be cause to dismiss the complaint or postpone the hearing. Where personal service is not obtained on all of the above parties, a copy of the complaint shall be posted on the property on the date the complaint is filed, in addition, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, and by first-class mail, to the residents and owner of the property. If the case of single-family dwellings, service on one (1) adult (persons eighteen (18) years of age and over) resident of the property shall be sufficient to obtain personal service. In the case of multi-family dwellings, service must be attempted for each residential unit. 
(5)  If after such notice and hearing, the Floyd County Magistrate Court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, is not in compliance with applicable codes, and constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of those persons working or residing within such dwelling, building, or structure, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and residents an order to close such dwelling, building, or structure. The court may place such conditions as are reasonable on the opening of such property, including the repair of the dwelling, building, or structure. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases where the conditions of a dwelling, building, or structure are so dangerous that a delay in closing such dwelling, building, or structure would/could cause a substantial likelihood of immediate harm or injury to those persons visiting, working or residing therein, the chief building official or the city manager may issue an order temporarily closing the property pending a hearing in the Floyd County Magistrate Court. In that event, the public officer shall proceed with filing a petition and scheduling a hearing using the provisions set forth under this Code section. Any hearing held under this paragraph (6) shall be scheduled no later than seventy-two (72) hours after the temporary closing of the property. 
(7)  All orders by the Floyd County Magistrate Court to close the property and all temporary orders by the chief building official or the city manager to temporarily close a property shall be binding on all persons, and failure to abide by such orders shall be a violation of this Code and is enforceable by the Floyd County Police Department or any authorized law enforcement agency. The chief building official, may, in his discretion, allow persons to temporarily enter into a closed dwelling, building, or structure for the purpose of removing personal property or to secure the dwelling, building, or structure. 
(Ord. of 8-9-16) 
Secs. 2-9-112—2-9-135. - Reserved. 
Chapter 2-10 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention regulations at airport, § 2-3-14 et seq.; fires at recreation facilities, § 2-13-13; construction codes, § 2-6-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-10-1. - Fire prevention code adopted. 
(a)  This section shall be known as the "Fire Prevention Code of Floyd County, Georgia," and it may be cited as the "fire prevention code." 
(b)  There is hereby adopted for the purposes of the public safety and welfare, that certain fire prevention code known as the Standard Fire Prevention Code, particularly the 1991 edition, as adopted and as amended by the State of Georgia and published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., except such portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended. Said code, including the modifications and amendments are hereby incorporated by reference and made part hereof as if fully set forth herein. Copies of the specifications, rules and regulations shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the fire marshal. 
(c)  Deletions and additions to, or adoption of the latest supplement to, such code may be adopted by a resolution or ordinance of the board of commissioners and thereby incorporated herein; provided, copies of any changes in the standard text be made available for inspection by the public. 
(d)  Fire regulatory permit and fire department services fees. The fire chief, fire marshal or their authorized representatives shall enforce the provisions of the fire regulatory permit and fire department services fees, as set forth in the Floyd County Fee Schedule Book, as authorized by section 2-1-12 of the Code of Ordinances of Floyd County, Georgia. 
(Code 1979, § 6-1018; Ord. of 5-26-92, § I; Ord. No. 2011-007A, § 1, 4-26-11) 
Sec. 2-10-2. - Definitions. 
Unless the context demands otherwise, the words and terms used in sections 2-10-2 through 2-10-5 shall have the following definitions: 
Alarm or alarm system: Any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used to emit a sound or signal signifying the occurrence of an unauthorized entry, fire, or other occurrence requiring urgent attention and to which emergency units may be expected to respond. 
False alarm: An alarm signal eliciting a response by police or firefighters or other public officials when a situation requiring a response by police or firefighters or other public officials does not in fact exist, excluding alarm signals caused by no fault of the user and caused by no apparent malfunction and also excluding an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature, such as, but not limited to, lightning, tornadoes, or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business or alarm user. 
False alarm penalty: An administrative fee imposed by the city/county to defray the expense to the city/county for responding to false alarms. The amount of the fees shall be as set out in the fee schedule as provided in subsection (g) of section 2-10-5. 
False alarm signal: A signal indicating an emergency requiring immediate action of the fire department, including, but not limited to, an alarm from a manually operated fire alarm box, a water flow alarm or an alarm from an automatic fire/smoke detection system or device. 
Fire equipment trouble alarm: An alarm indicating some form of malfunction or trouble with the fire protection or fire detecting system or device being monitored. Such trouble alarm does not indicate the need for emergency fire department response to the site, but only that the person responsible for maintenance of the system being monitored is to be notified of the trouble alarm signal. 
Police signal: A signal from a manually operated or automatic device which indicates an emergency requiring immediate response by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 2000-005A, § 2, 9-26-00) 
Sec. 2-10-3. - Requirements for monitoring/receiving alarm signals. 
It is the purpose of sections 2-10-2 through 2-10-5 to establish requirements for the monitoring and/or receiving of fire and burglar alarm signals, and fire equipment trouble alarms at the 911 center. 
(Ord. No. 2000-005A, § 2, 9-26-00) 
Sec. 2-10-4. - Registration of alarm systems. 
(a)  All alarm systems must be registered within thirty (30) days of installation. 
(b)  Initial registration fee is fifteen dollars ($15.00) for newly installed alarm systems. 
(c)  Registration is not transferable. New owners must re-register and pay the fifteen-dollar fee. 
(d)  There will be no registration fee or fine for medical alarms. 
(e)  All alarm companies must submit a list of all customers in Rome and Floyd County to the E911 center annually between January 1 and January 31. The list should include the name of the customer, the customer's address and customer's phone number. 
(f)  Failure to register/re-register an alarm system within the allotted time will result in a fine as shown in the fee schedule. 
(g)  Any response to an alarm that has not been registered/re-registered will result in a fine shown in the accepted fee schedule. 
(h)  Alarm installation companies will be provided with and required to present a copy of the city/county alarms ordinance to each customer at the time of alarm installation. 
(i)  Failure of the alarm installation company to notify the customer or the central monitoring center of these requirements will result in a fine as shown in the fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2000-005A, § 2, 9-26-00) 
Sec. 2-10-5. - Miscellaneous alarm requirements. 
(a)  Connections: No emergency signal alarm shall be connected directly to the 911 center. All emergency signal alarms will be monitored by an answering center/person who will then contact the 911 center. 
(b)  Automatic dialers: It shall be unlawful to key automatic dialer fire or burglar alarms to the city/county emergency numbers or to the 911 center. These types of alarms shall be keyed to a private service that can then notify the 911 center. 
(c)  Automatic cutoff system: All audible alarms, sirens, bells, or horns shall have an automatic cutoff system so that the alarm shall not operate for more than thirty (30) continuous minutes. 
(d)  Transmission of false alarms: The transmission of false alarms to the 911 center in excess of the allowable alarms as contained in the fee schedule shall authorize the imposition of a false alarm penalty as provided in said fee schedule as set out in subsection (g) of this section. 
(e)  Accounting of false alarms: The 911 center shall maintain an accounting of false alarms on a monthly and annual basis. Each calendar year shall constitute a new accounting period for determining the imposition of false alarm penalties as established in the fee schedule. 
(f)  Termination of services: Service will be terminated as provided in the fee schedule. Service will be reinstated only after appropriate action has been taken to correct user deficiencies and the user receives approval from the appropriate chief. 
(g)  Fee schedule and false alarm penalty: The schedule of penalties as stated in the fee schedule book shall apply for the purpose of determining the administrative fees to be imposed on a yearly basis as established in sections 2-10-2 through 2-10-5(f) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2000-005A, § 2, 9-26-00) 
Secs. 2-10-6—2-10-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SELF-SERVICE MOTOR FUEL DISPENSING PUMPS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Regulations, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-16. 

Sec. 2-10-20. - Definitions. 
When used in this article, the following terms and phrases shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Dispensing station: An independent dispensing station located on a larger gas pump which said station dispenses one (1) or more types of gas out of said station. For instance and as an example, on most of the typical pumps located today, there are three (3) stations and those stations are dispensers for unleaded gas, gas plus and super unleaded gas. Each one (1) of those dispensers is an independent station as defined herein. 
Qualified attendant: A person employed by the person operating the self-service motor fuel dispensing pump present at the pump's location, to operate the pump in dispensing the fuel into the motor vehicle or other container of the member of the public seeking to obtain fuel through the pump. 
Self-service motor fuel dispensing pump: A pump which dispenses gasoline, diesel fuel or any other motor fuel to members of the public, by the operation of the pump, or devices thereon, which is intended to permit the member of the general public to dispense the fuel personally, without the necessity or requirement that an attendant be present, to dispense the fuel into the motor vehicle or container of any other kind, provided by the person seeking to obtain the fuel. 
Vehicle: An automobile, truck or other self-propelled vehicle using a gasoline, diesel or other internal combustion engine as the motive power for its locomotion. 
(Code 1979, § 7-3021; Ord. No. 2001-003A, § 1, 7-10-01) 
Sec. 2-10-21. - Purpose. 
It is hereby found and declared that the dispensing of gasoline and other flammable fuels, without control over the dispensing into unauthorized containers with the subsequent dangers inherent thereto; the inherent danger by use of self-service of dispensing gasoline and other fuels to minors who may lack the ability to safely transport the same and/or to other persons who are unable to safely operate a vehicle because of intoxication and for other reasons; the inherent danger to the public of the handling of a bulk flammable and combustible product in case of riots and other civil disorders during which personal and property damage are commonplace occurrences; the lack of complete control over spillage of gasoline and other fuels and oils that cause or may cause physical injury to persons while servicing their own vehicles; and the danger to life and limb by reason of spillage and improper practices near pumps unsupervised, is a present, real and serious danger and risk to the health, welfare, safety, morals, convenience, order and well-being of the citizens of the county. 
(Code 1979, § 7-3022) 
Sec. 2-10-22. - Permit—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate within the county self-service motor fuel pumps which dispense gasoline, diesel fuel or other motor fuel without a qualified attendant being physically present at the self-service pump at all times unless all requirements as set out in section 2-10-23 are met by the applicant. This applies to all county self-service fuel stations where fuel is received by members of the public; and provided further that permit to operate the pump has been obtained from the clerk of the board of commissioners as prescribed herein. 
(Code 1979, § 7-3023; Ord. No. 2001-003A, § 2, 7-10-01) 
Sec. 2-10-23. - Same—Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a self-service motor fuel dispensing pump before installing and commencing the operation of the same, shall apply to the clerk of the board of commissioners for a permit. The application shall show the plans and specifications for the station, and how and in what manner the self-service fuel pump is to be operated so that the board of commissioners may have an opportunity to examine or have examined the plans to determine that it is safe for the members of the general public to purchase from the self-service pump, and that proper safeguards have been taken to prevent flammable fuel from being obtained by minors of such tender years as to not be able to know how to properly handle the fuel, or intoxicated persons or persons seeking the fuel during a time of civil disorder for the purpose of using the same to carry out the scheme of the disorder through the use of "molotov cocktails," fire bombs and other arson. 
(b)  The application shall further show the nature of the attendance upon the pumps by an attendant, what the attendant's duties will be, how many attendants will be used, the hours of operation of the station, the safety devices and safeguards to be taken to prevent spillage, or danger of fires and explosions. 
(c)  The application shall be accompanied by a letter and/or a state permit showing approval of the mechanism and method of operation proposed for the self-service motor fuel pumps from the state fire marshall's office. The application shall also be accompanied by a letter from the local Rome-Floyd County Fire Marshall's Office indicating that the mechanism and method of operation is cleared from a safety standpoint by the City of Rome/Floyd County Fire Marshall's Office. This requirement shall apply to all self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps whether said pumps have attendants or not. 
(Code 1979, § 7-3024; Ord. No. 2001-003A, § 3, 7-10-01) 
Sec. 2-10-24. - Same—Fee. 
The permit application shall be accompanied with a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the first four (4) dispensing stations and fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each additional dispensing station thereafter. 
(Code 1979, § 7-3025; Ord. No. 2001-003A, § 4, 7-10-01) 
Sec. 2-10-25. - Same—Approval or disapproval of applications; time limit. 
After the filing of the application as aforesaid, the board of commissioners shall, within thirty (30) days, either approve or disapprove the application, and in the event the application is disapproved, the decision of the board of commissioners shall set out the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1979, § 7-3026) 
Sec. 2-10-26. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon information made known to the sheriff and/or chief of police or to any officer of the sheriff's department or the police department that any person is in violation of this chapter, they shall cause a citation to be issued requiring the person to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Citations issued hereunder shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and shall be personally served upon the person accused. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(Code 1979, § 7-3027; Ord. of 3-28-89, § I) 
Sec. 2-10-27. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the terms of this chapter or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto may be punished as provided in section 2-1-8 or shall be required to pay a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day until such time as they have met the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-28-89, § I; Ord. of 12-9-97(1), § 1) 
ARTICLE III. - OPEN BURNING 

Sec. 2-10-28. - Open burning in dangerous conditions. 
(a)  The Fire Chief of Rome and Floyd County, with the approval of the Floyd County Manager and the City of Rome Manager, shall be authorized to ban all open burning of all types, including camp fires, bonfires, and any other open burning, when atmospheric, environmental, drought or other dangerous conditions of any type warrant such ban by creating significant risk of fire. Such ban, once declared, shall continue until lifted. Such ban can be imposed county-wide or limited to specified area or areas or limited in other ways. Such ban shall not include fire department training fires, nor cooking with typical grills or smokers. The fire chief, with the consent of the Floyd County Manager and the City of Rome Manager, shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this article by the issuance of a citation in violation thereof through the Floyd County Magistrate Court. 
(b)  With the recommendation of the Fire Chief of Rome and Floyd County, the county and city managers shall have the authority to cancel said burn ban should said ban be implemented. 
(c)  Either manager may set the burn ban and/or lift the burn ban on their respective city or county. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating the ordinance from which this article derives shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as follows: 
1st violation - One hundred dollar ($100.00) fine. 
2nd violation - Two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) fine. 
3rd violation - Five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine. 
4th and any further violations - One thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine and/or sixty (60) days imprisonment, or as otherwise provided by the laws of this state. 
(Ord. of 1-10-17) 
Secs. 2-10-29—2-10-50. - Reserved. 
Chapter 2-11 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Discarding refuse at airport, § 2-3-34; littering at recreation facilities, § 2-13-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-11-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Health officer. The director of health of the county or such director's authorized representative. 
Nuisance. Whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome. 
(Code 1979, § 4-5003; Ord. of 8-12-86, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definition of animal nuisance, § 2-5-1. 
Sec. 2-11-2. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon information being made known that any violation of this chapter is occurring, a citation shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. section 15-10-63 by any member of the police department, the sheriff's department, or by any other agent of the county who is authorized to enact or enforce ordinances on behalf of the county, requiring the violator to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for violation of this chapter. 
(b)  Citations issued hereunder shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 15-10-63, and shall be personally served upon the person accused. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(c)  As soon as a citation is issued hereunder, the county manager shall be notified that a citation has been issued. The county manager shall in turn notify the county attorney who shall prosecute the matter before the county magistrate court. 
(d)  The county police department shall have the authority to determine whether or not property is neglected pursuant to the definitions of neglected property as set out in sections 2-11-6 and 2-11-7 of the Code. If the county police make the determination that the property is, in fact, neglected property, then the county shall have the right to have the neglected lots and/or property cut and/or cleared of weeds and debris after ten (10) days' notice to the landlord. A fifa shall be issued against the property owners for the costs involved for the cutting of weeds and/or removal of debris. 
(Code 1979, § 4-5009; Ord. of 8-12-86, § 1; Ord. of 3-27-90, § I; Amend. of 6-9-98, § 1; Ord. No. 2000-009A, § 1, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2005-003A, § 2, 10-25-05) 
Sec. 2-11-3. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person violating the terms of this chapter or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, may be punished as provided in section 2-1-8. Separate offenses shall be deemed to be committed on each day during on or which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)  In addition to all other provisions of this chapter, any violation of this chapter is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction in the superior court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1979, § 4-5010; Ord. of 8-12-86, § 1) 
Sec. 2-11-4. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to define specific types of nuisances in order to: 
(1)  Protect residents from annoyance and health hazards of certain aggravating circumstances; 
(2)  Delineate residents' responsibilities and prohibited acts in the community. 
(Code 1979, § 4-5002; Ord. of 8-12-86, § 1) 
Sec. 2-11-5. - Conflict with law. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal or state law. 
(Code 1979, § 5-4004; Ord. of 8-12-86, § 1) 
Sec. 2-11-6. - Specific nuisances. 
The following are specifically declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Toilets, other sanitary facilities, plumbing or sewers not in compliance with the rules and regulations of the county board of health or the state department of human resources. 
(2)  Conditions conducive to the excessive breeding of flies, mosquitoes, or other insects in relation to surrounding conditions as determined by the health officer. 
(3)  Pollution of the air by gases, vapors, fumes, mists, dust, or smoke in quantities sufficient to be disagreeable, discomforting, or detrimental to health or well-being in relation to the conditions of the surrounding area, as determined by the health officer. 
(4)  Trash, garbage, refuse, or any foul, decaying or putrescent material kept in such quantifies or used in such a manner or place as to be or become offensive, objectionable, or detrimental to health or well-being. 
Cross reference— As to such nuisances, see also § 2-7-50 et seq. 
(5)  Keeping of horses, mules, asses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or similar animals or fowl except under the following conditions: 
a.  Any housing or enclosures used by such animals or fowl shall be well-drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health officer. 
b.  Such animals or fowl shall be kept at the following minimum distances from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner: 

 
c.  Each such animal or fowl (except those raised in a commercial poultry house for profit or for distribution to a brokerage house) shall be provided with the following average minimum floor or ground area in the enclosure or housing in which it is kept: 

 
d.  All such animals or fowl, except dogs in areas where confinement of dogs under the rabies control regulations does not apply, shall be kept in adequate enclosures or tethered. 
e.  Diseased animals or fowl which might infect healthy animals or cause a menace to the public health shall be isolated or destroyed as the health officer deems necessary. 
f.  In the case of bona fide licensed pet shops, veterinary hospitals, stockyards poultry houses, and similar commercial establishments, the health officer may modify these requirements where undue hardship would result from their strict enforcement. 
(6)  Garbage, trash, solid waste, belongings or any other items originating from the property of a landlord and being left on the street for more than twenty-four (24) hours following an eviction. 
(7)  Circumstances where the owner or occupant of a building, structure or property to utilize the premises of such property for the open storage of any abandoned motor vehicle, ice box, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building rubbish or similar items. In that regard, it shall be considered a nuisance if such owner or occupant does not keep the premises of such property clean and does not remove from the premises all such abandoned items as listed above including, but not limited to, weeds, hedges, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc. upon notice form the county police department. 
(8)  Neglected property. Any neglected property as defined herein shall also be considered a nuisance and said neglected property means a parcel or parcels of land which have been developed and have been neglected by the owners by not keeping it cut to prevent over growth or by allowing the property to be used as a dumping ground for foreign materials. 
(Code 1979, § 4-5005; Ord. of 8-12-86, § 1; Ord. No. 2000-008A, § 1, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2005-003A, § 3, 10-25-05) 
Cross reference— Similar provisions enforced by the director of animal control, § 2-5-6. 
Sec. 2-11-7. - Nuisance prohibited. 
No person shall create, maintain, support, aid or continue a nuisance, such as: 
(1)  Television sets, phonographs, radio receiving sets, musical instruments or any similar device for the production or reproduction of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of neighboring residents or any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area; 
(2)  Animals or fowl, otherwise permitted to be kept, which, by any sound, cry, or behavior, shall cause annoyance or discomfort to a reasonable person of normal sensitiveness in any residential neighborhood; 
(3)  General noises which are blatantly foreign to the normal order of a community which shall cause the disturbance of peace, quiet and comfort of residents or any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness in the area; 
(4)  Standards to be considered in determining whether subsection (1), (2) or (3) of this section has been violated shall include, but will not be limited by the following: 
a.  The volume of the noise; 
b.  The intensity of the noise; 
c.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
d.  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
e.  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
f.  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
g.  The time of the day or night the noise occurs; 
h.  The duration of the noise; 
i.  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and 
j.  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
(5)  Leaving garbage, trash, solid waste, belongings or any other items originating from the property of a landlord on the street for more than twenty-four (24) hours following an eviction. 
(6)  Circumstances where the owner or occupant of a building, structure or property to utilize the premises of such property for the open storage of any abandoned motor vehicle, ice box, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material, building rubbish or similar items. In that regard, it shall be considered a nuisance if such owner or occupant does not keep the premises of such property clean and does not remove from the premises all such abandoned items as listed above including, but not limited to, weeds, hedges, dead trees, trash, garbage, etc. upon notice form the county police department. 
(7)  Neglected property. Any neglected property as defined herein shall also be considered a nuisance and said neglected property means a parcel or parcels of land which have been developed and have been neglected by the owners by not keeping it cut to prevent over growth or by allowing the property to be used as a dumping ground for foreign materials. 
(Code 1979, § 4-5006; Ord. of 8-12-86, § 1; Ord. No. 2000-008A, § 2, 1-23-01; Ord. No. 2005-003A, § 4, 10-25-05) 
Cross reference— See also definition of animal nuisance, § 2-5-22 et seq. 
Sec. 2-11-8. - State rules and regulations. 
(a)  Adopted. The rules and regulations of the state department of human resources entitled and published as "Chapter 290-5-14 Food Service" are hereby adopted as written in revised form of September 10, 1986, and amended, a copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  Enforcement. Prosecutions for violations of this section shall be upon citation as provided in O.C.G.A. sections 15-10-62 and 15-10-63, as amended. The county health department sanitarian of is hereby authorized to issue citations for the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or sixty (60) days' imprisonment, or both; and if such violation be continued, each day's violation shall be a separate offense. Violations of this section may also be handled by the seeking of civil remedies. 
Editor's note— Inclusion of the provisions of §§ 1—3 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 13, 1988, as § 2-11-8 was at the discretion of the editor, the ordinance being nonamendatory of the Code. 
Sec. 2-11-9. - Disposition of garbage, trash or property by landlords. 
(a)  Any property, trash, belongings or other items left on the street for more than twenty-four (24) hours following an eviction shall be subject to collection for a fee. The landlord or property owner shall be responsible for the payment of said collection fees which shall be set by the county manager. 
(b)  Once the county police department reports that a violation of subsection (a) above has occurred, the county manager will notify, by certified mail, the landlord and/or have the property posted if, in fact, there is no applicable address for said landlord. The notice shall contain a provision that the landlord and/or property owner shall have seven (7) days from the date of the notice to remove the property, trash, belongings or other items left on the street. If the items are not removed at the end of the seven-day period, then the county shall have the right to remove the items and a fifa shall be issued against the landlord and/or property owner for the costs involved. 
(c)  The costs of removal shall be determined by the county manager and the county public works department based upon the amount of items removed as well as the time involved in the removal of said items. 
(Ord. No. 2000-007A, § 1, 1-23-01) 
Secs. 2-11-10—2-11-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNKED AND ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-003A, adopted July. 25, 2006, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 2-11-20—2-11-29, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1979, §§ 2-2001—2010. 

Sec. 2-11-20. - Definitions. 
Custom motor vehicle: A motor vehicle at least twenty-five (25) years old and of a model year subsequent to 1948 or was manufactured to resemble a vehicle twenty-five (25) or more years old and of a model year subsequent to 1948 and has been altered from the manufacturer's original design or has a body constructed from non-original materials. A custom motor vehicle as defined herein shall not be considered a junked vehicle as such phrase is defined herein and shall be exempt from the provisions of this article so long as the custom motor vehicle is located out of ordinary public view. 
Junked vehicle: Any vehicle defined in subsection (a) above which vehicle either does not have lawfully affixed on it an unexpired license plate and valid liability insurance as required by state law, or which vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned, or discarded. Not included in said definition of a junked vehicle is any vehicle that is located out of ordinary public view. 
Ordinary public view: Within normal visual range by a person on a public street, sidewalk or other public right of way adjacent to real property by means including, but not limited to, inside storage, suitable fencing, trees, shrubbery or otherwise. 
Parts car: Any automobile that is not intended to be operated along streets and roads, but is used to provide parts for the restoration of other automobiles. Such parts cars shall not be considered a junked vehicle as such phrase is defined herein and shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance so long as the parts car is located out of ordinary public view. 
Person: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
Private property: Any real property within Floyd County which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined below. 
Public property: Any street or highway which shall include the entire width of the right of way publicly owned (or in which any public body has an easement for roadway purposes) and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. 
Street rod: A motor vehicle that was manufactured prior to 1949 or a motor vehicle manufactured after 1948 but built to resemble a motor vehicle manufactured prior to 1949 and has been altered from the manufacturer's original design or has a body constructed from non-original materials. A street rod as defined herein shall not be considered a junked vehicle as such phrase is defined herein and shall be exempt from the provisions of this article so long as the street rod is located out of ordinary public view. 
Vehicle: Any means of conveyance, whether self-propelled or not, that is designed to travel on the ground or on water or in the air, including, but not limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers, recreational vehicles, boats, airplanes, train cars and any means of conveyance which are designed to be pulled by motorized vehicles upon the roadway such as boat trailers, wagons, balers, motorcycle trailers, auto transport trailers, and any other trailer designed to haul specific items attached to motor vehicles on the roadway. 
This article shall not be construed to prohibit a person from engaging in the activities of an automobile collector in any area within the county, so long as any vehicles, including parts cars, maintained and stored by the collector are located out of ordinary public view. A person involved in the activities of an automobile collector may conduct mechanical repairs and modifications to a vehicle located out of ordinary public view on private real property. An automobile collector means a person who collects and restores vehicles, including, but not limited to, street rods or custom motor vehicles, whether as a hobby or profession. 
(Code, 1979, § 9-2001; Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 1, 7-25-06) 
State Law reference— Definition of abandoned motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. 
Sec. 2-11-21. - Storing, parking or leaving unattended any junked vehicle or abandoned motor vehicle prohibited; declared nuisance; exceptions. 
No person shall park, store, leave, or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any abandoned motor vehicle or any junked vehicle upon any public property within Floyd County for a period of time in excess of three (3) days. Nor shall any person park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked vehicle upon any private property within Floyd County for a period of time in excess of thirty (30) days. The presence of an abandoned motor vehicle on public property or of a junked vehicle or any parts of such a vehicle on private or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Floyd County Code. This section shall not apply to any vehicle located out of ordinary public view as such phrase is defined herein, or to any vehicle held by an automotive maintenance, repair, or salvage facility, or similar business enterprise, lawfully licensed by Floyd County and properly operated in an appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of Floyd County, or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on raceways or drag strips. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 2, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-11-22. - Notice to remove. 
(a)  Whenever it comes to the attention of Floyd County that any nuisance defined in section 2-11-21 exists in Floyd County upon private property, a notice in writing shall be served on the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, and when there is no occupant, then notice shall be served on the owner of the land or their agent. Notice shall be served upon owner or occupant pursuant to section 2-11-24 herein. 
(b)  Whenever it comes to the attention of Floyd County that any nuisance defined in section 2-11-21 exists in Floyd County upon public property, notice as defined in section 2-11-24 shall be served upon the registered owner of the vehicle, if such vehicle is required to be registered, and if not, notice shall be served upon the owner, if such owner is known to the Floyd County Police Department or to any other law enforcement officer whose duty involves the removal of said vehicle from the public property. 
(c)  If a basis for the notice to remove is that the vehicle is inoperative, then the officer serving said notice on the owner or occupant of private property on which a vehicle is located shall request the person served to demonstrate the operability of the vehicle to the officer. In the event that the person who is served shall demonstrate that the vehicle can be started and operated lawfully upon the roadway to the officer, then the officer shall make a note of same. However, in the event that the person served shall refuse or is unable to demonstrate the operability of the vehicle to the officer, then the officer shall make a note of same and shall introduce said note into evidence at any hearing or trial on the matter, and such evidence shall constitute a reputable presumption that the vehicle is inoperative. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a), (b) and (c), whenever it comes to the attention of Floyd County that a nuisance exists involving a junk motor vehicle whereby conditions are conducive to the breeding of flies, mosquitoes and other insects, particularly standing stagnant water, whether in natural or manmade containers, and it is apparent that such conditions have the potential to enable the spread of diseases, or there are conditions conducive to the excess breeding of rodents and vermin, the Floyd County Health Department shall be notified immediately of such conditions so the same may be abated under sections 2-11-1 through 2-11-8. Rodent shall be defined as any member of the Order Rodentia, including, but not limited to, mice and rats. Vermin shall be defined as any noxious, troublesome, disgusting or objectionable animals, including, but not limited to, flying and crawling insects and any animal likely to spread disease or produce noxious waste. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 3, 7-25-06; Ord. No. 2006-005A, I, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 2-11-23. - Responsibility for removal. 
(a)  Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the occupant or the owner, if unoccupied, of the private property on which the junked vehicle is located shall be responsible for the vehicle's removal. In the event of removal and disposition by Floyd County, the owner of the junked vehicle shall be liable for the expenses incurred as provided in subsection 2-11-25(b). 
(b)  In the case of a junked vehicle or abandoned motor vehicle located upon public property, the owner (if he is identified and given notice to remove as set out in section 2-11-22) shall be responsible for the vehicle's removal. In the event of removal and disposition by Floyd County, the owner of the junked vehicle shall be liable for the expenses incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 4, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-11-24. - Notice procedure. 
(a)  Floyd County shall give notice for removal to the owner or occupant of private property where a junked vehicle is located, at least ten (10) days before the deadline for compliance with this chapter. It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of the notice is posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by registered mail to the occupant or owner, if unoccupied, of the private property at their last known address. 
(b)  In the case of a junked vehicle or abandoned motor vehicle located on public property, it shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of the notice requesting removal is affixed to the vehicle, and a duplicate copy is sent by registered mail to the owner of the vehicle at their last known address (if said owner is known to the officer whose duty it is to see that the vehicle is removed). Notice must be posted and mailed if owner is known, three (3) days prior to removal of vehicle by Floyd County. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 5, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-11-25. - Notice and abatement. 
(a)  Content of notice for vehicles located upon private property: The notice described in subsection 2-11-24(a) shall contain a demand for removal within ten (10) days, and notice shall advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, said nuisance will be declared a violation of the Code of Floyd County and shall be punished as provided for in sections 2-11-3 and 2-11-8. 
(b)  Abatement by Floyd County: If the nuisance, as adjudged by the magistrate court, is not abated as ordered within ten (10) working days from the date of such adjudication, then Floyd County is authorized to remove any junked vehicle from the property in question. The cost to Floyd County of this abatement shall be charged to parties adjudged responsible for such nuisance abatement. If the owner of the real property affected has been adjudged responsible for abatement, and the charges remain unpaid for a period of thirty (30) days after payment is due, the Floyd County Police Chief or his designee shall cause an execution to be issued against the owner of the property for those charges. The execution shall be a lien on the property, and when recorded in the general execution docket of Floyd County, shall be a lien on all property of the defendant in execution from the date of such recording. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 6, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-11-26. - Content of notice for vehicles located upon public property. 
The notice, described in subsection 2-11-24(b), shall contain a demand for removal within three (3) days, and the notice shall advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, Floyd County shall undertake such removal with the cost being levied against the owner of such vehicle and that said nuisance will be declared a violation of the Code of Floyd County and shall be punished as provided for in sections 2-11-3 and 2-11-8. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 7, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-11-27. - Removal of motor vehicle from public property. 
If the violation cited in the notice has not been remedied within the notice period for compliance, Floyd County shall have the right to take possession of the junked vehicle or abandoned motor vehicle and remove it from the public property where it is located. It shall be unlawful for any persons to interfere with, hinder, or refuse to allow such person or persons acting for Floyd County to remove said vehicle under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 8, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-11-28. - Notice of removal. 
Within forty-eight (48) hours of the removal of the vehicle, Floyd County shall give notice to the registered owner of the vehicle, if known, that said vehicle, (or vehicles) has been impounded and stored for violation of this chapter. The notice shall give the location of the vehicle (or vehicles) and the amount of costs incurred by Floyd County for removal and that said vehicle is subject to sale pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 9, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-11-29. - Disposition of vehicles. 
Upon removing a vehicle under the provisions of section 2-11-27, Floyd County shall after ten (10) days appraise said vehicle. If the vehicle is appraised at one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, Floyd County shall execute an affidavit so attesting and describe the vehicle, including the license plates, if any, and stating the location and appraised value of the vehicle. Floyd County, after complying with the above, may summarily dispose of the vehicles and execute a certificate of sale. If the vehicle is appraised at over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), Floyd County shall be authorized to sell the abandoned vehicle at public auction. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 10, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-11-30. - Public sale. 
Any abandoned motor vehicle or junked vehicle sold at public sale by Floyd County shall be sold to the highest and best bidder. At the time of payment of the purchase price, Floyd County shall execute a certificate of sale in duplicate, the original of which shall be given to the purchaser, and a copy thereof to be maintained in the files of Floyd County pertaining to the pubic sale of personal property items. Should the sale for any reason be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, Floyd County's liability shall be limited to the return of the purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 11, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-11-31. - Redemption of impounded vehicles. 
The owner of any vehicle seized under the provisions of this chapter may redeem such vehicle at any time after its removal but prior to the sale or destruction thereof upon proof of ownership and payment to Floyd County of such sum as it may determine and fix for the actual expense of removal, and any preliminary sale advertising expenses, the costs incurred by Floyd County, if any, for storage for each vehicle redeemed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 12, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-11-32. - Rights of lien holders. 
During the impoundment of any abandoned motor vehicle or junked vehicle removed from public property pursuant to this chapter and prior to the sale of any such vehicle, should any person assert that he is a lien holder on said vehicle or should any lien holder be identified by research into the ownership of said vehicle by any agent of Floyd County, then said lien holder shall receive any notice required by this chapter to be delivered to any owner of any said vehicle. Any such lien holder may obtain possession of the vehicle from Floyd County by paying off costs as described in section 2-11-31 above at any time prior to the sale of said vehicle as set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 13, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-11-33. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Upon information made known to the sheriff of Floyd County, and/or chief of police of Floyd County, or to any officer of the sheriff's department or the county police department, or the county attorney, that any person is in violation of this article, the one gaining the information shall cause a citation to be issued requiring such person to appear before the judge of the magistrate court on a day and time certain, then and there to stand trial for violation of this article. 
(b)  Citations issued hereunder shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63 and shall be personally served upon the person accused. Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 14, 7-25-06) 
Sec. 2-11-34. - Chapter not exclusive. 
This chapter shall not be the exclusive regulation of abandoned or junked vehicles within Floyd County and shall be supplemental and in addition to the other ordinances, statutes or provisions of law hereto or hereinafter enacted by Floyd County, the state, or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2006-003A, § 15, 7-25-06) 
Secs. 2-11-35—2-11-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— An amendment adopted May 10, 1994, set out a new Art. III and repealed in its entirety the old Art. III, §§ 2-11-40—2-11-47, which pertained to "smoking ban" and derived from Code 1979, §§ 7-4002—7-4008, and an ordinance adopted May 26, 1987. The amendment adopted May 10, 1994, became effective Sept. 1, 1994. 

Sec. 2-11-40. - Definitions. 
County facility means any building, office complex, office center, courthouse, civic center, auditorium, jail, terminal, or other enclosed structure, not including motor vehicles, owned or otherwise under the exclusive control of Floyd County, Georgia. 
County vehicle means any automobile, truck, van, or other motor vehicle designed primarily for on-the-road use which is owned or otherwise under the exclusive control of Floyd County, Georgia. 
Smoking means the burning of any tobacco product in a cigarette, cigar or pipe of any type or kind; or any vapes, electronic cigarette, e-juice, wax vape pens and herbal vaporizers unless the vaporizers are medically prescribed by a licensed MD for breathing assistance. 
Tobacco product means any kind or type of tobacco, whether loose leaf, processed or rolled, intended, packaged or sold for the purpose of chewing, dipping, smoking, vapes, electronic cigarette, e-juice, wax vape pens and herbal vaporizers unless the vaporizers are medically prescribed by a licensed MD for breathing assistance. 
(Amend. of 5-10-94, § 1, Ord. No. 2015-005A, 12-8-15) 
Sec. 2-11-41. - Purpose. 
This article is enacted for the purpose of preserving and protecting the public health, safety and welfare by reducing individual exposure to first- and secondhand tobacco smoke, by reducing the possibility of fire in county facilities and by providing a generally more healthful and sanitary environment for working and for conducting public business. 
(Amend. of 5-10-94, § 1) 
Sec. 2-11-42. - Restrictions. 
No person shall smoke or otherwise use any tobacco product while in any county facility. After consultation with the appropriate department head(s), the county manager may establish reasonable work rule restrictions governing smoking and the use of tobacco products in non-enclosed or outdoor employee work areas and upon the grounds of county facilities frequented by members of the general public. The county manager shall cause the erection and installation of signs necessary and appropriate to promote the purposes of this article. 
(Amend. of 5-10-94, § 1) 
Sec. 2-11-43. - Exceptions. 
The sheriff of the county is authorized to designate one (1) or more specific locations within the confinement area of the county jail as a smoking area. The warden of the county correctional institute is authorized to designate one (1) or more specific locations within the confinement area of the correctional institute as a smoking area. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize smoking in any area of such jail or correctional institute which is accessible to members of the general public. The restrictions set forth in this article shall not be applicable to buildings or other structures owned by the county but under lease to private individuals or for-profit business organizations. 
(Amend. of 5-10-94, § 1) 
Sec. 2-11-44. - County vehicles. 
No smoking or other use of tobacco products shall be permitted in any county vehicle. 
(Amend. of 5-10-94, § 1) 
Sec. 2-11-45. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by the county manager or any authorized law enforcement officer of the county. Any person found in violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Jurisdiction shall be in the magistrate court of the county. 
(Amend. of 5-10-94, § 1) 
Secs. 2-11-46—2-11-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POLITICAL SIGNS 

Sec. 2-11-50. - Definition. 
As used in this article, a "political sign" is any sign, banner, pennant, valance or display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, plywood or other light material, with or without frames, which advertises or promotes any candidate for election or any political issue which will be submitted to the voters at an election. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4001; Ord. of 1-13-87; Ord. of 6-14-88) 
Sec. 2-11-51. - Enforcement. 
Upon information being made known to the clerk of the board of commissioners that any violation of this article is occurring, the clerk shall cause a notice to be issued requiring the violator to appear before the clerk on a day and time certain. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4009; Ord. of 1-13-87; Ord. of 6-14-88) 
Secs. 2-11-52, 2-11-53. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2-11-52, regulating time limitations on political signs, derived from Code 1979, § 6-4002, and ordinances adopted Jan. 13, 1987, and Mar. 15, 1988, and § 2-11-53, regulating size limitations, derived from Code 1979, § 6-4003, and an ordinance adopted Jan. 13, 1987, were repealed by § 1 of an ordinance adopted June 14, 1988. 
Sec. 2-11-54. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  Public property: No political sign shall be located upon a public street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way, easement or other governmental property or property dedicated to a public use, except that signs attached to a wall, fence or building may project over such areas a distance not greater than six (6) inches. Political signs must be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from the pavement of any street or public right-of-way. 
(b)  Obstructions: No political sign shall prevent or interfere with free ingress to or egress from any door, window or fire escape. 
(c)  Traffic safety: No political sign shall be located or maintained in such a place or in such a manner as to constitute a hazard to the safety of pedestrians or vehicular traffic. Political signs shall not be attached to street signs or any sign directing or controlling traffic, nor to any pole or post supporting such signs. The decision of the county traffic engineer as to whether a sign constitutes such a hazard shall be conclusive. 
(d)  State law: All state laws as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1, and its modifications, and all other applicable state law must be complied with. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4004; Ord. of 1-13-87; Ord. of 6-14-88, § 1) 
Sec. 2-11-55. - Cash bond—Required. 
(a)  Prior to posting or erecting any political sign, the candidate, the candidate's representative or the person or organization intending to post signs for or against a ballot measure, shall post a cash bond of one hundred dollars ($100.00) with the clerk of the board of commissioners. Only one (1) such bond is required for any candidate for election or for the respective proponents or opponents to a ballot measure. The amount of the bond may be returned to the person who posted it when the building inspection department certifies to the county clerk that the respective signs erected by or on behalf of the person posting the bond have not been erected or maintained in violation of this article. 
(b)  If any political signs shall be erected or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article, by or on behalf of the person posting the bond, the cash bond shall be forfeited. 
(c)  If it becomes necessary for the county to remove any political sign from private property for noncompliance with this article, and the owner of such sign desires to retrieve it from the county, a service charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be made. The county may deduct the service charge or any other charges equal to the cost of removal of the sign from the cash bond and remit the balance of such bond to the person who posted it. 
(d)  No bond is required where an individual erects a political sign on property owned or occupied by such person if the other provisions of this article are complied with. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4005; Ord. of 1-13-87; Ord. of 6-14-88, § 1) 
Sec. 2-11-56. - Same—Forfeiture. 
Any person violating the terms of this article, or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, will forfeit any and all cash bonds required under section 2-11-55. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4010; Ord. of 1-13-87; Ord. of 6-14-88, § 1) 
Sec. 2-11-57. - Compliance. 
It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain a political sign, other than as authorized by this article, or for any owner of real property to permit, allow, acquiesce in, sanction or condone the erection or maintenance of a political sign on such person's property other than as authorized by this article. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4006; Ord. of 1-13-87; Ord. of 6-14-88, § 1) 
Sec. 2-11-58. - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the erection or maintenance of signs other than as regulated by this article, provided such other signs are authorized by other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1979, § 6-4007; Ord. of 1-13-87; Ord. of 6-14-88, § 1) 
Secs. 2-11-59—2-11-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC INDECENCY 

Sec. 2-11-66. - Enacted; definitions; violations. 
(a)  Enacted. This section has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of the county; protecting societal order; reflecting moral disapproval of people appearing in the nude among strangers in public places; and proscribing public nudity across the board. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Accessible to the public as used in this section shall mean any area or place, including but not limited to any building, structure or business, where the public is invited and members of the public are free to go upon special or implied invitation, including but not limited to such an area or place available to any or all segments of the public. 
(2)  Nudity as used in this section shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic areas or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipples or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(3)  Public Place as used in this section shall mean any area or place, including but not limited to any building, structure or business, whether privately or publicly owned, which is accessible to the public. 
(4)  Showing as used in this section shall mean to expose and to point out or draw attention to. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this section for any person, while in a public place, to knowingly or intentionally: 
(1)  Engage in sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Engage in deviate sexual conduct; 
(3)  Appear in a state of nudity; or 
(4)  Fondle the genitals of himself/herself or another person. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to erect, construct, alter, convert, operate or maintain any building, structure or business for the purpose of allowing or promoting a violation of this section. 
(e)  Violations of this section shall be enforced by criminal prosecution and/or by civil proceedings, including but not limited to actions for injunctive relief brought by the county attorney or other appropriate county authority. 
(f)  Any person convicted of violating this section shall have committed a misdemeanor and shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for a period of time not exceeding sixty (60) days or both. 
(g)  If this ordinance is found to be in conflict with any other ordinance of the county, then this public indecency ordinance shall be controlling. 
(h)  Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this section be declared unconstitutional or invalid for any reason, the remainder of this section shall not be affected thereby and shall remain valid. 
(i)  Section (c)(3) shall not apply when the nudity is part of some larger form of expression which merits First Amendment protection pursuant to the Constitution of the United States of America or the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-25-92) 
Sec. 2-11-67. - Adult entertainment establishment ordinance. 
(a)  Findings; public purpose. 
(1)  Based on the experience of other urban counties, including, but not limited to Fulton County, DeKalb County, Richmond County, and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences we believe are relevant to the problems faced by Floyd County, Georgia, the Floyd County Board of Commissioners takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Further, the county board of commissioners finds that adult entertainment establishments, if unregulated, will likely lead to an increase in prostitution, venereal disease, drug and alcohol offenses and other criminal activity. Further, the board of commissioners finds that adult entertainment establishments sometimes are fronts for or operated by persons associated with organized criminal activities, and the need to scrutinize such dance establishments are thereby enhanced. Further, it is the finding of the board of commissioners that public nudity, either partial or total, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages and/or beer begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. The county board of commissioners further finds that there are certain undesirable community conditions that identify with nudity and alcohol, and they are the depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, the increased expenditures for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and the increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. Further, the location of an adult entertainment establishment may, and most probably will, attract an undesirable quantity and quality of transients which adversely affect property values, causes an increase in crime and encourages residents and businesses therein to move elsewhere. 
(2)  Therefore, the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcohol, beer and/or wine and/or establishments where there is consumption on the premises of alcohol, beer and/or wine is in the public welfare, and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also and/or encourage nudity. To that end, this ordinance [consisting of this section, 2-11-67] is hereby adopted. 
(b)  Enactment. The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises where beer, wine and/or alcoholic beverages are consumed on the premises: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcohol beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (b)(1) of this section or where such persons (or person) perform(s) acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(2)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (b)(1) and (2) above. 
(4)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two (2) feet from the level of the floor, and no dancing shall occur closer than ten (10) feet to any patron. 
(5)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(6)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer, and no dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(c)  Severability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the county board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this enactment are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section hereof shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this enactment, since the same would have been enacted by the Floyd County Board of Commissioners without the incorporation herein of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(d)  Violation—penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine and/or imprisonment, or in lieu thereof, violation of this ordinance shall also be grounds for the governing authority to apply for and obtain a temporary and/or permanent restraining order against such violations. 
(Amend. of 2-14-95) 
ARTICLE VI. - PRODUCTS USED IN THE PREPARATION OF METHAMPHETAMINE 

Sec. 2-11-68. - Definitions. 
Product used in the preparation of methamphetamine: Any compound, mixture, preparation or drug product containing a dosage of twenty-five (25) mg. or more, in tablet or caplet form, of ephedrine, pseudoephedrine or phenylpropanolamine, or any of their salts, isomers or salts of isomers, alone or in a mixture. This definition shall not include product otherwise qualifying as "product used in the preparation of methamphetamine" but which is manufactured in time release form or in the form of gel caps, gel tabs, liquid tabs, capsules, liquids, elixirs, syrups, nasal spray or popsicles. 
(Ord. No. 2004-005A, 12-28-04) 
Sec. 2-11-69. - Display of products prohibited. 
Products used in the preparation of methamphetamine may not be openly displayed for sale in the unincorporated area of the county, but must be maintained behind the counter, maintained in a locked cabinet or maintained in a location from which it may be distributed for sale only by the pharmacist, pharmacy technician, sales clerk or other retail distributor employee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-005A, 12-28-04) 
Sec. 2-11-70. - Requirements for purchase of products. 
Products used in the preparation of methamphetamine may not be dispensed, sold or distributed in the unincorporated area of the county without requiring the individual purchasing, receiving or otherwise acquiring such compound, mixture, preparation or drug product to produce a photo identification showing their date of birth and sign a written log or receipt showing their signature and printed name, the date of the transaction, the type and amount of product purchased. 
The log or receipt must be maintained by the retailer or other person dispensing, selling or distributing the drug used in preparation of methamphetamine for a period of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 2004-005A, 12-28-04) 
Sec. 2-11-71. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be considered a misdemeanor punished in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-60, et seq., and 36-1-20 and the Floyd County Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Rome/Floyd County Drug Task Force, the Floyd County Police Department, the Floyd County Sheriff's Office, the Floyd County Ordinance Officer, and any other designated party. 
(c)  This article shall become effective on January 1, 2005. 
(Ord. No. 2004-005A, 12-28-04) 
Sec. 2-11-72. - Validity and severability. 
Should any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2004-005A, 12-28-04) 
Secs. 2-11-73—2-11-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 2-11-81. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The Floyd County, Georgia Commission finds and declares that within the limits of Floyd County there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, as well as optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in Floyd County or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of Floyd County and the State of Georgia; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in Floyd County where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders such real estate and adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of Floyd County and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe-human habitation. The Floyd County Commission finds that there exist in the county dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this article shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the Floyd County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2005-003A, § 1, 10-25-05) 
Sec. 2-11-82. - Declaration of unsafe buildings and systems as illegal; application to private property; continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
(a)  All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings, structures or service systems. 
(b)  All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  A finding by a public officer that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  It is the intent of the Floyd County Commission that nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2005-003A, § 5, 10-25-05) 
Sec. 2-11-83. - Definitions. 
Applicable codes means (a) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in Chapter 2 of Title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (b) any fire or life safety code as provided for in Chapter 2 of Title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and (c) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. Chapter 2 of Title 8 after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
County means Floyd County, Georgia. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16, known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not be mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the Floyd County Commission. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with [O.C.G.A.] Code section 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. "Interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings; or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. section 41-2-7, section 41-2-8 and sections 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under section 41-2-7, section 41-2-8, and sections 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2005-003A, § 6, 10-25-05) 
Sec. 2-11-84. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the county, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. It shall be unlawful for such owner to allow a dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to become unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the county or otherwise become a nuisance as set forth under this Code or the laws of this state. 
(b)  The County Commission of Floyd County, Georgia hereby appoints and designates the county code enforcement officer, county fire marshall, county police chief, and the Chief Building Inspector of the Rome/Floyd County Building Inspection Department and their respective designees as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least two (2) residents of Floyd County, Georgia charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance, with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. 
The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the Magistrate Court of Floyd County, at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
The Magistrate Court of Floyd County shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all such complaints. 
(d)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order which: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation the present value of the dwelling, building or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. The income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in Chapter 39A of Title 41, of the O.C.G.A., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. Such abatement action by the county shall commence within two hundred seventy (270) days after the expiration of time specified in the court order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to [O.C.G.A.] Code section 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the two hundred seventy (270) days in which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placed with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the county are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in any court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(h)  In addition to any other power or authority granted in this article to the court, the court shall have full jurisdiction and authority to punish persons found to have created, allowed or maintained a nuisance or other dangerous, unsafe or unsanitary condition and who have refused to abate the same, as provided for in the section 2-11-6 of the Floyd County Code. 
(i)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare nuisances and to summarily and without notice order the abatement of or abate any nuisance or dangerous condition where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. No. 2005-003A, § 7, 10-25-05) 
Sec. 2-11-85. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinance dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures whose interior or exterior bearing walls, or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such extent as to weaken the structural support of such member or members below the minimum required by the building codes of the county; 
(2)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures, which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose for which it is used, or intended to be used; 
(3)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures, which have visible soil erosion adjacent to or under any structural support; 
(4)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures, which have parts that are so attached that they are likely to fall and injure persons or property; 
(5)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures, which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; 
(6)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures having inadequate facilities for egress in the event of a catastrophe, such as windstorm, fire, earthquake or panic because of inadequate stairways, elevators, escalators or fire escapes, such that such defect is likely to cause injury to persons or property in the event of such a catastrophe; 
(7)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety or the general health and welfare of the occupants thereof or the people of the county; 
(8)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures which have become so dilapidated, decayed, damaged, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living such as effective and adequate ventilation, plumbing, sanitation facilities, running water, light or other facilities such that such conditions render the dwellings, buildings, or structure dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, morals, or welfare of either those living therein, those who may live therein, or the people of the county; 
(9)  Those buildings, dwellings or structures which exist in violation of any ordinances of the city such that said building, dwelling or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial business or industrial use due to conditions existing in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such building, dwelling or structure, of the occupants of the neighborhood buildings, dwellings or structures, or of other residents of the county. 
(10)  Other additional standards which may from time to time be adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 2005-003A, § 8, 10-25-05) 
Sec. 2-11-86. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the county in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinance; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2005-003A, § 9, 10-25-05) 
Sec. 2-11-87. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three (3) business days of filing the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2005-003A, § 10, 10-25-05) 
Sec. 2-11-88. - Notice of lis pendens; costs; creation of lien; appeals. 
(a)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Floyd County at the time of filing the complaint in the Floyd County Magistrate Court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(b)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner or county revenue officer, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(c)  The lien provided for in this code section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Floyd County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (c) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Floyd County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(d)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this chapter, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this Code section shall transmit to the county tax commissioner or county revenue officer a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within ninety (90) days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the appropriate county tax commissioner or county revenue officer, who is responsible or whose duties include the collection of county taxes, to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically [O.C.G.A.] Chapter 4 of Title 48; provided, however, that the limitation of [O.C.G.A.] Code Section 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. A county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce county liens imposed pursuant to this chapter in accordance with [O.C.G.A.] Code Section 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner or county revenue officer shall remit the amount collected to Floyd County, Georgia. 
(e)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this Code section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner or county revenue officer of the final determination of costs in accordance with this Code section. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this chapter. 
(f)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this Code section shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this Code section together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority, county tax commissioner, or county revenue officer in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(g)  The county may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(h)  Any person affected by an order requiring the abatement of a nuisance, including the closure, repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure issued by the Floyd County Magistrate Court may petition the Superior Court of Floyd County by direct appeal under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. 2005-003A, § 11, 10-25-05; Ord. No. 2008-003A, § I, 5-27-08) 
Sec. 2-11-89. - Emergency closing of unfit dwellings, buildings and other structures. 
In addition to having a dwelling, building, or structure closed pursuant to an order under Code section 2-11-84, a public officer may bring an immediate, emergency action ordering the closing of a dwelling, building, or structure in urgent cases where such property is found to be unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses. Such emergency petition may be brought prior to issuing a complaint for the abatement of a nuisance under this article. 
A petition requesting an emergency closing may be brought under the following conditions: 
(a)  After inspection of a dwelling, building, or structure, a public officer may proceed with filing an emergency petition to close the property upon finding that the dwelling, building, or structure constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of those persons visiting, working or residing within such dwelling, building, or structure, and that imminent harm to the occupants thereof has occurred or is likely to result from the continued use of such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(b)  The public officer shall prepare a petition which shall identify subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and known residents or users of the subject property; identify the exact nature of danger and all applicable codes relevant to such danger. The complaint shall also contain a statement requesting the closure of the dwelling, building, or structure. 
(c)  A hearing shall be scheduled by the magistrate court as soon as practicable, given the nature of the danger and the likelihood of injury alleged in the complaint. 
(d)  The owner of the property and any person in possession of said property and premises shall be served personally with a copy of the complaint whenever possible. The public officer, any officer of the Floyd County Police Department, and any person authorized by the State of Georgia as a process server may attempt to make such personal service. Failure to perfect personal service shall not be cause to dismiss the complaint or postpone the hearing. Where personal service is not obtained on all of the above parties, a copy of the complaint shall be posted on the property on the date the complaint is filed. In addition, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, and by first-class mail, to the residents and owner of the property. In the case of single-family dwellings, service on one (1) adult (persons eighteen (18) years of age and over) resident of the property shall be sufficient to obtain personal service. In the case of multi-family dwellings, service must be attempted for each residential unit. 
(e)  If after such notice and hearing, the magistrate court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use, is not in compliance with applicable codes, and constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety and welfare of those persons working or residing within such dwelling, building, or structure, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and residents an order to close such dwelling, building, or structure. The court may place such conditions as are reasonable on the opening of such property, including the repair of the dwelling, building, or structure. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases where the conditions of a dwelling, building, or structure are so dangerous that a delay in closing such dwelling, building, or structure would/could cause a substantial likelihood of immediate harm or injury to those persons visiting, working or residing therein, the chief building official, Floyd County Police Chief or his designee or the county manager may issue an order temporarily closing the property pending a hearing in magistrate court. In that event, the public officer shall proceed with filing a petition and scheduling a hearing using the provisions set forth under this Code section. Any hearing held under this paragraph (f) shall be scheduled no later than seventy-two (72) hours after the temporary closing of the property. 
(g)  All orders by the magistrate court to close the property and all temporary orders by the chief building official, Floyd County Chief of Police or his designee or the county manager to temporarily close a property shall be binding on all persons, and failure to abide by such orders shall be a violation of this Code and is enforceable by the Floyd County Police Department or any authorized law enforcement agency. The chief building official, Floyd County Police Chief or his designee or the county manager may, in his discretion, allow persons to temporarily enter onto a closed dwelling, building, or structure for the purpose of removing personal property or to secure the dwelling, building, or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2008-003A, § I, 5-27-08) 
Secs. 2-11-90—2-11-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TIMBER HARVESTING[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted May 9, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as art. VIII §§ 8-11-1—8-11-9. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. VIII §§ 2-11-111—2-11-119. 

Sec. 2-11-111. - Purpose. 
The intent of the Floyd County Board of Commissioners in enacting this article is to enable the county to promote the safety of citizens and to maintain all county roads and rights-of-way in a proper and safe operating condition and to provide a permit process concerning timber harvesting in Floyd County. The ordinance codified in this article is meant to be in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24 of the State of Georgia Code of Ordinances. If any portion of the ordinance is in derogation of the above code section, the state law will prevail. 
(Ord. of 5-9-17(2)) 
Sec. 2-11-112. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County road means any county owned or maintained highway, road, street, avenue, drive, detour or other way open to the public and intended or used for the passage of motor vehicles. 
Operations means those activities contemplated by this article, including the loading or transporting of raw materials such as stone, timber, oil and fill dirt. 
Right-of-way means any area occupied by a roadway and the areas and facilities immediately adjacent to a roadway to include the shoulder, front slope, ditch, drain, back slope and any areas beyond such that have been acquired and/or accepted by the county for the purpose of maintaining such areas and facilities. 
Timber harvester means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or private organization of any character and the officer's agents and employees thereof carrying out the activities contemplated by this article. 
(Ord. of 5-9-17(2)) 
Sec. 2-11-113. - Notice. 
(a)  All persons or firms, commercially harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of Floyd County for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant located inside or outside this state shall provide notice of such harvesting operations to the Floyd County Engineering Department prior to harvesting any such timber. Note: Timber operations occurring on lots five (5) acres or less and being done primarily for building construction or lot maintenance may be exempted from these requirements upon the inspection and approval of the engineering department. 
(b)  Prior written notice shall be required of any person or firm commercially harvesting such timber for each separate tract to be harvested thereby; shall be on such form (supplied by Floyd County) as prescribed by rule or regulation of the director of the state forestry and shall consist of: 
(1)  A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
(2)  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A § 48-57.5 and/or O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24; 
(3)  The name, address and daytime telephone number of the timber seller, if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale, or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)  The name, business address, business telephone number and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm commercially harvesting such timber. 
(c)  Notice must be submitted in person at 12 E 4 th Avenue, Suite 100, Rome, GA 30161. 
(d)  Notice shall be effective for such harvesting, operation on such tract within such unincorporated area of the county upon receipt of the same by the board of commissioners or its designated agent, and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the board of commissioners or its designated agent within three business days after such change. 
(e)  The Floyd County Engineering Department, after receiving the required written notice, irrevocable letter of credit as specified later in this article and any other required information required by this article, will issue a timber harvest permit which must be posted at each entrance in a location which is easily visible from the adjacent county road. 
(Ord. of 5-9-17(2)) 
Sec. 2-11-114. - Haul route. 
Any person or firm commercially harvesting timber within the unincorporated areas of Floyd County shall provide to the Floyd County Engineering Department proposed haul routes prior to harvesting any timber. The engineering department shall review and approve all haul routes as proposed or with changes specified by the department. Timber harvesters shall be required to follow the approved haul routes specified and approved by the department. 
(Ord. of 5-9-17(2)) 
Sec. 2-11-115. - Public right-of-way nuisance or hazard. 
(a)  No person or firm commercially harvesting timber within the unincorporated areas of Floyd County shall allow dirt, mud or other debris resulting from timber operations to accumulate upon the right-of-way of any public road to such an extent that it becomes a nuisance or a hazard to persons traveling upon said roads or creates an unsightly condition upon the public right-of-way. 
(b)  No person or firm commercially harvesting timber within the unincorporated areas of Floyd County shall allow dirt, mud or other debris resulting from timber operations to accumulate in the ditches and drainage areas on public rights-of-way to such an extent that the usual flow of water or runoff is stopped, disturbed, changed or interrupted. 
(c)  No person or firm commercially harvesting timber within the unincorporated areas of Floyd County shall create any other type of public nuisance or hazard within the rights-of-way of the county. 
(d)  No person or firm commercially harvesting timber within the unincorporated areas of Floyd County shall park or leave unattended a truck or other motor vehicle or trailer upon any county maintained right-of-way for any period of time. 
(e)  All persons or firms commercially engaging in timber harvesting operations within the unincorporated areas of Floyd County shall implement and maintain at all times soil erosion and sedimentation control best management practices, as prescribed by the Georgia Forestry Commission, US EPA and the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission sufficient to prevent dirt, mud and other debris from accumulating in the county drainage ditches and on the county roads upon which the timber harvester is ingressing and egressing. 
(Ord. of 5-9-17(2)) 
Sec. 2-11-116. - Roadway signage. 
No person or firm commercially harvesting timber within the unincorporated areas of Floyd County shall commence timber operations until he has first posted or caused to be posted along the public road onto which the timber harvester will enter from his timber operations at least the following signs: One (1) sign in each direction located five hundred (500) feet from the entrance which states "Slow Trucks Entering Highway"; one (1) sign in each direction located one thousand (1,000) feet from the entrance stating "Warning: Logging Operation Ahead". Each such sign shall be thirty-six (36) inches by thirty-six (36) inches, orange in color and posted at least three (3) feet from the surface of the road. 
(Ord. of 5-9-17(2)) 
Sec. 2-11-117. - Irrevocable letter of credit. 
Surety in the form of an irrevocable letter of credit, in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be provided to the Floyd County Engineering Department by all timber harvesters prior to commencing timber harvesting operations within the unincorporated areas of Floyd County. Irrevocable letters of credit shall be entitled "Floyd County Right-of-Way Maintenance Associated with Timber Harvesting and Hauling Activities" with a beginning date of the date operations are to begin. The beneficiary shall be "Floyd County Georgia, P.O. Box 946, Rome, GA 30162-0946". Such letters of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which they are delivered and must be renewed annually for as long as timber harvesting operations continue. 
(Ord. of 5-9-17(2)) 
Sec. 2-11-118. - Violations. 
A violation of any requirement of this article shall be punishable by a minimum fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), per violation. Each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute an additional, separate and distinct violation. Violations shall be enforced by Floyd County Magistrate Court. 
(Ord. of 5-9-17(2)) 
Sec. 2-11-119. - Fees. 
Fees shall be set as outlined in Floyd County's Fee Schedule list and any amendments thereto. 
(Ord. of 5-9-17(2)) 
Secs. 2-11-120—2-11-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PAUPER AND/OR INDIGENT BURIALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Oct. 10, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as art. IX § 9-11-1. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as art. IX § 2-11-141. 

Sec. 2-11-141. - Pauper and/or indigent burials. 
(a)  The intent of the Floyd County Board of Commissioners in enacting this article is to more clearly define and/or delineate the county's function in reference to pauper and/or indigent burials. The ordinance from which this article derives is governed by O.C.G.A. § 36-12-5 of the State of Georgia Code of Ordinances. If any portion of the ordinance is in derogation of the above code section, the state law will prevail. 
(b)  Floyd County and/or the Floyd County Board of Commissioners is responsible under O.C.G.A. § 36-12-5 in providing an indigent decedent either a decent interment and/or cremation at the discretion of the county governing authority. 
(c)  Upon the death of an indigent and/or whose family is also unable to provide and pay for a proper burial, Floyd County shall be responsible to provide that indigent with either a cremation or a proper burial at the election of the county governing authority. 
(d)  If an individual dies and it is determined by the coroner that said individual is, in fact, indigent, Floyd County shall be immediately notified and shall make every effort to contact the family and/or any relatives for the indigent deceased. 
(e)  If no relatives and/or next of kin can be contacted, the Floyd County governing authority shall run an ad in the legal ad section of the legal organ of the county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks. Said ad shall notify any family and/or relatives that they should notify the Clerk of the Floyd County Board of Commissioners at their earliest possible convenience if they have any objection to the county making a discretionary determination of whether to give the indigent individual a decent burial or a cremation. If within seven (7) days after the two (2) ads have run as outlined above there is no contact from any family member and/or relative, then Floyd County will notify the coroner that the indigent individual is to be either cremated or given a proper burial at the election of the county governing authority as represented by the county manager. 
(f)  The county coroner shall, at his election, assign the elected burial technique as determined by the county governing authority in whatever order he/she deems appropriate for the actual burial and/or cremation. 
(Ord. 10-10-17) 
Secs. 2-11-142—2-11-165. - Reserved. 
Chapter 2-12 - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Malt beverage license, § 2-4-40 et seq.; regulation of wrecker services, § 2-18-20 et seq.; hotel-motel excise tax, § 2-9-70; solid waste hauler's license, § 2-7-59 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-12-1—2-12-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 2-12-20. - Levy of tax. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for each year, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the incorporated and unincorporated area of the county, at a rate of twenty-five-hundredths (0.25) percent of the gross receipts of said depository financial institutions. "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts, as defined in O.C.G.A. 48-6-93. "Depository financial institutions" shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2041(a); Amend. No. 2003-003A, § 1, 2-11-03) 
Sec. 2-12-21. - Minimum tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 2-12-20 shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Code 1979, § 3-2041(b)) 
Sec. 2-12-22. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1, of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Said return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of revenue, based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this article, based upon the information provided in said return. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2041(c)) 
Sec. 2-12-23. - Due date of tax. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due not later than thirty (30) days after filing of the return prescribed by section 2-12-22, unless extended by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 3-2041(d)) 
Secs. 2-12-24—2-12-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

Sec. 2-12-31. - Rationale and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, moral, and general welfare of the citizens of the county, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the county. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the board of commissioners, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C., 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); and Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 331 F.3d 1196 (11th Cir. 2003); Artistic Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Warner Robins, 223 F.3d 1306 (11th Cir. 2000); Williams v. Pryor, 240 F.3d 944 (11th Cir. 2001); Williams v. A.G. of Alabama, 378 F.3d 1232 (11th Cir. 2004); Gary v. City of Warner Robins, 311 F.3d 1334 (11th Cir. 2002); Ward v. County of Orange, 217 F.3d 1350 (11th Cir. 2000); Boss Capital, Inc. v. City of Casselberry, 187 F.3d 1251 (11th Cir. 1999); David Vincent, Inc. v. Broward County, 200 F.3d 1325 (11th Cir. 2000); Sammy's of Mobile, Ltd. v. City of Mobile, 140 F.3d 993 (11th Cir. 1998); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville, 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); This That And The Other Gift and Tobacco, Inc. v. Cobb County, 285 F.3d 1319 (11th Cir. 2002); DLS, Inc. v. City of Chattanooga, 107 F.3d 403 (6th Cir. 1997); Grand Faloon Tavern, Inc. v. Wicker, 670 F.2d 943 (11th Cir. 1982); International Food & Beverage Systems v. Ft. Lauderdale, 794 F.2d 1520 (11th Cir. 1986); Gammoh v. City of La Habra, 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane, 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset, 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); and Fairfax MK, Inc. v. City of Clarkston, 274 Ga. 520 (2001); Morrison v. State, 272 Ga. 129 (2000); Sewell v. Georgia, 233 S.E.2d 187 (Ga. 1977), dismissed for want of a substantial federal question, 435 U.S. 982 (1978) (sexual devices); Flippen Alliance for Community Empowerment, Inc. v. Brannan, 601 S.E.2d 106 (Ga. Ct. App. 2004); Oasis Goodtime Emporium I, Inc. v. DeKalb County, 272 Ga. 887 (2000); Chamblee Visuals, LLC v. City of Chamblee, 270 Ga. 33 (1998); World Famous Dudley's Food & Spirits, Inc. v. City of College Park, 265 Ga. 618 (1995); Airport Bookstore, Inc. v. Jackson, 242 Ga. 214 (1978); and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Houston, Texas - 1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Minneapolis, Minnesota - 1980; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Spokane, Washington - 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Littleton, Colorado - 2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the board of commissioners finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. 
(2)  Sexually oriented businesses should be separated from sensitive land uses to minimize the impact of their secondary effects upon such uses, and should be separated from other sexually oriented businesses, to minimize the secondary effects associated with such uses and to prevent an unnecessary concentration of sexually oriented businesses in one area. 
(3)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the county has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the county's rationale for this article, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and nonsexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the county's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the county. The county finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this article are reasonably believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 1, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-32. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
A "principal business activity" exists where the commercial establishment: 
(1)  Has a substantial portion of its displayed merchandise which consists of said items, or 
(2)  Has a substantial portion of the wholesale value of its displayed merchandise which consists of said items, or 
(3)  Has a substantial portion of the retail value of its displayed merchandise which consists of said items, or 
(4)  Derives a substantial portion of its revenues from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration of said items, or 
(5)  Maintains a substantial section of its interior business space for the sale or rental or said items; or 
(6)  Maintains an "adult arcade," which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting "specified sexual activities" or specified "anatomical areas." 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or other commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown to more than five persons for any form of consideration. 
Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this article, no business shall be classified as a sexually oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated NC-17 or R by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
Clerk means the Floyd County Clerk. 
County means Floyd County, Georgia. 
Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
Establish or establishment shall mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
Hearing officer means an attorney, not otherwise employed by the county, who is licensed to practice law in Georgia, and retained to serve as an independent tribunal to conduct hearings under this article. 
Influential interest means any of the following: (1) the actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business, (2) ownership of a financial interest of thirty (30) percent or more of a business or of any class of voting securities of a business, or (3) holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
Licensee shall mean a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. In the case of an "employee," it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually oriented business employee license has been issued. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
Operate or cause to operate shall mean to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. "Operator" means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person shall mean individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a sexually oriented business license. 
Regularly means and refers to the consistent and repeated doing of the act so described. 
Semi-nude or state of semi-nudity means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
Semi-nude model studio means a place where persons regularly appear in a state of semi-nudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. 
This definition does not apply to any place where persons appearing in a state of semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class. 
Sexual device means any three (3) dimensional object designed and marketed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices such as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, nor shall this definition be construed to include commercial establishments which do not restrict access to their premises by reason of age. 
Sexual encounter center shall mean a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of consideration, physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex when one (1) or more of the persons is semi-nude. 
Sexually oriented business means an "adult bookstore or adult video store," an "adult cabaret," an "adult motion picture theater," a "semi-nude model studio," a "sexual device shop," or a "sexual encounter center." 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region; buttock; and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified criminal activity means: 
(1)  Any of the following specified offenses for which less than five (5) years elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
a.  Rape, child molestation, sexual assault, sexual battery, aggravated sexual assault, aggravated sexual battery, or public indecency; 
b.  Prostitution, keeping a place of prostitution, pimping, or pandering; 
c.  Obscenity, disseminating or displaying matter harmful to a minor, or use of child in sexual performance; 
d.  Any offense related to any sexually-oriented business, including controlled substance offenses, tax violations, racketeering, crimes involving sex, crimes involving prostitution, or crimes involving obscenity; or 
(2)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one (1) of the foregoing offenses. 
Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(2)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in (1) above. 
Substantial means at least thirty-five (35) percent of the item(s) so modified. 
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business shall mean any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
Viewing room shall mean the room, booth, or area where a patron of a sexually oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 2, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-33. - Classification. 
The classifications for sexually oriented businesses shall be as follows: 
(1)  Adult bookstore or adult video store; 
(2)  Adult cabaret; 
(3)  Adult motion picture theater; 
(4)  Semi-nude model studio; 
(5)  Sexual device shop; 
(6)  Sexual encounter center. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 3, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-34. - License required. 
(a)  Business license. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the county without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  Employee license. It shall be unlawful for any person to be an "employee," as defined in this article, of a sexually oriented business in the county without a valid sexually oriented business employee license, except that a person who is a licensee under a valid sexually oriented business license shall not be required to also obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. 
(c)  Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license shall file in person at the office of the clerk a completed application made on a form provided by the clerk. A sexually oriented business may designate an individual with an influential interest in the business to file its application for a sexually oriented business license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be signed as required by subsection (d) herein and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in this subsection (c), accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five (5) years. 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(4)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business. 
(5)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(6)  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
(7)  A statement of whether any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking. 
(8)  An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration requirements of this article shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable regulations. 
The information provided pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the clerk within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  Signature. A person who seeks a sexually oriented business employee license under this section shall sign the application for a license. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license under this section is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the sexually oriented business or in a legal entity that controls the sexually oriented business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this article and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the office of the clerk on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by court order. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 4, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-35. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Business license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the clerk shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the county to deny or grant an annual license. The temporary license shall not be construed to provide the applicant with any substantive right, entitlement, or claim of estoppel beyond the ability to operate until the county makes a final decision to deny or grant an annual license. Within twenty (20) days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business license application, the clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The clerk shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  The sexually oriented business, as defined herein, is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this article or is not in compliance with locational requirements of this article or the locational requirements of any other part of the Floyd County Code. 
(5)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(6)  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(b)  Employee license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the clerk shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the applicant seeks licensure to work in a licensed sexually oriented business and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business employee license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the county to deny or grant an annual license. Within twenty (20) days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business employee license application, the clerk shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The clerk shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to provide information as required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  Any sexually oriented business in which the applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(5)  The applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(c)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. A sexually oriented business employee shall keep the employee's license on his or her person or on the premises where the licensee is then working or performing. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 5, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-36. - Fees. 
The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business licenses and sexually oriented business employee licenses shall be as follows: one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial fee for a sexually oriented business license and fifty dollars ($50.00) for annual renewal; fifty dollars ($50.00) for the initial sexually oriented business employee license and twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for annual renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 6, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-37. - Inspection. 
Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall permit agents of the Floyd County Police Department, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this article, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the county to authorize only reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 7, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-38. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one (1) calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this article. 
(b)  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least ninety (90) days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made less than ninety (90) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current license will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 8, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-39. - Suspension. 
(a)  The clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly violated this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article. 
(b)  The clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business employee license if the employee has knowingly violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 9, 5-23-06) 
Sect 2-12-40. - Revocation. 
(a)  The clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if the licensee knowingly violates this article or has knowingly allowed an employee to violate this article and a suspension of the licensee's license has become effective within the previous twelve-month-period. 
(b)  The clerk shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license, as applicable, if: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the sexually oriented business license or the sexually oriented business employee license. 
(2)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(4)  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; or 
(5)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this article, the county revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee license for one (1) year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 10, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-41. - Hearing; denial, revocation, and suspension; appeal. 
(a)  When the clerk issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the clerk shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the clerk for the respondent. The notice shall specify a date, not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days after the date the notice is issued, on which the hearing officer shall conduct a hearing on the clerk's written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license. 
At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the clerk's witnesses. The clerk shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two (2) days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five (5) days after the hearing. 
If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall not become effective until the thirtieth day after it is rendered, and the decision shall include a statement advising the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. If the hearing officer finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the clerk to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the clerk shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(b)  If any court action challenging the decision of the hearing officer is initiated, the county shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within ten (10) days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The county shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any sexually oriented business that is operating as a sexually oriented business, or any sexually oriented business employee that is employed as a sexually oriented business employee, on the date on which the completed business or employee application, as applicable, is filed with the clerk: Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the county's final administrative denial, suspension, or revocation decision, the clerk shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the sexually oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the county's final administrative decision. The provisional license shall not be construed to provide the applicant with any substantive right, entitlement, or claim of estoppel beyond the ability to operate until the court enters judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the county's final administrative decision. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 11, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-42. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 12, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-43. - Hours of operation. 
No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 13, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-44. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video cassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The clerk may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) foot candles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet is limited to one (1) person. 
b.  That sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
e.  That violations of these regulations are unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in (5)a though e above. 
(7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. If the premises has two (2) or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the operator's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 14, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-45. - Loitering, exterior lighting, visibility, and monitoring requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to: (a) post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on such property; (b) designate one (1) or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once every ninety (90) minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors; and (c) provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(c)  No sexually oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or other barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment from being visible from a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 15, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-46. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A person who knowingly violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by fines not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such find and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished as such. 
(b)  The county's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this article to prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings, including injunction, shall be brought in the name of the county, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this article, or any of the laws in force in the county or to exempt anyone violating this Code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 16, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-47. - Applicability of ordinance to existing businesses. 
All existing sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees are hereby granted a de facto temporary license to continue operation or employment for a period of ninety (90) days following the effective date of this article. By the end of said ninety (90) days, all sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees must conform to and abide by the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 17, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-48. - Prohibited conduct. 
It is unlawful for a sexually oriented business licensee to knowingly violate the following regulations or to knowingly allow an employee or any other person to violate the following regulations. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this article for a patron, employee, or any other person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public nudity is expressive in nature. 
(2)  It shall be a violation of this article for a person to knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, remains at least six (6) feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least eighteen (18) inches from the floor in a room of at least one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(3)  It shall be a violation of this article for any employee who regularly appears semi-nude in a sexually oriented business to knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(4)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to sell, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(5)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person to knowingly allow a person under the age of eighteen (18) years on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
A sign in a form to be prescribed by the clerk, and summarizing the provisions of subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5), shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 18, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-49. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
This article does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this article, an act by an employee that constitutes grounds for suspension or revocation of that employee's license shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this article, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 19, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-50. - Failure of county to meet deadline not to risk applicant/licensee rights. 
In the event that a county official is required to act or to do a thing pursuant to this article within a prescribed time, and fails to act or to do such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required of the county official under this article, and not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by the county of an applicant or licensee's application for sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee's license (including a renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the county's action has passed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 20, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-51. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to establish, operate, or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business in Floyd County, unless said sexually oriented business is at least: 
(1)  One thousand (1,000) feet from any parcel occupied by another sexually oriented business or by a business licensed by the State of Georgia to sell alcohol at the premises; and 
(2)  One thousand (1,000) feet from any parcel occupied by a church, house of worship, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, or from any parcel zoned S-R (Suburban Residential), LT-R (Low Density Traditional Residential), HT-R (High Density Traditional Residential), D-R (Duplex Residential), M-R (Multi-family Residential), and A-R (Agricultural-Residential). 
(b)  Measurement. For the purpose of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line in all directions without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest part of any structure on the parcel containing the sexually oriented business, including signs and roof overhangs that is used in conjunction with the sexually oriented business, to the closest point on a property boundary or right-of-way associated with any of the land use(s) or zoning districts identified in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Floyd County ordinances or the Unified Land Development Code of Floyd County and the City of Rome, a sexually oriented business that does not conform to this section but which was legally established and lawfully operating under local and state law prior to the effective date of this article may continue to operate for two (2) years following that date in order to make a reasonable recoupment of its investment in the real property at the current location. At the conclusion of said two (2) years, the use will no longer be recognized as a lawful nonconforming use, and shall be terminated unless an extension of time has been granted, upon a showing of financial hardship, pursuant to the procedure set forth in the following subsection (d). An application for an extension based upon financial hardship ("hardship exception") shall be filed at least sixty (60) days, and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days, before the conclusion of the initial two-year-period. 
(d)  Procedure for seeking hardship extension. An application for a hardship extension shall be filed in writing with the clerk and shall state the grounds for requesting an extension of time. Within ten (10) days after receiving the application, the clerk shall schedule a public hearing on the application before the hearing officer, which public hearing shall be conducted within thirty (30) days after the clerk's receipt of the application. Notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be mailed to the applicant, shall be published at least ten (10) days before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation published within the county, and shall contain the particular location for which the hardship extension is requested. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to offer testimony, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; may be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision within ten (10) days after the public hearing on the application for a hardship extension. An extension under the provisions of this section shall be for a reasonable period of time commensurate with the investment involved, and shall be approved only if the hearing officer makes all of the following findings or such other findings as are required by law. 
(1)  The applicant has made a substantial investment, including but not limited to lease obligations incurred in an arms-length transaction, in the property or structure on or in which the nonconforming use is conducted; such property or structure cannot be readily converted to another, conforming use; and such investment was made prior to the effective date of this article; and 
(2)  The applicant will be unable to recoup said investment as of the date established for termination of the use; and 
(3)  The applicant has made good faith efforts to recoup the investment and to relocate the use to a location in conformance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 21, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-52. - Severability. 
This article and each section and provision of said ordinance hereunder, are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said ordinance, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this article be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 22, 5-23-06) 
Sec. 2-12-53. - Conflicting code provisions repealed. 
Any provision(s) in the Floyd County Code of Ordinances specifically in conflict with any provision in this article is hereby deemed inoperative and repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-002A, § 23, 5-23-06) 
Secs. 2-12-54—2-12-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNSHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 2-12-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in their article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee. Any person who works in a pawnshop, whether on a part-time or full time basis, regardless of whether renumeration is received or not. 
Pawnbroker. Any person who works in a pawnshop in the capacity of manager or owner or both. 
Pawnshop. Any business that takes or receives by way of pledge, pan or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise or personal property as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawn or pledge. A bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement redeemable upon certain terms and with the implied power of sale or default. 
(Ord. No. 2008-004A, § 1, 5-27-08) 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.) 
Sec. 2-12-82. - Enforcement. 
The Floyd County Police Department shall see that the provisions of this article are observed and enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2008-004A, § 2, 5-27-08) 
Sec. 2-12-83. - Annual registration. 
Before operating a pawnshop or becoming an employee of a pawnshop, any person must first register with the Floyd County Police Department and provide the following information: 
(1)  The registration shall be renewed on an annual basis; 
(2)  The person shall state the address of the pawnshop; and 
(3)  The person shall provide the full name, address, phone number, date of birth and Social Security number of any employee or pawnbroker. 
(Ord. No. 2008-004A, § 3, 5-27-08) 
Sec. 2-12-84. - Record of transactions. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent electronic record of its pawn transactions in which an accurate description of all property pledged, traded, or sold to the pawnshop can be transmitted to the Floyd County Police Department via an electronic automated reporting system. Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop and shall be made at the time of each transaction, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase, pawn or sale of the property; 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the customer making the pledge, trade or sale; 
(3)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card which contains a photograph of the customer; 
(4)  A description of the pledged or purchased property by serial, model, or other number, if available, and by any identifying marks (e.g. brand name, color, style, etc.); 
(5)  The number of the receipt or pawn transaction issued for the property pawned or bought; 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned; 
(7)  The maturity date of the transaction, if pawned; 
(8)  A photograph of the customer and the item pawned or bought which will be taken using the electronic automated reporting system at the time of the transaction; and 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
(b)  Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system or may elect to upload electronically via the internet a batch file or all transactions for each business day to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system immediately at the conclusion of each business day. 
(c)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, pawnshops and pawnbrokers will be required to make records of transactions in paper form. Such paper forms required must include all information as enumerated in subsection (a) of this Code section. Pawnbrokers shall maintain a three-day supply of these paper forms. 
(d)  Any duly authorized law enforcement officer may, during the ordinary hours of business or any other reasonable time, inspect any pawnbroker's electronic records at the pawnbroker's place of business to ensure compliance with this article. 
(e)  The chief of police or his designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system. There will be a fee assessed to the pawnshop for each reported transaction. This fee will be invoiced to the pawnshop brokers and collected by the chief of police or his designee, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Ord. No. 2008-004A, § 4, 5-27-08) 
Sec. 2-12-85. - Waiting period for disposal of articles. 
Any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop who makes a loan on pledged goods, shall hold said pledged goods on the condition that the seller may repurchase said goods, shall hold said goods for at least thirty (30) days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Non-pledged goods bought under this section shall be held for at least seven (7) calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2008-004A, § 5, 5-27-08) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. 44-12-138. 
Sec. 2-12-86. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to receive goods in pawn, trade, purchase or sale from a person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 2008-004A, § 6, 5-27-08) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. 44-12-137. 
Sec. 2-12-87. - Lost or stolen items. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating or employed by a pawnbroker, to report to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent any article or goods sold or pawned to him if he shall have reason to believe that the article or goods were lost or stolen when presented by the seller or customer. 
(b)  With respect to any items which would normally have a serial number or other means of identification, if any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop becomes aware that such items have had the identification removed such fact shall be immediately reported to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent. 
(c)  If it is determined that an item bought, sold, traded or pawned by a seller or customer to the pawnbroker or his employee is the subject of any reported theft, then the surrender of said item to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent shall be done upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 2008-004A, § 7, 5-27-08) 
Sec. 2-12-88. - Violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to: 
(1)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by the terms of this article; or 
(2)  Violate any criminal law of this state while acting in the course of business as a pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker. 
(c)  Persons who violate this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 2008-004A, § 8, 5-27-08) 
State Law reference— O.C.G.A. 44-12-137. 
Chapter 2-13 - PARKS AND RECREATION 

Sec. 2-13-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
Alcoholic beverages: All intoxicating beverages, malt beverages, wine or any other beverages containing any alcohol whatsoever. 
Authority: The Rome-Floyd County Parks and Recreation Authority. 
Building: Any structure attached to the ground which as a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind. The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
City: The City of Rome, Georgia. 
County: Floyd County, Georgia. 
Destination park: An outdoor recreational area owned by the county providing opportunities for fishing, camping, hiking, boating, picnicking and nature study, but excluding any organized athletic leagues or similar youth-oriented activities. 
Director: The appointed person selected by the city and county managers as the executive of the authority. 
Firearm: Any armament that is designed to or may readily be converted to expel a projectile by the action of an explosive or the frame or receiver of any such armament, any firearm muffler or firearm silencer, or any disruptive device as defined in 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3). 
Litter: All garbage, refuse, paper, rubbish, debris, trash and all other waste material, whether natural or artificial. 
Recreation facilities: All recreation areas and parks, including land, buildings, lakes, swimming pools, and all other property and buildings owned, leased or managed by the county or the authority or their designated agents or departments. 
Vehicle: Any motor-driven equipment, automobile, truck, motorcycle, bicycle or sled. 
Weapon: Any hatchet, ax, bb-gun, air gun, slingshot, bow, or other similar device. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3004; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2; Ord. of 7-23-85; Ord. No. 2007-006A, §§ I—II, 10-9-07; Ord. No. 2015-002A, § I, 4-28-15) 
Sec. 2-13-2. - Joint city-county recreation authority. 
(a)  The Rome-Floyd County Parks and Recreation Authority is hereby created and established by and between the city and the county, as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. The authority shall be organized and empowered as set out in this section. The authority shall consist of seven (7) appointed voting members. Others may serve on the authority as ex-officio, non-voting members. The appointed voting members' terms shall begin July 1, 2015. Except for the initial appointees, all terms will be for five (5) years. 
(1)  The city shall appoint three (3) voting members and the county shall appoint four (4) voting members. The Cave Spring City Council, the Rome City Schools and Floyd County Schools shall each have one (1) appointment to serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member. Each governmental entity may use its own selection and appointing methodology. In addition to the Floyd County and Rome City Managers, the county and the city may each appoint one (1) of their respective commissioners to each serve as an ex-officio non-voting member to the authority board. 
(2)  In order that the terms of the members shall be staggered, the initial appointment by the city shall be one (1) person for a five-year term, one (1) person for a four-year term and one (1) person for two-year term; the initial appointment by the county shall be two (2) persons for three-year terms, one (1) person for a five-year term, and one (1) person for one-year term. The members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Members of the authority may serve up to two (2) consecutive five-year terms. 
(3)  All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(4)  Members of the authority may be involuntarily removed by the appointing body which originally appointed such member only for failure to abide by meeting attendance requirements, malfeasance in office, and indictment for a crime involving moral turpitude or unanimous recommendation of the other members of the authority. 
(5)  Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing body whose appointee vacates the position. 
(6)  The absence of any member for three (3) consecutive regular meetings without leave except when such absence is made necessary by sickness or other similar causes will declare vacant the seat of such member, in which the vacancy thus created shall be filled by the appropriate appointing governing body. 
(7)  All authority members are expected to attend an orientation session upon joining the authority. Additionally, it is expected that all members be present for at least seventy-five (75) percent of regularly scheduled meetings each calendar year. 
(b)  The authority shall elect its chairperson and vice chairman from among its appointed voting members, provided one (1) shall be a county appointee and the other a city appointee. The terms of the chairperson and such other officers shall be one (1) year, or until their successors are duly elected and qualified. No elected official or city and/or county manager may serve as chairperson. 
(1)  In the event of the resignation of any officer, the members shall elect a successor in accordance with subsection (b) above. The department shall designate staff members to serve in the capacity of secretary. The secretary is responsible for distributing meeting agendas, minutes, and other relevant information to authority members. The parks and recreation director is the primary point of contact in the department for the authority officers and members. 
(2)  The authority shall make its own rules of procedure, consistent with the law of the state and with the authority granted it by this article, the resolution of the county and the agreement between the city and the county referred to in this article. Any amendments or modifications to this article must be approved by the city and the county. 
(3)  The chairperson of the authority shall preside at all meetings of the authority and shall perform such other duties as may be determined by the authority. The vice chairperson shall assume the duties of the chairperson in his or her absence. 
(4)  The director of parks and recreation is responsible for the general administration of the department and for carrying out the policies recommended by the authority when approved by the appropriate governing body. In conjunction with the county and city managers, the parks and recreation director shall be the agent of the Rome Floyd Parks and Recreation Authority and to that end shall supervise the operation of all the department's activities. The director shall submit a detailed report of activities and administration of the programs of the parks and recreation department to the city and county managers and to the authority at each regular meeting for the month prior to the meeting. 
(5)  The board secretary is responsible for notifying authority members and the public of all meetings. The secretary is responsible for keeping minutes of each meeting and for distributing meeting agendas, minutes, and other relevant information to authority members, department staff, and the public. 
(6)  The authority shall make recommendations affecting recreation policies, programs, finances, developing or closing a park facility and land acquisition related to the department's programs and policies. Such recommendations shall be forwarded to and approved by the appropriate governing body. The authority's recommendations are advisory in nature. The authority shall be responsive to the concerns and needs of the community and shall support the department to ensure that the community's needs are met. The authority shall study, review, and formulate solutions to alleviate problems concerning recreational activities. They shall enlist the cooperation of community, religious, professional, civic, labor and business organizations and other identifiable groups (i.e., YMCA, Boys and Girls Club, among others) within the county in programs and campaigns devoted to the improvement of recreational opportunities. Formal recommendations of the authority shall be communicated with city and county commissions by and through the parks and recreation director. 
(7)  The authority shall work with the director each calendar year to establish an operating budget to be approved by the Floyd County Commission and accompanying capital budgets to be approved by the appropriate governing body. The authority shall annually establish program participation and facility rental fees that seek to meet the overall objectives of the county and the city as well as furthering the overall mission of the authority. Within the annual budget, the authority shall endeavor to establish and manage a comprehensive scholarship program that serves to increase youth participation in all sports. 
(8)  The authority shall periodically report to the governing bodies the condition of the respective lands and capital improvements thereof and shall immediately notify such bodies of any damage thereto or condition requiring repair and make recommendations concerning such condition and/or required repairs. 
(9)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the authority from contracting with the city to perform work in the recreation areas, but performance by the city shall be the subject of separate charges and shall not be considered participation by the city. 
(10)  The authority is empowered to solicit corporate financial assistance and create public foundations and friends groups to further develop parks and recreation services. All such foundations and/or other groups must be fully disclosed to and approved by the city and county before formally established by the authority board. The foundations and/or fundraising groups shall be created and operated as required by Georgia law. 
(11)  Meetings: 
a.  Regular monthly meetings of the Rome-Floyd Parks and Recreation Authority shall be held at a time and place agreed upon by the majority of the membership and shall not conflict with city or county meeting schedules. 
b.  Special meetings may be called by the chairperson or upon written request from a majority of the body with a minimum forty-eight-hour public notice, but such meetings may not conflict with city or county commission meeting schedules. 
c.  A majority (four (4) of the seven (7) voting members) of the members constitute a quorum. 
d.  In case of an expected absence from a meeting, the authority member should notify the secretary and director. 
e.  The process for conducting meetings will adhere to Roberts Rules of Order. The authority chairperson and the director shall endeavor to create a meeting agenda and distribute it in advance to all authority members, at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting. Requests for changes or additions to the agenda should be submitted to the chairperson and/or the director. 
f.  All meetings are open to the public. 
g.  A joint meeting with both governing authorities shall be held no less than once annually. 
(12)  Committees: 
a.  The chairperson may appoint such committees, standing or special, as may be authorized by the authority. 
b.  The chairperson and the director of parks and recreation shall be ex-officio members of all committees and, as such, shall be notified of all meetings. 
c.  An executive committee consisting of the chairperson, vice chairperson, and one (1) other authority member appointed by the members, shall meet with the department director and other staff as needed to manage logistics, responsibilities, and general activities of the authority. 
(c)  The city and county managers shall appoint the parks and recreation director, but the salary thereof shall be within and consistent with the budget established and approved. The duties of the director shall be to plan, organize, direct and control a county wide parks and recreation program, pursuant to the policy established by this agreement and the authority and within the budget submitted to and approved by the governing bodies of the city and county. The director shall prepare and present to the authority a suggested budget showing anticipated revenues and required expenditures. The authority's director is prohibited from serving as a voting member of any citizen foundation or fundraising group, but may serve as staff support and administrative secretary to such groups. 
(d)  The city and county shall, and do, respectively retain title to all their respective lands, and capital improvements connected with, and used in and by, the parks and recreation system, and the authority shall protect and maintain said properties. The recreation buildings and park lands will be owned by the city and county either independently or jointly. Further capital improvements on real property will remain the responsibility of the respective land owner/owners. 
(1)  Since the year 1983 and for all succeeding years, the county shall finance the operating budget, and the city shall not be required to contribute. No matter which governmental entity is responsible for operation or maintenance of a particular facility, in no event shall the rights of the city or the county and their residents be abridged in any manner in the operation of the recreation program. 
(2)  Certain future projects such as CDBG projects may be procured and administered by the city or the county, in consultation with the authority. 
(3)  The authority will seek and administer grants and private assistance for capital projects. Any such capital improvement will inure to the benefit of the owner of that facility. 
(4)  Prior to the city's adding any new recreation facilities or parks which will be operated and maintained by the authority, the city shall consult with the authority and the county regarding the construction of such facility and concurrence must be granted by same in order for the project to be included in the authority's capital improvement plan. The city may add facilities unilaterally so long as the city pays the entire operating and maintenance cost of the unilaterally added facility. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5022; Ord. of 3-28-89, § I; Amend. of 6-23-98, §§ 1, 2; Amend. No. 2004-001A, § 1, 3-23-04; Ord. No. 2015-002A, § I, 4-28-15) 
Sec. 2-13-3. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the authority is to serve as a citizen board to advise the Floyd County Commission and Rome City Commission, the Floyd County and Rome City Managers, and the director of the authority, on various matters pertaining to the operation of park facilities and recreation programs within Rome and Floyd County, to make policy recommendations to Floyd County and the City of Rome, and to carry out duties as may be assigned to them by the respective county and city commissions. This purpose is to assist in the developing, maintaining and operating a comprehensive parks and recreation service system for the city and the county without duplication of services and expense, and with fairness and equity to both political subdivisions. Facilities shall be open to all citizens of the city and of the county. The goal of the authority shall be to assure that operation and maintenance of all facilities, whether titled in the city or county, will continue at a level equal to, or better than, in prior years. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3001; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2; Ord. No. 2015-002A, § I, 4-28-15) 
Sec. 2-13-4. - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply in all parks and recreation areas under the jurisdiction of the county, the authority of the designated agents or departments of either, unless expressly exempted. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3002; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-5. - Enforcement. 
This chapter shall be enforced by any authorized law enforcement officer of the county or by the recreation facility employees. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3028; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-6. - Compliance with rules and regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any rules or regulations relating to the use of the recreation area as established by the authority where such rules and regulations have been approved and adopted. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or attempt to use any of the facilities within a recreation facility except during the hours and in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the authority. 
(Code 1979, §§ 4-3024, 4-3027; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-7. - Littering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit litter on the grounds, streets, sidewalks, fountains, ponds, lakes, swimming pools, streams or other bodies of water in any recreation facility, except within public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the recreation facility. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be removed from the park by the person responsible for its presence and shall be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3005; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-8. - Weapons and firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Bring into, or have in such person's possession in, any recreation facility any weapon; 
(2)  To discharge a firearm in a recreation facility; or 
(3)  To discharge, shoot, use, carry, or employ any weapon or similar device in a recreation facility. 
Official starters at authorized track and field events and law enforcement officers while in the discharge of official duties are excepted from these restrictions. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3006; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2; Ord. No. 2007-066A, § III, 10-9-07) 
Sec. 2-13-9. - Explosives and fireworks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in such person's possession, or set off, any fireworks. Permits may be given for conducting properly supervised fireworks in designated park areas provided such person first obtains a permit from the judge of the probate court and complies with all applicable state laws. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3007; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-10. - Throwing objects. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stone or missile at any person or at any public or private building in a recreation facility. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3008; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-11. - Annoying noise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to whistle, hiss or holler at another person in a boisterous, unbecoming or erring manner or make any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, peace or safety of other persons in a recreation facility. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3009; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-12. - Profanity; disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use profanity or profane language, engage in threatening, abusive, insulting, or indecent language or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace in a recreation facility. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3010; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-13. - Fires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire in a recreation facility except in designated areas which are clearly marked by signs. Any fire shall be continuously under the care and direction of a competent person from the time it is kindled until it is extinguished. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3012; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-14. - Damaging vegetation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut trees, tree limbs, shrubbery, flowers or other vegetation or dig up or damage trees, flowers, shrubbery or other vegetation in a recreation facility. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3013; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-15. - Damaging structures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mark, deface, disfigure, damage, displace or remove any buildings, tables, benches, grills, water lines, signs, markers, equipment or other property whatsoever in a recreation facility. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3014; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-16. - Alcoholic beverages and controlled dangerous substances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring alcoholic beverages, or to drink or use the same at any time, at any recreation facility, except when the entire recreation facility has been contracted for a special event with written approval from the executive director of the authority in compliance with the authority's alcohol use policy and guidelines. Periods of alcohol consumption shall not overlap with regularly scheduled facility hours for the general public. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code section to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of intoxicating beverages at any recreation facility. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring any controlled dangerous substance, or use the same at any time, or be under the influence of any controlled dangerous substance at any recreation facility or destination park. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3015; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2; Ord. of 7-23-85; Ord. of 8-13-85; Ord. No. 2012-003A, § 1, 3-27-12) 
Sec. 2-13-17. - Vehicle use—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle in a recreation facility except upon roadways and paths constructed, designated and maintained for vehicular traffic. It shall also be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in areas designated as "Restricted." Recreation facility employees whose duties require them to drive maintenance vehicles and equipment shall be exempt from the limitations set forth in this section. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3016; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-18. - Same—Bicycles. 
It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of others. The riding of bicycles in highly used public areas is prohibited in a recreation facility. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3017; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-19. - Same—Parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle in a recreation facility except in those areas designated by appropriate signs as vehicle parking areas. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park in a recreation area if the owner of the vehicle is not utilizing the recreation facility. 
(Code 1979, §§ 4-3018, 4-3019; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-20. - Same—Hours restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle in or on a recreation facility or park or attempt to park a vehicle on any of the streets, avenues, or parking areas or at any location within a recreation facility between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily, with the exception of authorized recreation facility personnel. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3023; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-21. - Hours open to public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be within a recreation facility between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily except authorized recreation facility personnel. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3022; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-22. - Commercial activity restricted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any merchandise or operate or attempt to operate a concession or engage in any commercial activity in a recreation facility without written authorization of the board of commissioners or the authority. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3020; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-23. - Picnics. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to hold a picnic in any recreation facility, except in areas set aside or specifically designated as picnic areas. A permit must be secured for any picnic with more than twenty (20) participants. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3021; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-24. - Swimming regulated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person not to leave a swimming area when so directed by a lifeguard on duty or not to cease any activity which would be hazardous to others when so directed by a lifeguard. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to engage in any activity within a swimming area that could cause injury or damage to any person using the swimming facility. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to swim, bathe, or waste in any body of water or portion thereof owned by the county or subject to the supervision of the authority unless designated for such use, during specified hours of the day. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3025; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-25. - Interference with use. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity within a recreation facility that could cause injury to other persons or interfere with the use and enjoyment of the recreation facility by other persons. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3026; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-26. - Ejection from recreation facility of persons causing disturbances or violating law. 
Any person causing a disturbance or engaging in any activity which shall unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of the recreation facility by citizens or who shall violate any ordinance of the county or law of the state shall leave the recreation facility upon notification by any authorized recreation employee or any law enforcement officer, and shall not return to said recreation area for a period of twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3011; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Sec. 2-13-27. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 2-1-8 and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Jurisdiction over violations of this chapter shall be in the magistrate's court. 
(Code 1979, § 4-3029; Ord. of 8-28-84, § 2) 
Chapter 2-14 - PERSONNEL 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-14-1. - Legal defense for officers and employees. 
(a)  The general assembly adopted an act, O.C.G.A. section 45-9-21, wherein the governing body of the county may, as a part of the compensation and terms of employment of members of the governing bodies, supervisors, administrators, employees, or other elected or appointed officers, adopt policies whereby the county will undertake to defend all or specified civil, criminal or quasi-criminal actions brought or maintained against members of the county, supervisors, administrators, employees, or its elected or appointed officers, arising out of the performance of their duties, or in any way connected therewith, whether based upon negligence, violation of contract rights, or violation of civil, constitutional common law, or statutory rights; provided that said governmental entity shall not be authorized to furnish a defense to any person charged with a criminal offense involving theft, embezzlement or other like crime with respect to the property or money of or in which said governmental entity has an interest, which shall be limited to attorney's fees, court costs, deposition costs, witness fees and compensation and other like costs, expenses and fees. 
(b)  In conformity with the act of the general assembly, the board of commissioners, in the name and behalf of the county, does hereby adopt a policy of providing a legal defense, to include attorney's fees, court costs, deposition costs, witness fees and compensation and all other like costs, expenses and fees, for the members of the governing body, supervisors, administrators, employees, or other elected or appointed officers, to defend all civil, criminal or quasi-criminal actions brought or maintained against any member of the governing body, supervisors, administrators, employees, or other elected or appointed officers, arising out of the performance of their duties, or in any way connected therewith, whether based upon negligence, violation of contract rights, or violation of the civil, constitutional, common law, or statutory rights, provided that the county shall not provide a defense for any person charged with a criminal offense, involving theft, embezzlement, or other like crime, with respect to the property, or money of or in which the county has an interest. 
(c)  In the event of a question as to whether a particular action shall be covered hereunder, the board of commissioners shall, after examination of the facts, determine whether the matter is included hereunder and entitled to the benefits of this policy. 
(d)  Because it is a function of county government to provide and administer a system of criminal indigent defense, for purposes of this code section, the Court Administrator of Floyd County Superior Court and members of the Indigent Defense Tripartite Committee of the Rome Judicial Circuit shall be considered as employees of the county with respect to the administration of such services. 
(Code 1979, § 1-1401; Ord. of 2-23-93, § 1) 
Sec. 2-14-2. - Police officers—Chief of police; powers and duties. 
The chief of police, or county police officers under the chief's direction, shall: 
(1)  Execute all lawful orders and directions of the county manager or board of commissioners; 
(2)  Maintain the peace, good order and tranquility of the county by the enforcement of all county ordinances and state or federal laws; 
(3)  Strive to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the police department, and make recommendations from time to time to the board of commissioners for improvements which the board may assist in making in the department; 
(4)  Make a monthly report in writing to the board of commissioners on the actions of the police department; 
(5)  Ensure that at all times there are sufficient officers on duty to carry out the tasks assigned to the police department; 
(6)  Suspend immediately any officer reporting for duty under the influence of alcoholic beverages and report the same to the board of commissioners; 
(7)  Maintain written rules and regulations for the police department, approved by the board of commissioners, a violation of which shall be grounds for disciplinary action; 
(8)  Post copies of all police department rules and regulations and this article in conspicuous place in the department. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1001) 
Sec. 2-14-3. - Same—Patrol powers. 
(a)  The police officers of the county shall have the authority to patrol any street, alley, path, sidewalk or park, in and around any stores, cafes, taverns, restaurants, dance halls, service stations or any other establishment in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)  An officer while on duty for the county shall have authority to enter any type of business while open to the public and check to see if everything is being carried on in a lawful manner. After business hours, and while closed to the public, an officer for the county has authority to check places of business, to see if the doors and windows are safely locked. 
(c)  An officer for the county shall have the authority to check and investigate, enter and patrol any park, business, residence or public place within the unincorporated areas of the county if the officer has probable cause or sufficient reason to believe some act is being committed which would involve the violation of a law or a county ordinance; a personal injury or damage to property; or if any of the above appear to be imminent. 
(d)  A police officer shall not enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant, unless such officer has the voluntary consent of the owner or occupant or such officer is in pursuit of a fugitive whom the officer has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a crime. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1002) 
Sec. 2-14-4. - Same—Abuse of position. 
(a)  No police officer shall use official position or official identification cards or badges: 
(1)  For personal or financial gain; 
(2)  For obtaining privileges not otherwise available to the officer except in the performance of duty; or 
(3)  For avoiding consequence of illegal acts. 
(b)  Police officers may not lend their identification cards or badges to another person, or permit them to be photographed or reproduced without the approval of the chief. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1003) 
Sec. 2-14-5. - Same—Abuses of process; withholding evidence. 
Police officers shall not convert to their own use, manufacture, conceal, falsify, destroy, remove, tamper with, or withhold evidence or information, or make false accusations of a criminal or traffic charge. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1004) 
Sec. 2-14-6. - Same—Departmental reports; truthfulness. 
Police officers shall submit all necessary reports on time and in accordance with established departmental procedures. Reports submitted by officers shall be truthful and complete and no officer shall knowingly enter or cause to be entered any inaccurate, false, misleading or improper information. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1005) 
Sec. 2-14-7. - Same—Endorsements and referrals. 
Police officers shall not recommend or suggest in any manner, except in the transaction of personal business, the employment or procurement of a particular product, professional service or commercial service such as an attorney, ambulance, towing service, bondsman, mortician or the like. In the case of an ambulance or towing service, when such service is necessary and the person needing the service is unable or unwilling to procure it or requests assistance, officers shall proceed in accordance with established departmental procedures. 
(Code 1979, § 2-1006) 
Sec. 2-14-8. - Law enforcement uniforms. 
(a)  No private company that engages in providing security and/or any related services shall use uniforms which have similar colors or designs and/or are confusingly similar to the uniforms used by any county law enforcement officers. 
(b)  If the county learns that a private company is violating subsection (a) above, then the county shall notify the violator and request corrective action within ten (10) days. If no corrective action is taken within ten (10) days, the county may seek a restraining order against the offending party and/or damages for up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) a day for the continued violation of this section. 
(Amend. of 2-25-97, § 1) 
Secs. 2-14-9—2-14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MERIT SYSTEM RULES AND REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Nepotism limitations, §§ 1-1-1, 1-2-9; merit system, § 1-5-1 et seq.; retirement, § 1-5-20 et seq.; merit system board, § 1-4-1 et seq.; employee insurance authorized, § 1-2-11. 

Sec. 2-14-20. - Equal opportunity statement. 
It is the intent of the Floyd County Civil Service System to provide equal opportunity in all aspects of the personnel system and employment process without discrimination because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, political affiliation or nonjob-related handicapped status. Appropriate affirmative action shall be taken to provide and ensure equal opportunity to all applicants and employees. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § I) 
Sec. 2-14-21. - Civil service statement. 
To ensure fairness and objectivity in all aspects of the personnel system and employment process, the civil service system shall operate and be guided by the following civil service principles: 
(1)  Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their relative ability, knowledge and skills, including open consideration of qualified applicants for initial appointment; 
(2)  Providing equitable and adequate compensation consistent with the principle of comparable pay for comparable work; 
(3)  Training employees, as needed, to ensure high-quality performance; 
(4)  Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance, and separating employees whose inadequate performance cannot be corrected; 
(5)  Ensuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, sex or religious creed and with proper regard for their privacy and constitutional rights; and 
(6)  Ensuring that employees are protected against coercion for partisan political purposes and are prohibited from using their official authority for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an election or a nomination for office. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § I(A)) 
Sec. 2-14-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— An ordinance adopted Dec. 12, 2017, deleted § 2-14-22 entitled "Right of appeal," which derived from an ordinance adopted Apr. 5, 1988, § I(B). 
Sec. 2-14-23. - Classified, unclassified and exempted services. 
(a)  Classified service. The "classified service" to which this article applies shall consist of all persons who receive salaries or wages from the county whose positions have been authorized and job descriptions developed under provisions of the Civil Service Act and this article, and those employees whose positions have not been specifically designated as being in the "unclassified" or "exempted" service. 
(b)  Unclassified service. "Unclassified service" shall consist of those positions in county government which have been specifically created or authorized by state law or local act under the home-rule power of county or court order; or, those positions specifically designated as chief deputy to an exempt position. 
(c)  Exempted service. The following positions, categories and classes of employees shall be in the "exempted service" of the county: 
(1)  All members of appointed or elected boards, commissions or authorities; 
(2)  All county officers who are elected by popular vote; 
(3)  The official court reporter(s) in any county court of record who shall receive their appointments and serve at the pleasure of the judge of such court; 
(4)  The county manager; 
(5)  The county attorney and/or assistant county attorney; 
(6)  The county physician; 
(7)  Persons temporarily appointed or designated to make or conduct a special inquiry, investigation or special duty where such appointment is approved by the county manager or board of commissioners; 
(8)  The county administrator and county guardian; 
(9)  All classes of positions now existing or that may hereafter be created and established as "exempted" under any state or federally funded program. 
(d)  Relationship of classified, unclassified and exempted service employees to these regulations: 
(1)  Personnel in the classified service of the county shall be subject to all provisions of the Civil Service Act and all rules, regulations, classifcation/pay plans, retirement or other benefit plans created or authorized by such Act, or amendment thereto. 
(2)  Unclassified service employees shall be subject to all provisions of the Civil Service Act except as to their method of appointment and removal, classification and pay. An employee in the unclassified service shall be eligible for all rights and benefits extended by this article except the right to appeal their removal or dismissal and the right to avail themselves of the grievance procedures established hereafter. 
(3)  Personnel in the exempted service shall be exempt from the provisions of the Civil Service Act or any regulations adopted pursuant to their individual positions. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § I(C); Ord. of 11-13-90(2), § 1) 
Sec. 2-14-24. - Probationary employees. 
Employees occupying positions in the departments and offices covered by the civil service system for six (6) months or more immediately prior to July 1, 1987 shall be continued in their respective positions without further examinations at the time the Civil Service Act becomes effective. Those holding positions in the departments and offices covered by the civil service system for less than six (6) months immediately prior to July 1, 1987 shall serve the balance of the probationary period as prescribed by the county personnel policies. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § I(D)) 
Sec. 2-14-25. - Personnel board—Qualifications, appointments. 
(a)  The personnel board shall consist of five (5) members of known sympathy with the applications of merit principles to public employment. No person shall be a member of the board unless that person shall have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years at the beginning of such person's term; unless such person shall have been a resident of the county prior to becoming a member of the board and unless that person remains a resident of the county during such service as a member of the board. No person shall be a member of the board if such person was an elected county officer in the county at any time during the twelve-month period immediately preceding that person's becoming a board member, or if such person holds any elective public office during such person's term of office as a board member. No person shall be a member of the board if such person was an employee subject to the provisions of the Act at any time during the twelve-month period immediately preceding that person's becoming a board member or if such person becomes an employee subject to the provisions of the Act during such employee's term of office as a board member. 
(b)  The term of office for a member of the personnel board shall be four (4) years or until his or her successor is elected and qualified, or until his or her earlier death, resignation or removal. A member of the personnel board shall be eligible to serve multiple terms. No member of the personnel board shall serve or be eligible to serve on any other continuing board or commission of the county during such person's term of service on the personnel board. 
(c)  Each of the five (5) members of the personnel board created by this section shall occupy a position, designated as positions 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, on the board as follows: 
(1)  The board of county commissioners shall appoint one (1) person as a member of the personnel board for position 1 and one (1) person as a member of the personnel board for position 2; 
(2)  The employees subject to the provisions of the Act shall elect one (1) person as a member of the personnel board for position 3 and one (1) person as a member of the board for position 4. All elections for members for positions 3 and 4 shall be by secret ballot, with the results thereof certified by the county board of elections, and entered upon the minutes of the governing authority; and 
(3)  A member of the personnel board for position 5 shall be elected by majority vote of the county officials, namely the clerk of the superior court, the tax commissioner, the sheriff, the judge of the probate court, the juvenile court judge, the district attorney and the chief judge of the magistrate court. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § I(E); Mo. of 12-13-88; Amend. of 2-10-98, § 1; Amend. No. 2003-001A, § 1, 1-28-03; Ord. No. 2012-004A, § 1, 5-22-12) 
Sec. 2-14-26. - Same—Removal of members. 
The personnel board shall consist of five (5) members at all times. No member shall be removed from office prior to the expiration of such member's term except for cause and after being served with a written copy of the specific charges against such member and being given an opportunity for a public hearing before the governing authority. Such hearing shall not be held unless the member has been served personally or by registered or certified mail to such member's residence as shown in the files of the governing authority at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for the hearing. Cause shall be construed to mean failure to maintain prescribed qualifications; mental or physical incapacity to act; dereliction of duty; misfeasance, nonfeasance or malfeasance in office; and absence from more than two (2) regular meetings of the board without just cause or proper excuse by the board. Upon indictment of any member during such member's term of office by a grand jury for a criminal offense involving moral turpitude, such member shall be suspended from such member's duties as a member of the board until a final disposition of such member's charges. If exonerated, the member may assume such member's duties for the balance of such member's term of office, except a temporary appointment shall be made by the governing authority to fill the vacancy where a conviction is appealed. Such temporary appointment shall continue until final adjudication of the appeal or appeals, or until the expiration of such member's term of office, whichever is sooner. In case the conviction is reversed, the member shall be reinstated for the balance of such member's term, if any. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § I(F)) 
Sec. 2-14-27. - Same—Meetings. 
The personnel board shall annually in January elect one (1) of its members as chairman and one (1) of its members as vice-chairman. The board shall meet in a county building at such time as shall be specified by call of the chairman. All meetings shall be open to the public, except that hearings on employee appeals shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14 of Title 50 of O.C.G.A. (Ga. L. 1972, p. 575). Notice of each meeting shall be given in writing to each member. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall preside. The personnel director shall act as permanent secretary to the board and shall keep minutes of the official transactions of the board. As secretary, the personnel director shall serve without compensation and shall not be a voting member. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § I(G)) 
Sec. 2-14-28. - Same—Location. 
The personnel board office shall be located at the seat of county government. All official books and records of the board shall remain in the custody of the personnel director. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § I(H)) 
Sec. 2-14-29. - Same—Powers, duties, and responsibilities. 
The personnel board shall be responsible for representing the public interest in the carrying out of its duties with respect to the civil service system and personnel administration for the county. The duties and functions of the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  To propose and recommend to the governing authority the approval and adoption of such personnel policies, rules and regulations for the civil service system and personnel administration of the county as authorized by the Act. Such policies, rules and regulations, when approved and adopted by the governing authority, shall have the force and effect of law and shall be binding upon all departments and employees covered by the civil service system. The personnel board shall be authorized to make recommendation as to amendments, additions to, and deletions from the personnel policies from time to time and when such amendments are adopted by the governing authority, they shall have the force of law and be binding on all parties affected by the civil service system. 
(2)  To monitor the personnel policies of the civil service system and to serve as a review board for appeals from employees. The personnel board shall adopt such rules and regulations with reference to hearings and appeals as may ensure a fair and equitable treatment of the employee. The board is empowered to administer oaths; to certify to its official acts under the signature of its chairman or its clerk or other person so designated by it; to issue subpoenas to compel attendance of witnesses and production of papers, books, documents, or tangible things; to keep order in its hearings; and to punish for contempt by fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) or by confinement not to exceed five (5) days in the county jail, or both. 
(3)  To keep and maintain an accurate record of minutes of its official actions, and shall be furnished clerical assistance as deemed necessary by the governing authority. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § I(I)) 
Sec. 2-14-30. - Same—Finance. 
All costs for salaries, expenses, and supplies for the establishment and operation of the personnel board shall be borne by the county and paid out of the general operating funds of the county as a cost of administration. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § I(J)) 
Sec. 2-14-31. - Establishment of classification plan. 
(a)  In determining which class to assign a position, the specification for each class shall be used as a general description and not as limiting the department head to prescribe or alter the duties of any position. However, the permanent assignment of lower level work requiring assignment to a class of a lower pay grade may be appealed by the incumbent to the personnel board. 
(b)  Necessary and desirable qualifications for the duties and responsibilities assigned to each class are included on class specifications. Knowledge, skills, and abilities necessary to effectively perform the duties of the job are listed as well as training and experience. Minimum levels of training and experience desirable and necessary as evidence of an applicant's ability to qualify for positions of each class are identified. Other training and experience, if evaluated as equivalent, may also qualify an applicant for a position. 
(1)  Assignment of positions. Every existing position and those created hereafter shall be assigned to the appropriate class by the personnel director after consideration of the department head's recommendations and job descriptions. The department head and employees shall be notified of the assignments and shall have the right to appeal the assignment to the personnel board whose decision is final. Position assignments shall be periodically reviewed by the director to maintain the consistency of the classification plan. Those positions requiring substantially similar levels of difficulty, responsibility, supervision, training, experience and pay shall be assigned to the same class. 
(2)  Position descriptions and class specifications. The personnel director shall maintain a file of current individual descriptions of duties and responsibilities assigned to each civil service position. The position descriptions shall be written by the incumbent when possible and reviewed by the department head. The director may request a current position description on a periodic basis or when a change in assigned duties occur. The director shall prepare and maintain current class specifications for all classes in the classification plan. Class specifications are designed to be descriptive, not restrictive. They identify the types of duties and responsibilities which are sufficiently alike for the purpose of personnel administration. They shall not be used to prescribe the duties or responsibilities of any particular position in a department. Class specifications are general descriptions of positions with similar levels of duties, responsibility, supervision and pay. Other duties of similar level may be assigned by the supervisor and may not appear in the class specifications. 
(3)  Allocation of new changes or additional positions. When an additional position is recommended by the department head and approved by the governing authority, the personnel director shall assign the positions in the same manner as original assignments. The director shall reassign positions whose duties are changed by the department head. The department head may request the director to review previous assignments: 
a.  Whenever an assigned position has been vacant for one (1) year or longer, it may be considered that the duties and responsibilities originally assigned to the position have changed and the position may be abolished. If the department head resubmits the same assignment of duties and responsibilities, the personnel director shall classify and assign the position in the same manner as any other new position. 
b.  When a position is reassigned, the incumbent shall not continue in the position unless the incumbent is eligible for competitive appointment, promotion, transfer or demotion to a position of the new class while serving in the position as previously assigned. If ineligible to continue in such a position, the incumbent may be transferred, promoted, or demoted by appropriate action in accordance with the provisions of this article. When the incumbent is eligible to continue in the position, and the incumbent is not transferred, promoted or demoted, the provisions of this article regarding layoffs shall apply. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § II) 
Sec. 2-14-32. - Compensation plan. 
After consulting with department heads, fiscal officers, and other appropriate persons, and considering the rates of pay and benefits for comparable services in public and private employment, the human resources director shall prepare and recommend to the governing authority a comprehensive compensation plan for all classes of positions in the county. When complete, the plan shall provide for pay grade assignment for each class of positions and a salary schedule consisting of range from minimum to maximum rates of pay. The plan shall be based on the following work standards: The standard workweek shall be forty (40) hours. The annual work standard shall be two thousand eighty (2,080) hours. 
(1)  Probationary salary. Upon adoption by the board, the compensation plan shall be the official salary schedule for positions under the civil service system. Salary advancements shall be based upon merit. All new employees shall be subject to a twelve-month probationary/working test period of employment. Employees working under the civil service provision may be considered for salary increases at the end of the twelve-month probationary/working test period of employment. Salary advancement following appointment shall be based upon the employee successfully completing a twelve-month probationary/working test period. 
(2)  Salary regulations. All salary increases are contingent upon satisfactory performance and shall be made effective at the beginning of the next pay period. 
(3)  Entrance salary. The salary of a new county employee shall be at the minimum of the pay grade for his/her appointed class. However, upon a written request from the department head and approval by the county manager, an employee may start at a higher pay step in the pay grade according to the following schedule: 
a.  Pay grade 1 through 10: Entry level salary up to pay step 10 is allowed. 
b.  Pay grade 11 through 20: Entry level salary up to pay step 20 is allowed. 
c.  Pay grade 21 and above: Entry level salary anywhere within the salary range is allowed. Department head salaries must be approved by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Promotional increases. An employee who is promoted shall have his/her salary established per the guidelines in subsection (3) above or a minimum increase of five (5) percent. Promotional increases shall be in accordance with the county pay table. 
(5)  Transfer and demotions. A transferred employee shall be paid the same salary that he/she received prior to transfer. An employee demoted involuntarily shall have his/her salary reduced to a step of the lower range which will cause at least a one-step salary reduction. An employee demoted voluntarily shall have his/her salary placed at any step in the lower range approved by the human resources director provided that it is not a higher salary. 
(6)  Reappointments. An employee who is reappointed within two (2) years of termination may have his/her salary placed at any step at the range assigned to his/her position provided it is not a higher salary than at the time of separation. 
(7)  Annual increases. 
a.  Annual salary advancements. Annual salary advancements, if awarded, shall be based on individual performance as reflected by the report of performance and the annual salary authorization of the governing authority. Salary advancements due to anniversary reviews shall start accumulating on the employee's respective anniversary dates provided the employee has served twelve (12) months in the class since the last annual increase. 
b.  Cost-of-living increase. Cost-of-living increases are granted when it is determined by the governing authority that inflation and other factors have affected the value of salaries that are being paid. From time to time, the governing authority may authorize an across-the-board increase in salary, in which case, all classified, unclassified and part-time exempted salaries are increased by a percentage set by the governing authority. Other exempt salaries may also be increased at the discretion of the governing authority. 
(8)  Special salary advancements. In special or unusual circumstances, the human resources director, upon request of a department head and with the approval of the governing authority, may authorize the adjustment of an employee's salary to a maximum of three (3) steps more than the employee could have earned normally under the provisions of this article. 
(9)  Longevity. Longevity is a system that provides for the recognition of loyalty to the county on the basis of the following formula: 
a.  Employees shall be paid "longevity" in two (2) installments on July 1st and on December 31st of each year. The payments received on July 1st and December 31st will be one-half of the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) multiplied by the total number of full years completed prior to July 1st and December 1st of each year plus one (1) percent of the employee's gross salary (not including the longevity payment). 
b.  For employees with six (6) or more full years of service prior to July 1st and December 1st, longevity payment shall be increased by an additional one (1) percent of gross salary. 
c.  For employees with eleven (11) or more full years of service, the longevity payment shall be increased by an additional one (1) percent of gross salary. 
In no event shall the longevity payment exceed the total of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each full year of service plus three (3) percent of the employee's salary (not including longevity payment). 
In order to receive a longevity payment, the employee must be employed by the county on the date on which the payment is due (July 1st and December 31st). If an employee retires or terminates between the longevity payment date and December 31st, then the employee will be able to retain their eligibility to receive longevity benefits. 
(10)  Overtime and compensatory time. 
a.  The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA). The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) sets minimum wage, overtime pay, equal pay, and record keeping standards for employees (who are covered by the Act) employed in federal, state and local governments. It is a federal law enacted by the United States Congress in 1938 and amended several times since. The department of human resources monitors compliance with the FLSA for Floyd County. At Floyd County, employees are covered, either as exempt or non-exempt employees unless the employee falls into a special category such as elected officials and their personal staff or bona fide volunteers. Fair Labor Standards Act requirements apply to positions and employees, not to job classifications. All individual positions are analyzed to determine whether or not the position is covered, and if covered, whether or not the position is exempt or non-exempt from the overtime and minimum wage requirements. 
b.  Employees that are covered by FLSA (non-exempt). All non-exempt employees who perform overtime work which exceeds the maximum number of hours prescribed for standard work periods which are established in their respective departments shall be entitled to receive either overtime pay at one and one-half (1.5) times their regular salary rates, or compensatory time at one and one-half (1.5) standard hours for each hour worked, whichever is applicable under the Fair Labor Standard Act (FLSA); provided, however, that no department head shall approve, suffer or permit any paid overtime to be worked by an employee which exceeds a maximum of two hundred forty (240) standard hours per calendar year (or compensatory time which exceeds a maximum of standard hours at any time), unless a greater amount is approved by the county manager. Employees who have accrued compensatory time shall, upon their request, be allowed to use some or all of such time within a reasonable period following such accrual, subject to approval of the department heads concerned. 
c.  Public safety personnel. Section 7(k) of the FLSA provides that employees engaged in law enforcement may be paid overtime on a "work period" basis. Law enforcement personnel must receive overtime after eighty-six (86) hours worked during a fourteen-day period. Under certain prescribed conditions, a state or local government agency may give compensatory time at a rate of not less than one and one-half (1.5) hours for each overtime hour worked, in lieu of cash overtime compensation. Employees engaged in law enforcement duties may accrue up to eighty (80) hours of compensatory time. 
d.  Employees that are not covered by FLSA (exempt personnel). Exempt personnel may accumulate compensatory time to a maximum of forty (40) hours. All hours earned will be accumulated at a rate of one-for-one (one (1) hour earned for each hour worked) and are not payable upon termination. All hours over the forty-hour maximum will be lost unless approval is obtained from the county manager to perform emergency work. In which case, compensatory hours shall be paid or banked. 
e.  Emergency call out. When a county employee is called out in an emergency situation such as during a storm, etc., to perform services he/she would be paid a minimum of four (4) hours. In the event that there is an additional call out during the same twenty-four-hour period, the actual time of any additional call out(s) shall be added to regular hours and paid in accordance with current FLSA regulations. 
f.  Beeper pay. When a county employee is required by his/her department head to carry a beeper and is subject to emergency call out, he/she shall be paid a stipend of fifty dollars ($50.00) per week, or the amount set forth in the fee schedule book, whichever is greater. This amount is in addition to any emergency call out pay he/she may receive. The county manager shall approve all departments utilizing beeper pay. Beeper pay may be adjusted at the discretion of the board of commissioners. 
(11)  Certification of payroll. Payment shall not be made to any classified or unclassified employee unless the payroll bears the certification of the human resources director or of the director's authorized agent and that persons named therein have been appointed and employed in accordance with the provisions of the Act and the personnel regulation promulgated thereunder. The human resources director may, for proper cause, withhold certification from an entire payroll or from any specific item or items thereon. There shall be a single omnibus certificate prepared covering the payrolls of each department and all employees therein when all pending transactions have been completed. Such certificate shall be worded as follows: 
CERTIFICATE 
I hereby certify that the records of the human resources department indicate that the employees listed on this payroll were appointed within the provisions of the Civil Service Act; that the positions listed were approved by the county manager and board of commissioners; and the salaries are in accordance with the pay schedule and compensation plan. 
_____ Human Resources Director 
The human resources director may authorize the release of payrolls before final certification in order to avoid undue delays involving pending personnel transactions. Any person appointed or employed in contravention to any provision of this Act or the personnel regulations thereunder who perform services for which he/she is not paid may maintain an action at law to recover the agreed pay for such service. If the human resources director wrongfully withholds certification of the payroll voucher or account of any employee, such employee may maintain an action at law to compel such certification. Practices and procedures not in accordance with this Act or the personnel regulations thereunder shall be forwarded as payroll exceptions to the director of finance who shall treat such exceptions in the same manner as other audit exceptions. 
(12)  Incentive pay. After the probationary period, public safety employees who are covered by the civil service system, are certified by P.O.S.T. (Peace Officer's Standards and Training Act), and are currently actively involved in public safety as designated by the county's personnel records, and who have successfully completed coursework from a regionally accredited college or university are eligible for the following educational pay incentive to be paid on the last payday in June. 

 
(13)  Salary supplement. Any employee who routinely interprets a language, including sign language for any county department is eligible for annual language incentive pay of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or an amount set forth in the fee schedule book, whichever is greater. This supplement will be paid at the same time as educational incentive pay. Annual requests must be submitted by departments for continued participation. 
(14)  Educational assistance. It is the policy of the board of commissioners to encourage career development through approved higher education courses. These are courses completed at a regionally accredited vocational-technical school, junior, senior college, or university. They must be approved by the educational committee and must not interfere with the effective departmental operations. 
a.  Requirements for approval include: 
1.  Education shall be directly related to career development. 
2.  Course of study shall be in line with needs of the department. 
3.  Approval must be obtained from the department head and the education committee prior to enrollment in order to participate in the educational assistance program. 
b.  Reimbursement for educational expenses. The county will reimburse full-time employees in accordance with the following schedule: 
1.  With a grade of "B" or above, one hundred (100) percent of tuition; 
2.  With a grade of "C", eighty (80) percent of tuition; 
3.  With grades below "C", are not eligible for tuition reimbursement. 
The above schedule is for tuition reimbursement only. No other expenses will be reimbursed. Employees receiving educational assistance who separate from employment with the county within two (2) years of receiving such assistance must reimburse the county. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § III; Ord. of 6-14-88; Ord. of 11-11-97(1), §§ 1—4; Amend. of 7-14-98, § 1; Ord. No. 2008-001A, §§ I—VI, XXIII, 1-8-08; Ord. No. 2015-001A-1, § 1, 4-28-15; Ord. No. 2016-002A, § 1, 1-26-16) 
Sec. 2-14-33. - Recruitment and selection. 
(a)  Recruitment. When a vacancy occurs in a classified position, the personnel director and the department head shall develop a recruitment plan to open the position competitively or to open the position promotionally to employees. For those positions which are to be open to all applicants, the personnel director shall determine whether there is to be continuous recruitment or whether applications shall be accepted for a specified period of time only. The director shall prepare public announcements for all competitive examinations at least seven (7) days in advance of the closing date for receipt of applications. Every reasonable effort shall be made to attract qualified applicants to compete for competitive examinations. Public announcements of examinations shall specify the title and salary range of the class of positions, where to apply, information as to rates of pay at which appointments are expected to be made, the duties to be performed, minimum qualifications required, the final date on which applications shall be received, and other conditions of competition. Announcements shall be posted in representative county offices. 
(b)  Applications. 
(1)  All applications shall be made on forms prescribed by the personnel director and, except in continuous recruitment programs, must be filed with the personnel department on or before the closing date specified in the announcement, or postmarked before midnight of that date. The director shall be the custodian of all such applications. The application shall include a statement from the applicant that includes pertinent information regarding the training, experience and any other job-related information that the director, in accordance with the classification plan, may deem necessary. All applications shall be signed and the truth of all statements contained therein certified by such signature. 
(2)  The personnel director may refuse to examine an applicant, or after examination, may disqualify such applicant or remove such applicant's name from a register, or refuse to certify any eligible on a register if the applicant: 
a.  Does not meet any of the requirements established for the examination for the class of position. 
b.  Is so disabled as to be rendered unfit for the performance of the duties of the class. 
c.  Is addicted to the use of narcotics or the habitual use of intoxicating liquors to excess. 
d.  Has made a false statement of material facts in the application. 
e.  Has used or attempted to use political pressure or bribery to secure an advantage in the examination. 
f.  Has directly or indirectly obtained information regarding examinations to which, as an applicant, such applicant was not entitled. 
g.  Has failed to submit such applicant's application correctly or within the prescribed time limits. 
h.  Has taken part in the compilation, administration or correction of the examination for which such applicant is an applicant. 
i.  Has previously been dismissed from a position in the county government for cause or has been separated as unsatisfactory from a position under the civil service system. 
j.  Has been convicted of criminal conduct. 
k.  Has failed to submit appropriate documentation as required by the Immigration Reform and Control Act. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § IV) 
Sec. 2-14-34. - Selection. 
(a)  General. In making appointments under this article the personnel director and the department head shall ensure that applicants receive fair treatment without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, sex, age, physical handicap or religious creed, and that bona fide consideration is given to all eligibles certified with higher scores than the person selected. The department head shall select for each position one (1) of the persons from among those with the five (5) highest scores on the list of eligibles when a numerical score has been assigned as a result of an examination, exclusive of the number of names. If two (2) or more eligibles have identical scores, they shall be collectively considered as one (1) score. When ratings of "highly qualified," "qualified" and "marginally qualified" are assigned, the department head shall select for each position one (1) person from the category "highly qualified" if there are five (5) or more eligibles listed with this rating. If fewer than five (5) eligibles are rated as "highly qualified," the department head may select from among the categories "highly qualified" or "qualified," provided the department head may select among any eligible listed or may request the personnel director to open the position again for additional recruitment. 
(b)  Examination. The personnel director shall, after consultation with the department head, determine an appropriate method of examination for all classes of positions under the civil service system. Every effort shall be made to ensure that examinations are fair and impartially administered and that examinations are job related and do not discriminate against members of a race, sex, or ethnic group. Examination methods may include written tests, performances tests, ratings of training and experience, oral interviews, assessment lab exercises, or any other appropriate methods. 
(c)  All applicants will be subject to a complete background check including references, motor vehicle records, previous employers, and education credentials. In addition, in employment areas such as public safety and finance where the public has a compelling interest in the security of property and life, applicants for employment, promotions, and transfers will be asked to supply additional information, as required for their specific job. A list of these jobs is maintained in the human resources office. 
To comply with federal law under the Prison Rape Elimination Act (PREA), Floyd County will not hire or promote anyone who may have contact with inmates who: (i) has engaged in sexual abuse in a prison, jail, lockup, community confinement facility, juvenile facility, or other institution (as defined in 42 U.S.C. 1997); (ii) has been convicted of engaging or attempting to engage in sexual activity in the community facilitated by force, overt or implied threats of force, or coercion, or if the victim did not consent or was unable to consent or refuse; or (iii) has been civilly or administratively adjudicated to have engaged in the activity described in (ii). Floyd County will also consider any incidents of sexual harassment in determining whether to hire or promote anyone who may have contact with inmates. 
(d)  Physical examination. All applicants who accept an offer of permanent county employment shall be required to undergo a routine physical profile examination, without charge, to be administered by the county-appointed physician. The bona fide occupational physical requirements for individual positions and classes (if any) shall be stated in the physical demands section of each job description. For those classifications where approved physical requirements exist, the findings of the county-appointed physician shall be final and conclusive. The complete record of all physical profile examinations shall remain confidential and shall become the property of the county. 
(e)  Special requirements. A department head may specify requirements of particular experience, working conditions, education, skill or other factors when such department head deems such requirements necessary for a position. In specifying such requirements, a department head shall submit a statement of justification as to why such requirements are needed. The personnel director may, after determining that such requirements are job related, certify in order of ranking on the register only the names of those persons who possess the qualifications specified. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § V; Ord. No. 2008-001A, § VII, 1-8-08; Ord. of 7-26-16) 
Sec. 2-14-35. - Establishment of register. 
(a)  Establishment. After each competitive examination the personnel director shall prepare a register of qualified persons. In establishing registers, the names shall be arranged as follows: 
(1)  When final numerical scores are determined on open competitive examinations for a class, the name of each eligible shall be placed on the register starting with the highest score. If the scores are identical, the names shall be placed on the register in alphabetical order. Any honorably discharged eligible, who has served in the Armed Forces of the United States during a period of war or armed conflict, shall have five (5) points added to such eligible passing score on each examination, and ten (10) points shall be added if such eligible has at least ten (10) per centum service-connected disability as rated and certified by the Veteran's Administration. The personnel director shall require documentation prior to granting additional points for veterans. 
(2)  If it is impractical to determine a final numerical score, applicants may be evaluated and rated as to the appropriateness of their education and experience and other factors in relation to the minimum qualifications for the class of positions as indicated on the class specification. Every reasonable allowance shall be made for equivalent qualifications when training and experience are desirable. Eligibles shall be listed in alphabetical order in the categories "highly qualified," "qualified" or "marginally qualified." No allowance for veterans status shall be granted under this method. 
(3)  On competitive promotional positions, eligibles may be given an appropriate examination to determine their numerical rankings as described in subsection (a)(1) above, or may be grouped as "highly qualified," "qualified" or "marginally qualified" as described in subsection (a)(2) above. No allowance for veterans status shall be granted for competitive promotional positions. 
(b)  Duration. The life of each register shall normally be one (1) year from the date of its establishment, but this period may be extended or reduced by the personnel director based on the availability of qualified applicants. 
(1)  The life of each register for classes in the continuous recruitment program shall be indefinite but may be terminated by the personnel director. The names of eligibles shall be added to and removed from such register on a continuous basis. Normally, the name of an eligible shall not remain on a register for a class in the continuous program for longer than one (1) year from the date of its entry on the register. 
(2)  Whenever a class is revised so that the qualifying examination, written or unassembled, must be significantly revised, the existing register shall be considered upon the administration of a superseding examination. The personnel director shall send to each eligible remaining on such register a proper notification prior to the administration of a superseding examination. Such notification shall be sent to the eligible at such eligible's last known address and shall clearly state the necessity of such eligible competing in the superseding examination in order to continue such eligible's eligibility for appointment. 
(c)  Removal and reinstatement. The personnel director may remove the name of an eligible from a register for any of the causes stipulated below: 
(1)  On evidence that the eligible cannot be located by postal authorities. (The return of one (1) notice or a returned notice marked no forwarding address shall be considered sufficient evidence.) 
(2)  On receipt of a statement from the eligible that such eligible no longer desires consideration for a position of that class. 
(3)  If two (2) offers of appointment for the probationary period to the class for which the register was established have been declined by the eligible. 
(4)  After an eligible is appointed to any position, such eligible's name may be removed from registers for all positions for which the starting salary is the same or less than that of the class to which such eligible has been appointed. Such an eligible may have such eligible's name reinstated to any such register at any time before its expiration upon such eligible's request. 
(5)  Whenever an eligible's name is removed from the register for cause, the personnel director shall notify the eligible of this action. Such notice shall be by mail to the last-known address of the eligible. An eligible's name may be reinstated to the register upon presentation of reasons satisfactory to the director. 
(6)  A department head may exclude from consideration all eligibles: 
a.  Whose availability cannot be ascertained because of: 
1.  Failure to reply within a period of five (5) days to a written request from a department head for interview; 
2.  Failure to reply within forty-eight (48) hours to a telephone request for interview; 
3.  Inability to report for interview within a reasonable time; 
4.  Failure to report for an arranged interview; 
5.  Inability to report for work at the time the vacancy must be filled; 
6.  Failure to produce the appropriate license or certification required by law, regulatory authority or class specification. 
b.  Who declined appointment or request that they not be considered for appointment. 
c.  Who accepted an appointment and failed to present themselves for duty at the time and place specified without giving reasons for the delay satisfactory to the department head. 
d.  To whom the department head offers an objection in writing because of the applicant's demonstrable unsuitability for the position which is sustained by the personnel director. 
e.  To whom a department head offers an objection in writing because the applicant is a relative of a superior or subordinate of the position and which is sustained by the personnel director. 
f.  To whom a department head offers an objection in writing because employment of the applicant in the position would result in a conflict of interest which is sustained by the personnel director. 
(7)  In selecting persons from among those certified, the department head shall be permitted to examine the applications and reports of investigations and to interview such persons. 
(8)  The final selection by the department head shall be reported in writing to the personnel director. 
(9)  At the same time the department head shall indicate the disposition of other names listed on the certificate and shall forward to the personnel director for permanent record evidence of the nonavailability of any eligible passed over for that reason. 
(d)  Certification. Upon receipt of a requisition, the personnel director shall certify and submit in writing to the department head the names of available persons eligible for the appointment in order of examination scores or rankings. The normal life of the certified list of eligibles shall be one hundred eighty (180) calendar days from date of issue and any appointment or commitment from such certificate shall not be subject to change as a result of a change in the register. The director shall certify only the top scoring applicant who has successfully completed the selection process for police officer or deputy sheriff. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § VI) 
Sec. 2-14-36. - Appointments. 
(a)  Reappointments. A permanent employee who has resigned while in good standing or who has been separated with a satisfactory recommendation shall be eligible for reappointment for a period of two (2) years from the date of termination. Such reappointment may be to any position of the same class in which the employee was employed at the time of separation provided that the employee meets minimum desirable qualifications as to training and experience. A reappointed employee must be employed for one (1) year before becoming eligible for credit of previous service for longevity pay and retirement purposes. Longevity pay and retirement shall include credit for the year served for eligibility. Civil service employees may be appointed to non-civil-service positions. Assurance of reappointment under the civil service system, in such cases, must be negotiated and approved by the board of commissioners prior to appointment to the non-civil-service positions. 
(b)  Regular appointment. If a department head chooses to fill a vacancy by selection of an eligible on the basis of open competition, a requisition shall be submitted by the department head to the personnel director upon a prescribed form. This requisition may be for one (1) or more positions of the same class, and shall indicate the number and identity of positions to be filled and the title of the class to which they have been assigned and specify all other pertinent information which the director deems necessary. 
(c)  Temporary appointment. If a vacancy occurs of a strictly temporary nature, a certification shall be made of the names of those eligible who have indicated willingness to accept temporary employment. Certification and appointments shall be made in the same manner as provided for competitive appointments. The duration of a temporary appointment shall be limited to the period of the need and shall not continue for more than six (6) months in any twelve-month period unless approved by the board of commissioners. The acceptance or refusal of a temporary appointment shall not affect an eligible's standing on a register or such eligible's eligibility for a regular appointment, and the period of temporary work shall not constitute part of a working test period. Successive temporary appointments to the same position shall not be made nor shall an employee receive continued temporary appointments unless approved by the board of commissioners. No temporary appointment shall confer upon the incumbent any privilege or right of promotion, transfer or reinstatement to any position under the civil service system. 
(d)  Emergency appointment. In case of an emergency requiring the immediate services of one (1) or more persons and it is impractical to use any preceding procedure for appointment, the department head may appoint a person or persons without regard to other provisions in this article. Unless approved by the board of commissioners, emergency appointments will not continue more than ninety (90) calendar days during any twelve-month period. Any person granted an emergency appointment shall be exempt from all advantages and benefits under the civil service system including leave, holiday pay and insurance coverage and shall serve at the pleasure of the department head. Emergency appointments must be approved by the personnel director and the county manager. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § VII; Ord. of 7-12-88) 
Sec. 2-14-37. - Working test and permanent status. 
(a)  Duration, nature and purpose. The first twelve (12) months of service in a position to which an employee has been appointed, reappointed or promoted, under this article, exclusive of any time spent in nonpay status, shall constitute a probationary or working test period. Notwithstanding any previous restrictions, the human resources director may fix a different length for the working test as it applies to positions of one (1) or more classes. Such a period shall not be fixed at less than twelve (12) months, nor more than eighteen (18) months. Any change in the length of working period shall apply to all positions in the class or classes affected. The working test shall be an essential part of the examination process, and shall be used to effectively adjust a new employee and eliminate employees whose performance is substandard during the working test period. 
(b)  Extension of probation. Law enforcement offices or other employees not completing mandated certification or licensing within the initial working test period shall have their probationary periods extended. No extension shall be granted unless recommended by the personnel director and authorized by the county manager. 
(c)  Job-related goals and objectives. The department head and/or immediate supervisor shall annually discuss with the employee job-related goals and objectives for successful job performance. 
(d)  Conditions preliminary to permanent status. 
(1)  Notification of personnel director. It shall be the responsibility of the department head to ascertain whether the services of each employee appointed for a working test period have or have not been satisfactory. The department head shall notify the personnel director of such department head's decision. 
(2)  Noncompletion of working test. If it is determined that the services of an employee have been unsatisfactory: 
a.  For an employee serving a working test period as the result of appointment or reappointment, the department head shall notify the employee in writing in advance of the date of such employee's termination. 
b.  For an employee serving a working test period as the result of a promotion, the department head shall place the employee in an equivalent position in a class in which the employee is eligible for transfer, or in a position in the lower class in which the employee last held permanent status or was eligible for transfer. If such a vacancy is not available, reduction in force (lay-off) procedures shall apply. 
(3)  Completion date. Permanent status of an employee shall be effective upon the completion of the working test period. 
(4)  Appeal rights. An employee terminated during the working test does not have appeal rights to the personnel board. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § VIII; Ord. No. 2015-001A-2, § 1, 4-28-15) 
Sec. 2-14-38. - Promotions, transfers and demotions. 
(a)  Promotions in general. A promotion is the filling of a vacancy by the advancement of an employee from a position of a lower class. For this purpose, a lower class means any class of positions with a lower pay grade than the vacant position. Promotions are made on a competitive basis. An employee who is promoted shall be required to serve a working test period in the higher position. While serving a working test period on promotion, the employee retains permanent status in the lower position. 
(b)  Competitive promotions. If a department head chooses to fill a vacancy by selection of a permanent employee on a competitive basis for promotion, request for certification shall be made in the same manner as for a regular appointment except the requisition shall specify that the position is to be filled by a competitive promotion. The personnel director shall prepare a certificate in the same manner as prescribed for regular competitive appointment, but shall list only the names of qualified permanent employees. Selection shall be made by the department head and the final action taken reported to the director in the same manner as prescribed for a regular appointment. The department head in the police and sheriff's office shall select only the top scoring applicant who has successfully completed the promotional process. 
(c)  Transfers. A department head may fill a vacancy by the transfer of a permanent employee from another position of the same class, or of a different class of the same pay grade, provided the employee meets the minimum qualifications of a different class. The status of the employee in the new position shall be the same as in the original position. All transfers must be reported in writing to the personnel director. 
(d)  Demotions. In general, a reduction of a permanent or working test employee to a position of a lower class is a demotion. For this purpose, a lower class means having a lower pay grade than the position in which the individual is employed. A demotion may be made for job-related cause or made on a voluntary basis or involuntary basis. An employee who is demoted shall retain the same step in the lower position which he/she had in the higher, except that a senior officer/deputy's salary shall be determined in accordance with applicable senior officer/deputy position provisions. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § IX; Ord. No. 2008-001A, § XXIV, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 2-14-39. - Disciplinary actions. 
(a)  Employment under the civil service system shall be with satisfactory performance of duties. The department head and the personnel director shall make every effort to ensure that all employees understand their duties and are aware of the rules and standards that apply to them. Every effort shall also be made to consistently enforce rules and standards. Fairness, promptness and legal sufficiency shall govern the disciplinary process. These guidelines shall be the only ones applicable to disciplinary actions in the county. Any departmental disciplinary rules which may be at variance thereto shall be subrogated to these regulations. 
(b)  In applying these guidelines, the concept of "progressive discipline" shall be followed. "Progressive discipline" is defined as meaning that when disciplinary actions are necessary, they are gradually increased and applied in terms of ascending severity. Each action is intended to correct unacceptable behavior. With progressive discipline, employees shall be given an opportunity to correct their behavior before a more severe action is applied. The objective is to apply the least severe action which will improve the employee's performance to an acceptable level. 
(c)  The normal order of priority in which progressive discipline shall be applied is as follows, depending upon the seriousness of the offense; provided, however, that certain offenses may require more severe action initially (such as dismissal), depending upon the details and circumstances involved: i. employee counseling; ii. written reprimand; iii. suspension without pay; iv. demotion; v. dismissal. 
(1)  Reprimand. A department head may submit a written reprimand to an employee when oral warnings prove ineffective or when severe initial action is required. A copy shall be filed with the personnel director for the employee's personnel file. Included in the letter shall be a statement of the employee's right to appeal before the civil service board and an outline of the proper appeal procedures. Two (2) reprimands within a twelve-month period for similar offenses may be grounds for dismissal. 
(2)  Suspension. A department head may, for cause, suspend an employee without pay for a period not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days in a twelve-month period. The suspension may be extended for not more than ninety (90) calendar days with approval of the personnel board. The department head shall give the employee a written statement listing specific reasons for suspension. Included in the statement shall be notice of the employee's right to appeal before the board and an outline of the proper appeal procedures. A copy shall be filed with the personnel director for the employee's personnel file. During the period of suspension without pay, no payment for sick leave, vacation nor payable overtime will be made until the period of suspension has concluded except in the event of termination. 
(3)  Demotion or reduction in salary. A department head may, for job-related cause, demote an employee or may reduce the employee's salary to a lower step in the pay grade. The department head shall give the employee a written statement listing specific reasons for the action. Included in the statement shall be notice of the employee's right to appeal before the personnel board and an outline of the proper appeal procedures. A copy shall be filed with the personnel director for the employee's personnel file. 
(4)  Dismissal. Probationary employees shall be separated as provided by conditions primary to permanent status. Permanent employees may be dismissed for cause as outlined below. To dismiss an employee, the department head shall give such employee a written statement specifically setting forth reasons for the action and the proper procedure to appeal the charges to the personnel board within ten (10) days after the notification of the action in question was mailed, or from the effective date of the action, whichever is later. A copy shall be filed with the personnel director for the employee's personnel file. The essential elements and responsibilities of progressive discipline are as follows: 
a.  Department heads and employees shall be mutually responsible for all employees understanding their assigned duties, rules, regulations, policies and procedures which are applicable. 
b.  Department heads shall be responsible for prompt and consistent enforcement of all applicable rules, regulations, policies and procedures, as necessary. 
c.  Department heads and employees shall be mutually responsible for understanding and following the principles of good employee relations. 
d.  Department heads shall be responsible for proper documentation of all disciplinary actions taken. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § X; Ord. of 2-14-89) 
Sec. 2-14-40. - Reasons for disciplinary action—Schedule. 
The following are general causes for disciplinary action, but discipline is not limited to the offenses listed: 
(1)  Felony conviction or a misdemeanor conviction involving moral turpitude; 
(2)  Excessive tardiness or absences; 
(3)  Abuse of sick leave or other categories of leave, or unexcused absences without leave; 
(4)  Inefficiency, negligence or incompetence in the performance of duties; 
(5)  Careless, negligent or improper use or theft of county property or equipment; 
(6)  Violation of civil service rules, county ordinances, policies and procedures, administrative regulations or work rules; 
(7)  Willfully giving false statements to supervisors, officials or the public; 
(8)  Being under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs when reporting for work, or partaking of such things while on duty, except medications taken within limits set by a physician. Any violation of this subsection shall be governed entirely by the provisions of § 2-14-55 which is the drug and alcohol use in workplace policy within the Floyd County Code. 
(9)  Instigation of, participating in, or leadership of strike, work stoppage, slow down or artificial restriction of productive work; 
(10)  Acceptance of bribes or gratuities in conflict with this article; 
(11)  Political activity or outside employment in conflict with this article; 
(12)  Other activities which adversely affect the safety, welfare, efficiency or successful performance of vital services for the county; 
(13)  Creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment; 
(14)  Selling intoxicating liquors or drugs on the premises; 
(15)  Sexual harassment and/or sexual involvement; 
(16)  Failure to report an accident or injury on the job as required by state law and county policy; 
(17)  Violation of administrative policies, procedures or safety rules where safety of persons or property is endangered; 
(18)  Minor violation of traffic laws while operating a county vehicle; 
(19)  Serious violations of traffic laws while operating a county motor vehicle, defined as involving damages of two hundred dollars ($200.00) or more. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XI; Ord. of 8-22-17) 
Sec. 2-14-41. - Same—General statement appeal rights. 
An employee who receives disciplinary action shall have the right to appeal to the personnel board. Such appeal shall be conducted in accordance with appeal procedures set forth in this article. 
Any violation relating to drug and/or alcohol use as referenced in subsection 2-14-40(8) and/or section 2-14-55 shall be governed entirely by the provisions within section 2-14-55 and there shall be no right of appeal to the Floyd County Personnel Board. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XI; Ord. of 8-22-17) 
Sec. 2-14-42. - Nondisciplinary separations. 
(a)  Resignations. A civil service employee should present such employee's resignation in writing to the appropriate department head at least fourteen (14) days in advance to allow time to recruit a replacement. The department head shall immediately forward the letter of resignation to the personnel director by prescribed form why the employee has resigned and whether or not reemployment is recommended. 
(b)  Disability. Any department head or the personnel director may direct any civil service employee to be examined by a licensed physician or to produce medical records or other verification of condition when illness or injury impairs or negatively affects the safe and successful performance of the job. The director, considering the specific situation and consulting with a physician if necessary, shall specify the length of time and condition of disability under the following guidelines: 
(1)  Temporary disability. If the disability is correctable, the maximum time allowed shall be not more than twelve (12) months in duration. For each case the employee shall be allowed a specific time of twelve (12) months or less to have the disability corrected as determined by the personnel director after considering the physician's recommendation. If the employee fails to have the disability corrected within the specific time, such employee shall be subject to layoff, retirement or termination. During the period of disability, the employee retains such employee's right to the job upon correction of the condition. A department head may hire a temporary replacement for the disabled employee provided the person hired is advised in writing that the position is temporary and subject to termination when the regular employee returns. 
(2)  Permanent disability. If the disability is not correctable within a twelve-month period, as determined by the personnel director in consultation with a physician, the department head shall attempt to place the employee in another position which such employee can perform, if practical. If this cannot be accomplished successfully, the director shall require the department head to separate the employee through layoff, retirement or termination. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XII) 
Sec. 2-14-43. - Loss of job requirements. 
Any employee who is unable to do such employee's job adequately because of loss of a necessary license or other requirement shall be departed by layoff until such license or requirement is acquired. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XIII) 
Sec. 2-14-44. - Layoff or reduction in force procedure in general. 
A department head layoff of civil service employees may be made whenever necessary due to shortages of work or funds, the abolishment of a position, or other material changes in duties, organization, disability or loss of job requirements. If a permanent employee is subject to layoff, such employee shall be offered a comparable position or a demotion to a lower class if a vacancy exists and such employee is qualified to fill the position. Whenever practical, the employee affected shall be notified in writing by the department head at least fourteen (14) days in advance. If it becomes necessary to reduce departmental work force, the department head shall submit to the personnel director a proposed plan specifying the order of reduction of employees to continue efficient and effective functioning of the department. The proposed order of reduction shall be based on the critical skills of each employee considering the length of service in the class and in county service, the level of performance as reflected by the report of performance, and the needs of the department. The director shall carefully review the proposed plan to ensure that there is no discrimination due to race, sex, religion, national origin, color, age, handicapped status, or political affiliation, and that all considerations are job related. The director may modify the reduction or demotion order for employees as necessary to adhere to civil service principles. When the final plan is approved by the director, the plan may be implemented. Permanent employees who are subject to layoff or reduction in force shall be entitled to reinstatement to their previous status in the reverse order of their reduction for a period of one (1) year from the date of separation, and prior to the appointment of any additional permanent employees in positions of the same class. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XIV) 
Sec. 2-14-45. - Employee ethics and conduct. 
(a)  General. Civil service employees represent county government to the general public they service. Employees shall act in a responsible manner and make every effort to ensure the government business is conducted honestly, free of bias and undue influence, and that no employee uses such employee's office for personal gain. 
(b)  Political activity. 
(1)  Interference with elections. No employee shall use or seek to use, directly or indirectly, such employee's official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of a political election, nomination or referendum; provided, however, that the foregoing shall not be interpreted or construed so as to abrogate or abridge the right of any employee to express such employee's political opinions, vote, seek elective office or otherwise participate in political undertakings in accordance with applicable law or personnel regulations; provided, however, that any employee, classified or unclassified, who qualifies as a candidate for any public office shall be placed on leave without pay under the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Contributions. No employee shall be required, coerced, expected, induced or encouraged as a condition of employment in any form whatsoever to make any contribution, loan, subscription or assessment for any political campaign, candidate or organization or for any other political purpose and no employee shall use, seek or promise to use such employee's official authority or influence, directly or indirectly, in connection with the solicitation or receipt of any such contribution, loan, subscription or assessment. 
(3)  Undue influence. No employee shall use, seek or promise to use, directly or indirectly, such employee's official authority or influence to secure for any person a position, promotion, pay increase or other employment advantage or consideration with respect to the classified service or specialized treatment or consideration with respect to any official function or operation of the county. 
(c)  Acceptance of gifts and gratuities. An employee under the civil service system shall not accept gifts, gratuities or loans from organizations, business concerns or individuals with whom such employee has official business relationships. These limitations are not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally, nor to prohibit employees from accepting social courtesies which promote good public relations, nor to prohibit employees from obtaining loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important that inspectors, contracting officers and enforcement officers guard against relationships which might be construed as evidence of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. Any employee who accepts bribes, gifts, gratuities or other unfair considerations shall be subject to disciplinary action and/or dismissal. 
(d)  Employment other than in county. An employee under the civil service system may not accept employment in addition to county employment if such employment interferes with the performance of the county position, if there is a conflict of interest, if employment occurs during county working hours or if employment involves performing the duties that should be performed during county employment. Failure to comply with this subsection by any covered employee will constitute grounds for dismissal. 
(e)  Nepotism (employment of relatives restricted). To prevent preferential or discriminatory treatment in the workplace based upon family or dating relationships, the following policy will be made upon adoption by the county commission: 
(1)  No person who is a "family member" of the county manager shall be eligible for employment with the county. 
(2)  No employee of the county, shall be allowed to work under the immediate supervision or in the direct line of authority of a "family member" or someone with whom he or she is having a "dating relationship." 
(3)  The term "immediate supervision" includes the responsibility and accountability for assigning work, evaluating performance, hiring, disciplining, or training. 
(4)  The term "direct line of authority" includes an employee's immediate supervisor and each direct level of supervision all the way up to the top supervisory employee. 
(5)  The term "family member" includes a spouse, parent, brother, sister, step-parent, child, step-child, grandparent, grandchild, or the same by relation of the employees' marriage. 
(6)  The term "dating relationship" is defined as an intimate relationship, primarily characterized by the expectation of romantic affection or sexual involvement. The term "dating relationship" does not include a casual relationship or ordinary association between persons in a business or social context. 
(7)  In the event that any two (2) employees, subsequent to their hiring, develop a dating relationship or become family members, the more senior employee (by position, not years of service) has a duty to immediately inform his or her supervisor or another employee in that direct line of authority. Thereafter, either employee may voluntarily apply for a lateral transfer (out of the direct line of authority of the family member/dating partner) within the departments of the county or may resign. If the senior employee fails to inform a supervisor OR if both employees refuse to voluntarily resign or transfer, both employees shall be in violation of this policy and may be subject to immediate dismissal. 
(8)  Also, if an employee applies for a lateral transfer and is either (1) not qualified, (2) denied a position for other legitimate reasons, or (3) no position is available, one (1) of the family members/dating partners must elect to resign or be dismissed. 
(9)  A subsequent "break-up" of a dating or family relationship will be individually evaluated by the personnel director as to whether and how this policy should continue to apply. 
(10)  Notwithstanding the foregoing: 
a.  Those individuals in violation of this nepotism policy at the time of its adoption shall not be subject to this policy with respect to those existing family relationships. 
b.  This policy shall not apply to any elected official of Floyd County, Georgia, nor shall it apply to any employee who is a family member as outlined above to an elected official if said employee is employed with Floyd County, Georgia, at the time the elected official assumes the duties and responsibilities of said office. 
c.  This policy shall also not apply to any employee who is in a dating relationship with an elected official at the time the elected official assumes the duties and responsibilities of said office. 
(f)  Residency. All county department heads not subject to subsection (1) below shall, if at all practical, be residents of the county at the time of their appointment or shall become residents of the county within six (6) months of their appointment. 
(1)  All county employees and/or department heads listed below shall, as a condition to employment with floyd county, be required to live within a twenty-five-mile radius of the employees' assigned work station. All affected personnel shall have one (1) year from the date of the enactment of Ordinance No. 2000-006A (January 9, 2001) to comply with said twenty-five-mile radius requirement. The affected personnel are as follows: (a) county manager, (b) county police chief, (c) county public works director, (d) county utilities administrator, (e) county correctional institute warden, (f) EMA director, (g) 911 director, (h) facilities manager, (i) airport manager, (j) animal control director. 
(2)  The purpose of this section is to make the affected personnel available for prompt emergency response in matters affecting the county. 
(g)  Use of county equipment. No employee of the county shall use any county-owned equipment and/or vehicles outside of the county, except in the following instances: 
(1)  As authorized by the board of commissioners in response to a request from another governmental agency. 
(2)  In response to a mutual aid agreement the board of commissioners has entered into with another governmental agency. 
(3)  During the course of executing a job function essential to county operations (i.e. transporting inmates, hauling supplies such as rock from a location outside of the county, hauling recyclables to a vendor outside the county, transporting equipment to a repair shop outside of the county). 
(4)  Travel to and from seminars, training, conferences, meetings, etc. as authorized by a department head. 
(5)  As part of a statewide or regional task force as authorized by the police chief or sheriff. 
(6)  Escorting athletic teams affiliated with the county school system out of the county if specifically requested to do so. 
(h)  Official Internet and online use policy. 
(1)  Policy and purpose. Officials and employees of the county may be authorized to use the Internet and applicable online services for the support of all county tasks. Use of the Internet is public and a privilege, not a right, which may be revoked at any time for unacceptable use. The county retains the right to keep, retrieve and monitor all access to Internet and online service activity, but only for good cause and when there is a strong likelihood that said access is being abused and/or there is unacceptable use. Restrictions may be placed on the use of the Internet or online services to protect the county and its resources. 
(2)  Definitions. As used in this document, the term: 
a.  Department head means the head of a department or agency, or the department head's designee. 
b.  Home page means the county's information page(s) on the Internet/World Wide Web. The county's home page will contain comprehensive information for the public on county services. 
c.  Malicious code means computer viruses or other programs introduced purposely to disrupt, destroy or damage county information technology. 
d.  Official provider means an Internet service provider officially selected for use by the county departments through a county request for proposal (RFP) or competitive bid process. 
(3)  Standards. 
a.  Official provider. Official county Internet service providers will be selected based on standard purchasing policies. 
1.  Other providers. A department may use a different, free, state agency or university account in lieu of a county account, provided use of those accounts is consistent with county policies and provides a legitimate benefit. 
2.  Reserved. 
b.  Acceptable use. Acceptable uses for the Internet will include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Research/education. Communication with professional associations, other governments, universities, businesses and/or individuals associated with the facilitation of county business, research and education efforts, as authorized by a department head. 
2.  General public. Distribution of information to the general public, whereby such information is made available under county guidelines and policies for the release of information and the Freedom of Information Act. 
3.  Incidental communication. Incidental communication among county employees and professional colleagues which facilitates work assignments and professional discussion in a work-related field of knowledge. 
c.  Unacceptable use. Unacceptable uses for the Internet will include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Personal use. Personal use not related to the conduct of work on behalf of the county or other organizations as set forth in agreements or contracts with the county. 
2.  Unlawful access. Efforts to gain unlawful access to information or computer and communications resources. 
3.  Malicious code. Intentional introduction of, or experimentation with, malicious code such as computer worms or viruses. 
4.  No county affiliation. Illegal, fraudulent or malicious activity; political activity; religious promotion; or activity on behalf of organizations or individuals having no affiliation with the county. 
5.  Copyright/patent violations. Transmission of materials in violation of applicable copyright laws or patents. 
6.  Contractual agreements. Entering into contractual agreements via the Internet or making statements on the Internet that may be interpreted as contractual. 
7.  Work interference. Sending of messages likely to result in the loss of recipients' work or systems, and any other types of use that could cause congestion of the network or otherwise interfere with the work of others. 
8.  Obscene/profane. Generating, receiving, viewing, storing, transmitting or other use of data or other matter which is abusive, profane or offensive to a reasonable person. 
9.  Confidential information. Transmitting confidential information using the Internet. 
10.  Web page. To insure a uniform county web presentation, development of a web or home page for personal or department purposes is not permitted on a county account, unless previously authorized by the county manager. 
d.  Costs. The county will financially support Internet or other online service accounts for employees under the following circumstances: 
1.  Budgeted. Funding must be available within a department's adopted budget. 
2.  Departmental regulation. A department head will monitor all usage and costs. 
3.  Efficient/effective use. Users have selected the Internet or another online service as the most efficient and cost-effective tool in comparison with all other communications tools, such as telephone, mail, e-mail or interoffice memos. 
4.  Additional costs. No additional Internet account costs (e.g., upgrading browsers) may be incurred by a user without consent of the department head. 
e.  Procedures. 
1.  Access. A department will register each of its users' names with the MIS department before any outside service is accessed. 
2.  Usage request. A user and the user's department head must complete and sign an Internet/online services use request and return it to MIS before a user name is assigned and access to the Internet is allowed on a county-owned account. 
3.  Remote access. An employee may access a county account from a remote location other than the site designated for that account, (e.g., telecommuting or checking e-mail while away from the office on business) only with the approval of the employee's supervisor and only for county business. 
4.  Signature line. All users must establish a signature line at the bottom of every message that includes the user's name, department and telephone number. 
5.  Anti-virus scans. Files from outside sources, including the Internet, must be scanned by the user or the user's department with anti-virus software before first use. 
6.  Compliance review. Violations of the Internet policy and procedures will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the department head. Violations may result in disciplinary action, and may include referral of a case to the appropriate authorities for civil or criminal prosecution. 
i.  Random audits. MIS may make random internal audits of Internet or online use. 
ii.  County examinations. MIS and/or the county have the right to examine any information sent via the Internet. 
f.  Periodic review. These procedures and standards will be reviewed at least every two (2) years by the MIS department, who will make recommendations to the county manager concerning any changes that need to be made. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XV; Amend. of 4-7-98, § 1; Amend. of 7-28-98 (2), § 1; Amend. of 9-8-98(2), § 1; Amend. of 10-13-98, § 1; Amend. of 3-23-99(2), § 1; Ord. No. 2000-002A, § 3, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 2000-006A, § 1, 1-9-01; Ord. No. 2008-001A, § VIII, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 2-14-46. - Abandonment of position. 
An employee who, without valid reasons, fails to report to work for three (3) consecutive workdays without authorized leave shall be separated from the payroll and shall be reported in writing to the personnel director by the department head as having abandoned such employee's position. Such employee shall not be eligible for reemployment. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XVI) 
Sec. 2-14-47. - Retirement. 
When an employee intends to retire, except in cases of emergency, thirty (30) days' notice must be presented to the personnel director by the department head to ensure proper recruitment and training of a replacement. An employee may retire earlier, provided such employee meets the requirements outlined in the approved county retirement plan. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XVII) 
Sec. 2-14-48. - Deaths. 
Deaths. The department head shall report the death of an employee to the director. Payment for accumulated leave and salary shall be made to the estate of the deceased. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XVIII; Ord. No. 2008-001A, § IX, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 2-14-49. - Attendance and leave. 
(a)  Attendance and work hours. The established work period for Floyd County is forty (40) hours per week. However, a department head shall establish the hours of attendance for employees under his/her direction subject to the approval of the county manager and may make other regulations in regard to attendance, as necessary. 
(b)  Vacation (annual leave). Employees are encouraged to use their vacation time. No employee shall receive pay in lieu of vacation time taken. Annual leave is accrued on unbroken service per the following schedule: 

 
(c)  Request for leave. A request for annual leave shall be submitted in writing by an employee to such employee's immediate supervisor and/or department head on a form designated by the personnel director. Leave may be taken only after approval by the department head or such department head's authorized representative, and only when an employee's absence will not greatly burden the work schedule of the department. 
(d)  Maximum allowable accumulation. Annual leave may be accumulated to a maximum of four hundred eighty (480) hours. Leave accumulated beyond four hundred eighty (480) hours shall be forfeited with no compensation. 
(e)  Payment of unused leave. When an employee is separated from a civil service position such employee shall be paid for all unused annual leave provided such employee has been cleared of all county property issued to such employee and has no outstanding liabilities or debts to the county. Annual leave with pay shall not be paid or granted to emergency or per diem employees. Permanent part-time employees shall earn leave in proportion to the number of hours worked. 
(f)  Nonworkdays. Employees are charged with annual leave for absence only on days which they would otherwise work and receive pay. No charge is made against annual leave for absences on holidays and nonwork or snow days established by the governing authority. If the county government is officially closed due to snow or inclement weather conditions, employees shall receive regular pay without deductions to vacation or sick leave. Any employee who, by the nature of their work, is required to work a regularly scheduled shift on an official county closing due to inclement weather conditions or snow day shall be credited with a day of annual leave for each such day worked or a portion thereof. In the event that there is an emergency call out, the emergency call out policy would apply. 
(g)  Official business. An employee who is on official business is not on leave and should always conduct himself or herself in a manner becoming to Floyd County Government. 
(h)  Holidays. Civil service employees shall be entitled to the following paid holidays: 

 
(1)  If a holiday falls on Saturday, it will be observed the preceding Friday. If a holiday falls on Sunday, it will be observed the following Monday. If Christmas Day falls on Saturday, it and Christmas Eve will be observed on the previous Thursday and Friday. If Christmas Day falls on Sunday, Christmas Eve will be observed on Friday, and Christmas Day will be observed on Monday. If Christmas Day falls on Monday, Christmas Eve will be observed on Monday and Christmas Day will be observed on Tuesday. 
(2)  Any employee, who by the nature of their work, is required to work a regularly scheduled shift on a county holiday, shall be credited with a day of annual leave for each such holiday worked. Any employee who would ordinarily be off on a holiday, but is required to work as a result of an emergency, shall be paid for the holiday hours worked at the applicable overtime rate. 
(i)  Sick leave and sick leave buy back policy. 
(1)  Rate of accrual. Employees under the civil service shall accrue sick leave at the rate of eight 3.69 hours biweekly. There is no maximum accumulation. 
(2)  Sick leave usage. An employee may use sick leave upon approval of the department head for absence due to illness or injury; for absence necessitated by exposure to contagious disease which would endanger others by such employee's attendance; for absence due to dental treatment; for absence due to preventive medical care; or for absence due to illness, accident, or death of the employee's immediate family requiring the employee's presence. In case of accidental injury or occupational disease where compensation is payable under Georgia Worker's Compensation Act, the employee may utilize sick leave during the period of disability only to the extent of the difference between such compensation and the employee's regular salary as provided in this article. A request shall be submitted before leave usage, when possible, or immediately upon return from illness or injury. 
(3)  Certification by physician. A medical certificate signed by a licensed physician may be required by a department head to substantiate a request for sick leave for the following reasons: 
a.  Any period of absence consisting of three (3) or more consecutive working days. 
b.  To support a request for sick leave during a period when the employee is on vacation leave. 
c.  Leave of any duration, if absence from duty recurs frequently or habitually, provided the employee has been warned that a certificate will be required. 
(4)  Payment of unused leave. Employees in good standing, with ten (10) or more years of service, the last five (5) being continuous, shall be paid in a single payment at termination for unused sick leave according to the following schedule: 
a.  Persons employed after January 1, 1983 shall be paid a maximum of ninety (90) days (seven hundred twenty (720) hours) of unused leave. 
b.  Persons employed before January 1, 1983 with ninety (90) days (seven hundred twenty (720) hours) of unused sick leave or less shall be paid for their unused sick leave to a maximum of ninety (90) days (seven hundred twenty (720) hours). 
c.  Persons employed before January 1, 1983 with more than ninety (90) days (seven hundred twenty (720) hours) of unused sick leave shall be paid for that amount or the amount at termination, whichever is less. Any unused leave days not paid at termination shall be credited as service for the purpose of computing retirement. 
d.  If payment is made to an employee, before termination, who qualifies as provided in subsections 1, 2 and 3 above, such payment will be deducted from the maximum amount payable to the employee at termination. The employee may continue to use accrued leave. 
e.  Persons employed after the effective date of these policies shall not be paid for unused sick leave upon termination. 
(5)  Permanent part-time employees. Sick leave with pay shall not be granted to emergency or per diem employees. Permanent part-time employees shall earn leave in proportion to the number of hours worked. 
(6)  Extended illness. If an absence, because of illness, extends beyond the sick leave accrued to the credit of an employee, such additional time will be charged to accrued annual leave. If all accrued sick and annual leave is used, the employee will be granted leave-without-pay or dismissed. 
(7)  Sick leave buy back policy. 
a.  Term. The sick leave buy back policy will be initiated on November 1, for a twelve-month period each year. Beginning November 1, 2008, employees shall be eligible for sick leave buy back based on the number of sick leave days that the employee used during the preceding twelve-month period. A "day" is defined as any eight-hour period based on the normal operation day of your department in a twenty-four-hour period. Any days taken in a no pay status or as sick time used pursuant to a workers' compensation injury will be counted as sick time usage. 
b.  Eligibility. 
(1)  To be eligible for sick leave buy back policy, the employee must: 
i.  Have accrued at least ninety-six (96) hours of sick leave each program year; and 
ii.  Complete and return the sick leave buy back form after November but prior to December of each year to confirm the employee's incentive pay and request buy back of sick leave. 
(2)  If an employee has used three (3) or more days of sick leave in the previous year, said employee is not eligible for sick leave buy back. 
c.  Employees eligible for sick leave buy back will be paid on the last payday of December. 
d.  Eligible employees shall have the option to sell back unused sick days as follows: 

 
(j)  Military leave. 
(1)  Any permanent employee who joins the military forces of the United States or who is inducted by the Selective Service shall, upon request, be placed on military leave without pay for the initial term of enlistment not to exceed five (5) years maximum. Time limits for returning to work depend on the duration of the orders. The rules are: Service of one (1) to thirty (30) days: The beginning of the first regularly scheduled work period on the first full day following completion of service and expiration of an eight-hour rest period. Service of thirty-one (31) to one hundred eighty (180) days: fourteen (14) days after completion of military duty. Service of one hundred eighty-one (181) days or more: ninety (90) days after completion of military duty. The employee shall be entitled to the same or comparable position, including seniority, status, and pay, if application is made within the appropriate period, as described above. The discharges must be classified as other than dishonorable and the employee must be physically and mentally capable of performing the work of the position. The returning employee shall also be entitled to any increases in salary (including cost-of-living increases) or any advancement in grade which would normally be accorded the incumbent of the position, with exception of any increases or advancement in grade which would normally be dependent on meritorious performance of duties of the position. Re-employment shall not necessitate the laying off of another person who was appointed at an earlier date than the person returning from military leave. 
(2)  Any permanent employee who is a member of the National Guard or Military Reserve of the United States shall be allowed a leave of absence, with full pay and benefits not to exceed eighteen (18) calendar days during any calendar year, to attend training and not to exceed thirty (30) days during any calendar year if activated by the governor. Such leave shall not be charged to any other category of leave. The employee must present proper military orders and/or other documentation to the personnel director in order to receive military leave. 
(k)  Court leave. 
(1)  Jury duty. An employee called for jury duty shall be granted court leave and shall be excused from work upon presentation of a court notice to such employee's department head to that effect. The employee shall be paid such employee's regular pay provided such employee submits evidence of actual days spent in court. The employee must return to work promptly when dismissed or released by the court. Jury duty fees will be kept by the employee. 
(2)  Subpoenas. Employees subpoenaed as a witness for the court shall be excused from work upon presentation of a subpoena to the department head to that effect. The employee may avail such employee of annual leave for the time spent in court, unless the subpoena is for a work-related matter, in which case the employee will be paid such employee's regular pay provided such employee submits evidence of the actual days spent in court. Witness fees will be kept by the employee. 
(l)  Funeral leave. Funeral leave of up to three (3) working days will be granted with pay for an employee absent from duty as a result of death in the immediate family. Funeral leave shall not be charged to sick or annual leave. All funeral leave must be approved by the human resources director. Immediate family is defined as: spouse, son, daughter, parent, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, sibling, grandparent, grandchild, or step-father, step-mother, step-son, or step-daughter or any relative domiciled in an employee's household. 
(m)  Leave without pay. A department head, upon written request of a permanent employee, may grant a leave of absence without pay for any period of twelve (12) months or less. The department head shall immediately notify the director in writing of the approved leave-without-pay status of the employee and the proposed return date. A department head may refill the position on a temporary basis. 
Leave without pay shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Leave without pay shall be granted only when it will not adversely affect the interest of the department and the county government. 
(2)  Failure of an employee to return to work at the expiration of approved leave shall be considered as absent without leave and grounds for disciplinary action and/or dismissal. 
(3)  An employee granted leave of absence who wishes to return before the leave period has expired shall be required to notify his/her department head immediately. Upon approval of the department head, the employee shall be permitted to return to work. 
(4)  No sick leave, annual leave, longevity, retirement, nor credit toward merit increases will be earned by an employee for the time the employee is on leave without pay. 
(5)  An employee shall return from leave without pay in the same classification and pay status. 
(6)  An employee, while on an authorized leave of absence without pay, shall not obtain either part-time or full-time employment elsewhere without the approval of the department head. 
A department head may grant a working test employee a leave of absence without pay for a period of fourteen (14) days or less. The department head shall immediately notify the director in writing of the approved leave and the return date. An employee's working test shall be extended by the number of days leave without pay status, and no leave shall be earned for any month the employee was in a non-pay status. Valid reason for the leave of absence must be presented to the department head prior to his/her approval. examples of such reasons include maternity, temporary spouse transfer and personal, non-business related problems. 
(n)  Nondisciplinary, administrative leave. 
(1)  Relieving of duty. An employee may be placed in a nondisciplinary, administrative leave status without loss of pay, benefits, seniority or other status when it is necessary to conduct a fact-finding investigation around circumstances requiring clarification of possible wrong doings or possible rule violations. An employee may also be placed on nondisciplinary, administrative leave status to protect such employee's health, welfare or safety because of unfavorable or possible harmful work situations of a temporary nature. A department head shall immediately notify the personnel director when an employee is placed on administrative leave. 
(2)  Employee's status. When an employee is placed on nondisciplinary, administrative leave, every effort shall be made to protect the property and liberty interest of the employee so that there is no loss of pay, benefits, seniority or status. The personnel records of the employee shall reflect only that the employee was placed on administrative leave for period. Such action shall clearly indicate nonprejudicial status implying neither guilt nor innocence, and shall not reflect adversely on the employee's standing with the county government in any future personnel action. 
(3)  Employee's rights during administrative leave. During the investigation to determine facts or to clarify circumstances, the employee placed on nondisciplinary, administrative leave shall be provided with preliminary findings of the investigation. Such employee may be represented or present evidence as circumstances require. 
(4)  Termination of administrative leave status. Following the findings of the investigation or the ending of unfavorable work situations, an employee shall return to duty promptly without penalty, if cleared, or shall be disciplined if the circumstances indicate. When an employee is placed in disciplinary status, such employee shall have full rights to answer charges, to be represented, if necessary, to present evidence, and shall be afforded all appeal rights. Nondisciplinary, administrative leave shall not be charged to annual, sick or other leave categories. 
(5)  Incentive pay. After their probationary period, law enforcement officers with arrest powers who have successfully completed forty-five (45) quarter hours or their equivalent of criminal justice or related courses at a regionally accredited vocational technical school, junior, senior college or university, shall be paid three hundred thirty-six dollars ($336.00) on the last pay period in June of each year. An additional three hundred thirty-six dollars ($336.00) shall be paid for a related degree from a regionally accredited college or university. 
(o)  Maternity leave. 
(1)  The employee concerned shall complete an application for family medical leave and file a written request for maternity leave with her department head at least two (2) weeks prior to the effective date (unless emergency conditions prohibit the filing of such prior notice, in which case, it shall be filed as soon as possible). The request shall be accompanied by a letter from the employee's doctor certifying that she is, in the doctor's opinion, no longer able to carry out the duties and responsibilities of her position. Also included should be an approximate determination by the employee's doctor as to the period of disability due to pregnancy. 
(2)  The employee shall keep such employee's immediate supervisor informed of such employee's status, and shall inform the supervisor as soon as possible as to the date the employee's doctor has indicated such employee can be expected to return to work. 
(3)  If the employee's disability due to pregnancy-related conditions exceeds the sick and annual leaves credited to the employee, the supervisor shall inform the employee as to the proper procedure for applying for leave without pay. 
(4)  The employee shall, upon return to work, present a letter from such employee's doctor certifying that such employee is, in the doctor's opinion, able to resume the duties and responsibilities of such employee's position. 
(p)  Injury leave. Injury leave shall be granted to any county employee who is unable to perform such employee's normal duties because of an occupational illness, injury or disability arising out of or in the course of such employee's employment, as defined by law. An employee who sustains an injury on the job will immediately report the injury to the personnel director who will initiate worker's compensation and other benefits. Employees receiving injury leave (nondebit sick leave) with pay who simultaneously receive compensation under the Worker's Compensation Act shall, for the first six (6) months of their injury, receive their regular salary minus the benefits paid by worker's compensation. Any injury leave extending beyond six (6) months must be approved by the board of commissioners. Only those employees who are unable to perform their regular duties or any modified or alternative duties as authorized by the department head may be granted injury leave. Injury leave shall not accrue and shall be independent of sick and vacation leaves. A physician's certificate must be furnished for all injury leave. 
(q)  Snow days. When winter conditions affect the operations of Floyd County, the following conditions will prevail: 
(1)  All closings must be approved by the county manager; 
(2)  When a county facility is officially closed, no reduction in pay will occur. Employees will receive regular pay without deduction from vacation or sick leave; 
(3)  If the county facility does not officially close and an employee is unable to report to work because of the weather, then the employee may: 
a.  Designate the off day as a paid day of vacation; or 
b.  Designate the off day as a day off without pay. 
Any employee who, by the nature of their work, is required to work a regularly scheduled shift on an official county closing due to inclement weather shall be credited with a day of annual leave for each such day worked or portion thereof. 
(r)  Shared leave program. The shared leave program is a means for a Floyd County employee to donate sick leave or vacation leave to a fellow employee, who is eligible for and requests leave while experiencing a serious health condition as defined, and which has caused, or is likely to cause, the employee to take leave without pay. 
This program applies to all employees of Floyd County who accrue sick leave. 
Definitions: 
(1)  "Employee recipient" - An employee who accrues sick leave and who has had continuous employment for at least six (6) months preceding the serious health condition. The recipient employee must have used all his/her extended sick leave, vacation leave, and compensatory time hours (if applicable) prior to being eligible to receive shared leave. Shared leave is not available for employees in off-work status due to workers' compensation. 
(2)  "Employee donor" - An employee who accrues sick leave and vacation and has a combined balance of at least one hundred twenty hours (120) hours. A donating employee can donate leave at anytime during the budget year up to a maximum of forty (40) hours per year. 
(3)  "Serious health condition" - A serious, extreme, catastrophic, or life-threatening medical condition is a period of incapacity requiring the employee to be medically unable to work for a period of seven (7) days or more. The medical conditions includes continuing treatment or supervision by a health care provider; or continuing treatment of a chronic or long-term health condition. The employee must be suffering from an extraordinary or severe illness, injury, impairment, or physical or mental condition, which has caused, or is likely to cause, the employee to take leave without pay. 
Any medical information forwarded to the human resources office will remain confidential and will not be shared with other employees or elsewhere within Floyd County. 
No employee shall be coerced, threatened, intimidated, or financially induced into donating paid leave for purposes of the shared leave program. 
Application to become a leave recipient. 
An employee may make written application to human resources to become a leave recipient using a shared leave request form provided by the human resources department. 
If an employee is not capable of making application on his/her own behalf, a personal representative, having documented power of attorney for the potential leave recipient, may make written application on behalf of the employee. 
In order for a request to receive donated leave to be approved, the employee must: 
(1)  Have completed the initial probationary period; and 
(2)  Provide certification from a licensed physician that the employee has a life-threatening or emergency medical condition; and, 
(3)  Have exhausted all sick and vacation leave (or provide credible medical evidence that he/she will have exhausted all sick and vacation leave before the medical condition is resolved). 
A potential leave recipient may request up to one hundred sixty (160) hours of leave transfer at one time, and may make up to three (3) applications for leave transfer within a calendar year, for a maximum total of four hundred eighty (480) hours requested per calendar year. 
The estate of an employee, who is awarded shared leave and dies before exhausting the allotment, shall not be entitled to any compensation for unused shared leave from the pool. Upon the death of an employee, the pool administrator shall return any unused shared leave back to the pool. 
Each application must include a complete shared leave request form and physician's certification of medical condition form provided by the human resources department. 
Approval of application to become a leave recipient. 
Each application will be reviewed by the human resources director or by members of a selected shared leave committee. The appointment of these committee members will be decided by the human resources director. 
The director or committee's decision to approve or disapprove a request for shared leave will be by simple majority vote and may be the result of communication by email, telephone, or other means in lieu of meeting together in one location. 
If the application is approved, human resources will notify the leave recipient (or the personal representative who made application on behalf of the leave recipient), within ten (10) working days after the date the application was received that: 
(1)  The application has been approved; and 
(2)  Other employees may request the transfer of annual or sick leave to the account of the leave recipient. 
The leave recipient or his or her representative may then advise potential donors that they may use the shared leave donation form as provided by the human resources department to request transfer of some of their leave to the leave recipient's account. When soliciting leave from other employees, potential leave recipients must be careful to refrain from any activity that might be interpreted as pressuring other employees to donate leave. Potential leave recipients and their representative must refrain from using the county's email to solicit leave by revealing a medical condition, as emailing of medical information may violate HIPAA privacy guidelines. 
If the application is not approved, the committee will notify the applicant (or the personal representative who made application on behalf of the potential leave recipient), within ten (10) working days after the date the application was received that: 
(1)  The application has not been approved; and 
(2)  The reason(s) for its disapproval. 
Requests not approved may be appealed in writing to the human resources director. 
Donation of leave. 
An employee may submit a shared leave donation form to human resources, requesting that a specified number of hours of leave be transferred from his/her vacation or sick leave account to the sick leave account of a specified leave recipient. Requests for leave transfers must be in eight-hour increments. A leave donor must retain a combined total of one hundred twenty (120) hours of leave in his/her own sick leave/vacation account (pro rated for part-time employees). If you wish to donate leave prior to separating from Floyd County (retirement, changing jobs), you may not donate more hours than you could use during the remainder of your employment. For example, if you have ten (10) working days until retirement, you may donate only eighty (80) leave hours (eight (8) hours x ten (10) days). The one hundred-twenty-hour rule still applies (see above). 
The county will not transfer vacation or sick leave to a leave donor's immediate or upper-level supervisor(s) or subordinates. 
Leave donation forms will be accepted until the total amount donated is equal to the amount approved by the shared leave committee. 
Leave donors have the choice of donating leave to an employee of his/her choosing or either donating leave to the shared leave pool, which will be used by future approved employees of the shared leave program. 
If the leave recipient does not use all the donated leave, unused leave in excess of twenty (20) hours will be re-deposited in a shared leave pool that is available to all approved employees in the program. Unused leave less than twenty (20) hours will be kept by the recipient. 
Alleged abuse of shared leave shall be investigated, and if warranted, the participating employee shall repay all sick leave drawn from the pool and may have his/her membership in the pool terminated by decision of the human resources director or by majority vote from an implemented shared leave committee. In addition, the employee may be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with Floyd County's disciplinary procedures. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XIX; Mo. of 2-27-90; Amend. of 8-22-95; Ord. No. 2008-001A, §§ X—XIX, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 2-14-50. - Grievance procedure. 
(a)  Policy. It is the policy of county government to foster employee satisfaction and to give careful consideration and attention to any complaint. For the purpose of this article, a grievance shall be considered to be any matter concerning: 
(1)  Employment or productivity that has been adversely affected by unfair treatment; 
(2)  Unsafe or unhealthy working conditions; 
(3)  Erroneous or capricious application of county policies and procedures; or 
(4)  Unlawful discrimination. This definition applies to all classified employees. 
(b)  Informal grievance procedure. An employee who has a problem or complaint should first try to resolve it through discussion with such employee's immediate supervisor without delay. If, after discussion, the employee does not believe the problem has been satisfactorily resolved, such employee shall then have the right to file a formal grievance in writing within five (5) workdays after receiving the informal decision. An informal grievance shall not be taken above the department head. 
(c)  Formal grievance procedure. 
(1)  First level of review. A grievance shall be presented in writing to the employee's immediate supervisor, who shall render such supervisor's decision and comments in writing and return them to the employee within five (5) workdays after receiving the grievance. If the employee does not agree with such employee's supervisor's decision, or if the immediate supervisor fails to provide resolution of the grievance as outlined above, the employee may present the appeal in writing to such employee's supervisor's immediate supervisor. Failure of the employee to take further action within five (5) workdays after receipt of the written decision of such employee's supervisor, or within ten (10) workdays if no decision is rendered, will constitute a withdrawal of the grievance. 
(2)  Further level of review as appropriate. The supervisor receiving the grievance shall review it, render such supervisor's decision and comments in writing, and return them to the employee within five (5) workdays after receiving the appeal. If the employee does not agree with the decision, or if no answer has been received within five (5) workdays after the supervisor receives the grievance, the employee may present the grievance in writing to the department head. Failure of the employee to take further action within five (5) workdays after receipt of the written decision of the supervisor, or within ten (10) workdays if no decision is rendered, will constitute a withdrawal of the grievance. 
(3)  Department review. The department head receiving the grievance, or such department head's designated representative, shall discuss the grievance with the employee, such employee's representative, if any, and with other appropriate persons. The department head shall render such department head's decision and comments in writing, and return them to the employee within five (5) workdays after receiving the grievance. If the employee does not agree with the decision reached, or if the department head fails to provide resolution of the grievance as outlined above, the employee may present such employee's grievance in writing to the county manager. Failure of the employee to take further action within five (5) workdays after receipt of the written decision of the department head, or within ten (10) workdays if no decision is rendered, will constitute a withdrawal of the grievance. Department heads may establish internal review committees as a part of the grievance procedure as long as the employee is afforded the opportunity for higher levels of review. 
(4)  County manager. The county manager, upon receiving the grievance, shall discuss the grievance with the employee, such employee's representative, if any, and with other appropriate persons. The county manager shall render such county manager's decision and comments in writing, and return them to the employee within five (5) workdays after receiving the appeal. Decision of the county manager shall be final. 
(d)  Conduct of grievance procedures. 
(1)  The time limits specified above may be extended to a definite date by mutual agreement of the employee and the reviewer concerned. 
(2)  The employee may request the assistance of another person of such employee's own choosing in preparing and presenting such employee's grievance at any level or review. 
(3)  The employee and such employee's representative may be privileged to use a reasonable amount of work time as determined by the appropriate department head in conferring about and presenting the grievance. 
(4)  The employee shall be assured freedom from reprisal for using the grievance procedure. 
(e)  Nongrievable areas. The following areas are not grievable: 
(1)  Issues which are pending or have been conducted by other administrative or judicial procedures. 
(2)  Work assignments which do not result in a demotion or salary reduction. 
(3)  Budget allocations and expectations, and organizational structure, including the persons or number of persons assigned to particular jobs or units. 
(4)  The content or rating of a performance appraisal except when the employee can show that such employee has been adversely affected by the appraisal. 
(5)  The selection of an individual by the department head to fill a position through appointment, promotion or transfer except when the employee can show that such employee has been adversely affected because of unlawful discrimination. 
(6)  Disciplinary actions other than oral reprimands. 
(7)  Any matter which is not within the jurisdiction or control of the department head. 
(8)  Internal security practices established by the department head or the governing authority. 
(9)  Decisions, policies, practices, resolutions or ordinances made or passed by the governing authority or the department head which are not job- or work-related and which do not contradict this article. 
(f)  Sexual harassment. It is not necessary to follow the grievance procedure for claims of sexual discrimination involving sexual harassment. Claims of sexual harassment may be processed privately by expressing the claim to the personnel director. The following policies outline actions that are prohibited: 
(1)  Kidding or joking about sex, directly or indirectly. 
(2)  Hugs, pats and similar physical contacts between employees (other than handshakes). 
(3)  All cartoons, posters and other materials referring to sex, directly or indirectly. 
(4)  Any forms of behavior which may be perceived as sexual in nature and as creating a hostile or intimidating work environment. 
(g)  Procedure for processing employee harassment complaints. 
(1)  The employee advises the personnel director that such employee wants to discuss a harassment problem. 
(2)  The personnel director meets with the complaining employee to discuss such employee's situation and to solicit facts surrounding the incident. 
(3)  The employee is advised that the county will investigate the complaint, which may include interviewing witnesses. 
(4)  The employee is asked to sign a complaint statement to start the investigation, if the problem appears to be of a serious nature and/or possible disciplinary problem. 
(5)  If formal complaint procedure has been satisfied, the personnel director will review the employee's facts and statements and interview witnesses, if appropriate. 
(6)  If the investigation supports the complaining employee, the appropriate department head will decide appropriate action to be taken. County employees will be advised of action taken after it takes place. 
(7)  If the investigation does not support the employee, then the employee will be advised of the results of the investigation, and that without support, no action can be taken. 
(8)  The employee will be reminded of the policy against harassment. 
(h)  ADA complaint procedure. Floyd County has adopted an internal complaint procedure providing for prompt and equitable resolution of complaints alleging any action prohibited by the U.S. Department of Justice regulations implementing Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Title II states, in part that "no otherwise qualified disabled individual shall, solely by reason of such disability, be excluded from the participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination" in programs or activities sponsored by a public entity. Complaints should be addressed to: 
Human Resources Director  Floyd County Human Resources  12 East Fourth Avenue  Rome, Georgia 30161  706-291-5156 
(1)  A complaint must be filed in writing, contain the name, address and phone number of the person filing it, be signed by the complainant or the complainant's authorized representative and briefly but specifically describe the alleged discriminatory action or practice and any relevant facts. Complaints must be filed with the human resources director personally or by U.S. mail. 
(2)  If a disability prevents a complainant from writing, the human resources director, at the request of the complainant, shall seek the assistance of an advocate or assistant to assist the complainant in writing the complaint. 
(3)  A complaint should be filed within thirty (30) days after the complainant becomes aware of the alleged violation. (Processing of allegations of discrimination which occurred before this complaint procedure was in place will be considered on a case-by-case basis.) 
(4)  The human resources director shall conduct an investigation, if warranted. These rules contemplate an informal but thorough investigation, affording all affected persons and their representatives, if any, an opportunity to submit evidence relevant to a complaint. This complaint procedure may also be used by complainants of ADA violations from applicants for employment. 
(5)  A written determination as to the validity of the complaint and a description of the resolution, if any, shall be issued by the human resources director and a copy forwarded to the complainant no later than thirty (30) days after its filing. 
(6)  The complainant may request a reconsideration of the case by the county manager in instances where he/she is dissatisfied with the human resources director's written decision. The request for reconsideration should be in writing and be received by the county manager at the above address within thirty (30) days of the date of the human resources director's decision under subsection (h)(4) above. The county manager may affirm the human resource director's decision or may refer the matter back with instructions about further measures to take to reach a fair resolution. 
(7)  The right of a person to a prompt and equitable resolution of the complaint filed hereunder shall not be impaired by the person's pursuit of other remedies, such as the filing of an ADA complaint with a responsible state or federal agency. Use of this grievance procedure is not a prerequisite to the pursuit of other remedies. 
(8)  The human resources director shall maintain the files and records relating to the complaints filed. 
(9)  The county will not retaliate, coerce, intimidate, or harass an individual who files a complaint against the county alleging discrimination because of a disability. 
(i)  Employee counseling. At any time, an employee who is having job-related problem regarding county employment may seek advice from his or her department head. Should the department head be unable to resolve the problem, the employee shall not be denied the right to discuss the problem with the personnel director. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XX; Ord. No. 2008-001A, § XX, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 2-14-51. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  Any civil service employee who believes that such employee has been terminated without proper cause or disciplined in any way without proper cause may appeal to the personnel board for a hearing after first discussing with the personnel director. Such appeal must be filed in writing with the board not later than ten (10) calendar days after the notification of the action was mailed or from the effective date of the action, whichever is later. 
(b)  When an appeal is received, the personnel director shall notify the personnel board and appropriate department head of the appeal by sending them copies of the appeal. 
(c)  The personnel board shall designate an appropriate time and place to conduct the hearing. The hearing shall be held and determined by the board within forty-five (45) days of the date the appeal is filed with the board. The appellant and the department head concerned shall be notified in writing at least ten (10) working days in advance of the time and place designated for hearing the appeal, and shall have the right to present witnesses, to give evidence and to have legal representation. The hearing may be held in closed session as necessary to protect individual rights or the board may limit those in attendance or separate witnesses. If the appellant chooses, the hearing may be held in open session. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XXI; Ord. of 12-12-17) 
Sec. 2-14-52. - Hearing procedure. 
In the hearing of an appeal before the personnel board, the following procedure shall prevail, and the proceedings shall be as informal as is compatible with justice: 
(1)  The chairman of the board shall read or cause to be read the charges and specifications as filed with the personnel director. The chairman shall then read or cause to be read the letter of appeal as filed with the director. 
(2)  The personnel board shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications as filed by the department head, and shall not consider evidence beyond the scope of the charges, and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: The department head shall present evidence in support of the charges; the appellant shall then present evidence in support of such appellant's appeal. The evidence of each party may be supported by the submission of pertinent documents. The personnel board will allow each party to present rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The employee and department head may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross-examine witnesses. In addition, the personnel board and the personnel director may interrogate both parties and all witnesses to obtain necessary information. 
(5)  The personnel board, after arriving at a final decision on an appeal, shall cause an order to be prepared within thirty (30) calendar days setting forth its decision and directing appropriate remedies, if any, to resolve the appeal. The decision of the board in such cases shall be final and conclusive, in the absence of an appellate review in the courts. Copies of the board order shall be made a matter of official record and shall be furnished to all parties at interest in the matter. 
(6)  The personnel board may, within thirty (30) days from the date of order, on its own motion or on the motion of any party at interest, reopen an appeal case and vacate, modify or revise its former order so as to lessen but not increase the penalty imposed; but after the end of such thirty (30) days, the board shall not have the authority to reopen a case for any reason. 
(7)  If the personnel board disaffirms the department head on a suspension or dismissal, the appealing employee shall return to work on the workday immediately following the announcement of the decision. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XXII) 
Sec. 2-14-53. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Records. 
(1)  Written notice of personnel actions. All personnel actions regarding appointments or changes in status or pay shall be made on forms prescribed by the personnel director. The department head shall forward all personnel action forms to the director. Appointments shall not become effective until approved by the director. 
(2)  Employee records. The personnel director shall maintain an individual file for each employee under the civil service system which shall contain application forms, examinations, personnel action for, reports of performance, records of promotion, records of reclassification and changes in pay, and other pertinent documents and information. 
(3)  Applicant records. The personnel director shall maintain applicant records for employment including application forms, correspondence, examinations and other pertinent documents and information. 
(4)  Retention and destruction of records. Employee records shall be kept in their original form for an indefinite period of time after termination. Applicant records, including correspondence, applications and examinations, may be destroyed after two (2) years or in accordance with approved retention schedules. 
(5)  Public inspection of records. All personnel records of employees under the civil service system and all other documents, examinations and materials related to personnel administration shall be considered confidential and the property of the personnel director. Information which is obtained in the course of the official duties shall not be released by any person other than those charged with this responsibility as part of official duties. Personnel records shall be accessible only to the department heads and the designated supervisors concerned, the civil service board and staff, and the employee concerned. The following information relative to employees and former employees shall be made available by the director for public inspection at reasonable times and in accordance with procedures as the board may prescribe: name, classification, salary range and length of service. Other information may be made available for official purposes at the discretion of the director. 
(b)  Minutes and records of the personnel board. The personnel director shall prepare and maintain minutes and records of meetings of the personnel board. 
(c)  Employee evaluations (reports of performance). The director shall administer a fair and objective system to evaluate employee job performance. Such evaluation shall be job related and shall be implemented by the various department heads on forms prescribed by the director. Department heads shall ensure that permanent employees are evaluated at least every twelve (12) months and immediately prior to any proposed salary advancement or promotion. Probationary employees shall be evaluated once, just prior to the expiration of the probationary period. When an employee is separated from employment, the department head shall indicate whether or not he/she would recommend that employee for re-employment. All salary advancements and promotions depend upon successful and satisfactory performance as indicated by the report of performance. In the event of lay-off or reduction in force, the report of performance will be considered for each employee affected as described in these rules. An employee may appeal a report of performance to the board within ten (10) days of the effective date as prescribed in the appeals procedures. 
(d)  Amendments to rules. If, and when, it is desirable in the interest of good administration, the personnel board may recommend amendments, additions to, or changes in this article to the governing authority. Such amendments, additions to or changes, when approved by the governing authority, shall become a part of this article. All amendments shall be numbered and dated. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XXIII; Ord. No. 2008-001A, § XXI, 1-8-08) 
Sec. 2-14-54. - Accident, injury, safety violation review policy and procedures. 
(a)  General policy. The county considers the prevention of accidents essential to the well-being of its employees and the general public. Employees are expected to use the highest degree of care in the exercise of their duties, to abide by all safety rules and procedures, and to attend safety training programs as requested. Department heads will be responsible for enforcement of safety rules and procedures. Firm but equitable disciplinary measures will be established for rule violations and employee negligence. Periodic safety inspections will be made of county vehicles, equipment and facilities. All accidents will be investigated and appropriate actions taken to prevent recurrence. 
(b)  Reporting procedures. 
(1)  All accidents or incidents resulting in property damage or bodily injury will be reported immediately by all employees to their supervisors. Supervisors will immediately notify the county manager and the personnel department. Employees involved with the accident or incident may be required to submit to drug and alcohol tests. Within twenty-four (24) hours of the accident or incident, each employee involved will complete a report using an approved form and submit it to his or her supervisor for review. If the employee is injured, the supervisor will obtain the facts and complete the report. Within forty-eight (48) hours, the report will be signed by the supervisor and department head and delivered to the secretary of the accident review board. Copies of the report will also be sent to the county manager and the personnel department. 
(2)  The police will be called to investigate all vehicular accidents. Except as required by law, in the case of all accidents or incidents, the employee shall not move the county vehicle from the points at which such vehicle came to rest until proper investigative law enforcement officers order the moving of such vehicle. The employee shall request photographs be taken by his immediate supervisor or the investigative officer on the scene. Photographs shall be taken of every accident or incident. 
(c)  Accident review board. 
(1)  Composition. The accident review board will have five (5) regular members plus one (1) ex-officio member. The department heads for county police, sheriff's department, prison, water and public works will each select one (1) person from their respective departments to be a member of the board. The personnel director will select a person from his department to be an ex-officio member of the board. 
(2)  Terms. The board will select three (3) members to serve initial one-year terms and three (3) to serve initial two-year terms. After the first year, all members will serve two-year terms with three (3) new members being selected annually. 
(3)  Officers. Each year the board will select one (1) of its members to serve as chairperson. The board will also designate an individual to serve as secretary. 
(4)  Duties. The board will review all reported accidents and incidents. When requested by the county manager, it will make a determination of the county's liability for damages or injuries. Employees involved with accidents will be notified of their right to present evidence to the board, and may be required to appear before the board for the purpose of answering questions. Where the damage or injury was caused by the negligence or intent of the employee, it will be declared to be a "chargeable accident." The board will furnish the county manager and the personnel department with a copy of the minutes of all meetings. 
(5)  Meetings. The board will meet regularly twice a month. An initial review of all reported accidents will be done at the first meeting each month. All accidents found to be chargeable at the first meeting will be referred to the second meeting for a final review. At the request of the county manager or in the event of an accident involving a serious injury or property loss, the chairperson may call for a special meeting. Each accident review board shall set the days of its monthly meetings but will only be required to meet twice each month. The regular meeting dates shall be posted and each affected party shall receive a written notice of said hearing date. 
(d)  Disciplinary action. 
(1)  When the accident review board has found an accident to be chargeable, the following progressive disciplinary policy becomes effective: 

 
However, certain chargeable accidents involving gross negligence or a total disregard for one's safety or the safety of others may require more severe action initially, including dismissal. 
(2)  After the personnel department has been notified of a "chargeable accident," it will review the personnel file of the employee to determine whether there have been other chargeable accidents within the preceding twelve (12) months. The personnel department will then make a recommendation to the employee's department head based on the county's progressive disciplinary policy. The department head will review the recommendation of the personnel department and the particular facts and circumstances involved and will take disciplinary action against the employee in accordance with county policy. If appropriate, the department head may also require the employee to have an eye and/or medical examination and attend a defensive driving course. 
(3)  Civil service employees who believe that they have been unfairly discriminated against as a result of disciplinary action taken under these policies may appeal to the personnel board by following the procedures described in Section XXI of the personnel policies. 
(Ord. of 4-5-88, § XXIV; Ord. of 3-9-93, §§ 1—3; Ord. of 11-11-97(2), § 1; Amend. of 6-22-99, §§ 1—3) 
Sec. 2-14-55. - County drug and alcohol use in workplace policy. 
Floyd County aims to provide a drug and alcohol-free, healthful, and safe workplace. Employees are required to report to work in mental and physical condition that allows them to perform their jobs in a safe and satisfactory manner. Any level of use of controlled substances, drugs, or alcohol on the job may pose serious safety and health risks as well as impairing job performance. 
For the purposes of these rules and regulations, "drugs" and "controlled substances" are synonymous and include illegal drugs and legal drugs taken without medical approval or other than prescribed. Illegal drugs or controlled substances includes, without limitation, marijuana, cocaine, opiates, phencyclidine (PCP), amphetamines, derivatives and other related drugs, natural or synthetic hallucinogens, "look alike" or designer drugs, inhalants, methadone, methaqualone, barbiturates, benzodiazepines, propoxyphene, or other drugs made unlawful under federal or state laws or a metabolite of any such substances, and unauthorized prescription drugs. 
This policy applies to all county employees, volunteers, interns, and any other individuals performing services on the county's behalf, whether paid or unpaid; all of whom will be referred to in this policy as "employees". Visitors, vendors, and contractors are governed by this policy when on county property or in county vehicles and will not be permitted to conduct business with Floyd County if found to be in violation of this policy. 
Any employee who is disciplined and/or terminated pursuant to the provisions of the drug and alcohol policy shall not have a right to appeal to the Floyd County Personnel Board. 
(1)  Drug-free workplace. Floyd County complies will all provisions of the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 in that: 
a.  No employee shall store or allow storage of controlled substances, illegal drugs, or alcohol on any land or within any building owned, rented, or leased by or under the control of Floyd County. No employee shall transport any form of illegal drugs, alcohol, or controlled substances in any county vehicle, equipment, or machine or in personal vehicles while on county business. The necessity for storing and or transporting controlled substances, illegal drugs, or alcohol on county property when these constitute evidence in criminal proceedings can be an exception to these policies. 
b.  While on Floyd County premises and while conducting business related activities or representing Floyd County off Floyd County premises, or during lunch breaks or when an employee is scheduled to return to work, the employee's use, possession, sale, distribution, or the presence in the employee's body of alcohol, drugs or a controlled substance are strictly prohibited. Violators shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
c.  The unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession or use of illegal drugs, controlled substances, or alcohol in the workplace are strictly prohibited. Employees must notify the director of human resources of a violation in the workplace of any criminal drug or alcohol statute that results in arrest, conviction, or a charge indictment within five (5) days of such arrest, conviction, or indictment. 
d.  The legitimate use of prescribed drugs, taken as prescribed by a qualified medical practitioner, is permitted on the job if it does not impair an employee's ability to perform the essential functions of the job effectively and safely. Each employee must notify his or her supervisor immediately of the use of any medication, prescribed or over-the-counter, which may have an effect on the employee's safe and effective performance of job duties. The taking of drugs prescribed to another person is strictly prohibited. 
e.  To assure a safe and effective workplace, Floyd County has established a drug and alcohol testing program as described in detail elsewhere in these rules and regulations. 
1.  Job applicants for safety sensitive positions, whether full-time, part-time, or temporary will be required to pass a post-offer drug and alcohol screen before hire. An applicant's refusal to submit to testing will disqualify that applicant from consideration for employment in the relevant position. Safety sensitive applicants covered by department of transportation rules will be tested in compliance with those rules. An applicant's refusal to submit to testing will disqualify that applicant from employment in the relevant position. 
2.  Employees in safety sensitive positions are subject to random testing. All other employees will be asked to provide urine, blood, saliva and/or hair samples to determine the illegal use of drugs and/or alcohol in the workplace under certain circumstances as described in the drug and alcohol testing section of these rules and regulations. An employee's refusal to submit to test will result in termination. 
f.  Education and training program. 
1.  Floyd County's Drug and Alcohol Policy and Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy are included in the handbook. Each employee shall receive a copy of the handbook and shall acknowledge receipt of such by signing a form acknowledging that he or she has read the handbook and understands and agrees to abide by its provisions. 
2.  Floyd County's Drug and Alcohol Policy and Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy will be reviewed with each new employee at orientation. 
3.  Floyd County will provide periodic mandatory training to management about the effects of drugs and alcohol and how to detect signs that an employee is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol in the workplace. 
4.  Information about drugs, controlled substances, and alcohol including the effects of each and the availability of counseling and treatment, shall be available through human resources. 
5.  Human resources will assist department directors with presentations about Floyd County's Drug and Alcohol and Testing Policies and presentations about the effects of drugs, controlled substances, and alcohol on the employee and the workplace. 
g.  Employee assistance program. 
1.  The employee assistance program (EAP) provides confidential counseling and referral services to employees who need assistance with drug and/or alcohol abuse or addiction. It is the employee's responsibility to seek assistance from the EAP prior to reaching a point where he or she may be subject to disciplinary action for drug or alcohol use in the workplace. Participation in the EAP after a disciplinary process has begun will not preclude disciplinary action, up to and including termination. Floyd County reserves the right to require employee participation in the EAP as a condition of continued employment. 
2.  Employees may contact the employee assistance program (EAP) directly if they desire confidential counseling and or referral services for drug and or alcohol issues. No employee will suffer retaliation for seeking assistance from the EAP. 
(2)  Drug and alcohol testing program. 
Floyd County recognizes its obligation to maintain a drug and alcohol free workplace. In an effort to detect and discourage drug and/or alcohol use in the workplace, Floyd County has established a drug and alcohol testing program that applies to applicants for safety sensitive positions who have received an offer of employment conditioned on passing the drug and alcohol screen; to all employees in safety sensitive positions, and to all employees under certain circumstances as described in these policies. 
Test for drugs or controlled substances will test at a minimum for marijuana, cocaine, opiates, phencyclidine (PCP), amphetamines, derivatives, and other related drugs. The county reserves the right to test for additional controlled substances should there be a legitimate reason, such as reasonable suspicion of use on the job or on county property. Testing for positions subject to department of transportation guidelines will be for those controlled substances listed in those guidelines. 
A urine or hair test shall be used to detect the use of drugs and/or controlled substances. All tests shall be conducted at a private medical laboratory that has been approved by the department of health and human services. Test results shall be reviewed by a medical review officer who is a licensed physician trained in analyzing drug tests. A positive test result shall be followed by a more detailed confirmation test and disciplinary action will be taken only if the confirmation test result is also positive. The medical review officer who reviews the test results shall report the findings directly to the Floyd County Human Resources Director. 
Tests for alcohol shall be by a scientifically and federally approved evidential breath-testing device or the use of a swab/saliva test performed by authorized personnel including, but not limited to, a trained law enforcement officer or qualified medical personnel. If it is not reasonable to conduct the alcohol test based on breathalyzer or swab/saliva test, the county reserves the right to test for drugs or alcohol by a blood test. The employee may request that a blood test by performed, at the employee's expense, at the same time to confirm the result of the breathalyzer test. If the employee or the county elects to have a blood test performed, the employee shall be required to sign a consent form permitting the lab to promptly obtain a blood sample and report the results to the human resources director. 
An employee whose confirmed drug test result is positive will be terminated. An employee with a confirmed alcohol level of .04 or higher will be terminated. An employee with a confirmed alcohol level of at least .02 but less than .04 will be removed from duty and subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. A probationary employee whose drug and/or alcohol test result is positive will be terminated. 
County employees who are terminated because of a positive test for drugs or alcohol may be disqualified for unemployment compensation benefits. A positive test or refusal to test following a workplace injury may disqualify an employee for worker's compensation. An employee who refuses to submit to a drug and/or alcohol test will be terminated. 
Refusal to test includes: 
•  Failure to appear for any test within a reasonable time, as determined by Floyd County, after being directed to do so. 
•  Failure to remain in the testing site until the testing procedure is complete. 
•  Failure to provide a urine specimen for any drug test. 
•  Refusal to submit to observation of providing a urine specimen after instruction to do so. 
•  Failure to provide a urine sample that meets required standards. 
•  Failure to provide a sufficient amount of urine, when directed, and it has been determined through a required medical evaluation that there is no adequate medical explanation for the failure. 
•  Failure to undergo a medical evaluation as directed by the medical review officer as part of the verification process. 
•  Failure to cooperate with or disruption of any part of the test process. 
•  Refusal to sign required documents. 
•  Production of a verified adulterated or substitute urine specimen. 
If any county employee, other than a probationary employee who shall not have this option, receives a positive result on a urine drug test which results in a termination, said employee shall have the right to request that a hair follicle test be performed in order to confirm the positive urine drug test result. The employee shall make the request for a hair follicle test at the time they receive notification of the positive urine drug test result. The employee shall provide the hair follicle sample in the same manner, at the same facility and/or a facility of Floyd County's choosing, under the same terms and conditions as referenced within this policy within twenty-four (24) hours of the request. 
If the employee requests a hair follicle test, they shall be placed on administrative leave without pay. If said hair follicle sample has not been provided within twenty-four (24) hours by the employee, they shall be deemed to have waived their right to a hair follicle test and shall be terminated pursuant to the provisions of this policy. If the hair follicle test results in a confirming positive drug test result, the employee shall be terminated pursuant to the provisions of this policy. If the hair follicle drug test is negative, the results of both tests shall be placed in employee's personnel file and employee shall be placed back in their position of employment and shall continue to be subject to the drug and alcohol policies of Floyd County during the remaining tenure of their employment with Floyd County. 
(3)  Pre-employment testing. 
a.  All applicants for safety sensitive positions, whether the position is full-time, part-time, or temporary, who have received an offer of employment with Floyd County will be required to complete a drug and alcohol screening with negative results prior to being hired. 
b.  Applicants for safety-sensitive positions who have received an offer of employment conditioned upon completing a drug and alcohol screening with negative results must consent to testing by signing a "consent form" authorizing appropriate testing for drug and alcohol and authorizing release of test results to the Floyd County Human Resources Director. 
c.  An applicant for a safety sensitive position with Floyd County who tests positive for drugs and/or alcohol or who refuses a drug and alcohol test shall relinquish the right to be considered for the position for which he or she applied. 
(4)  Reasonable cause testing. 
a.  When a member of management observes what is believed to be observations of reasonable cause, said member of management shall have said observations of reasonable cause confirmed by a second member of management and upon such confirmation may require that the affected employee be tested. Examples of reasonable cause include: 
•  Direct observation of drug use; 
•  Employee's admission that he or she has ingested alcohol or used drugs; 
•  Evidence that an employee has tampered with his or her drug test results; 
•  Physical symptoms of drug or alcohol use such as slurred speech, uncoordinated movement, dilated or pinpoint pupils, or an unsteady gait; 
•  Disoriented, confused, hostile or aggressive behavior; 
•  Trouble staying awake and focused; 
•  An obvious and significant decline in job performance and/or adherence to safety standards; 
•  Evidence that the employee has used, possessed, sold, solicited, or transferred drugs while at work; or 
•  A report from a reliable source that an employee is using drugs or alcohol on the job. 
b.  Upon determination that there is reasonable cause to test an employee the manager who made or confirmed the observation shall: 
1.  Notify the department director, if possible, and remove the employee to a private setting. 
2.  Document the reasonable cause in writing at the time of the observation or as soon as possible after observation and sign the documentation. 
3.  Assure the employee is not left unattended. 
4.  Express his or her observations to the employee. 
5.  Require the employee to submit to a drug and alcohol test. 
6.  Prohibit the employee from performing any job functions. 
7.  Transport the employee to and from the approved testing site as soon as possible. 
8.  If the employee tests positive, inform the employee that he or she will be placed on administrative leave immediately and will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
9.  If the employee tests positive, provide county transport or arrange safe transport for the employee to his home. 
(5)  Post-accident testing. All county employees, whether full-time, part-time, or temporary, who are involved in a work related accident or a vehicle accident, whether county or personal vehicle, while conducting county business are subject to post-accident drug and alcohol testing. 
a.  An employee involved in a work related accident or a vehicle accident as described above must notify his or her supervisor immediately or another supervisor if his or her supervisor is not available. 
b.  The notified supervisor must go to the scene of the accident as soon as possible and insure that the employee receives drug and alcohol testing in accordance with this policy. 
c.  The employee must receive the test for alcohol as soon as possible but no later than eight (8) hours following the accident. The employee must receive the post accident drug screen as soon as possible but no later than thirty-two (32) hours following the accident. 
d.  Supervisors of employees whose positions require a commercial driver's license (CDC) and who are operating CDC equipment at the time of the accident will insure that such employees are tested in compliance with department of transportation (DOT) requirements. 
e.  Supervisors do not have discretion to waive post-accident testing. A supervisor who waives post-accident testing will be subject to disciplinary action. 
f.  Any employee who is subject to post-accident testing who leaves the scene of the accident, except to report the accident or to obtain aid for the injured, or who fails to remain readily available for drug and alcohol testing will be considered to have refused to submit to testing. 
(6)  Random testing. 
a.  All safety sensitive employees, whether full-time, part-time, or temporary shall be subject to random, unannounced drug and/or alcohol testing. A safety sensitive employee is: 
•  One who occupies a position in which an employee who is under the influence of drugs or alcohol may cause injury or death to the employee, other employees, or members of the public; or may cause damage to county, public and/or private property. 
•  One whose job duties may require direct contact with drugs and/or alcohol. 
b.  For purposes of these rules and regulations, positions whose duties are described below are considered safety sensitive: 
•  Operating any vehicle or equipment, regularly or as needed, that must be operated by a holder of a CDL (drug and alcohol testing must follow DOT guidelines). 
•  Performing work as a POST (Peace Officer Standards and Training Council) certified law enforcement officer. 
•  Performing work that requires interacting with prison work details. 
•  Performing work as a guard in a jail, detention center, or correctional institution. 
•  Carrying a firearm for security or law enforcement purposes. 
•  Performing duties essential for drug interdiction. 
•  Performing duties which directly affect public safety. 
•  Operating a county vehicle, motorized equipment or machinery in the normal course of job duties. 
•  Performing maintenance functions on motorized vehicles or equipment that may require test driving the vehicle or equipment. 
•  Performing maintenance functions on facilities or equipment whose operations affect the health and well-being of the public. 
•  Working with confidential documents pertaining to criminal investigations. 
•  Performing duties that involve capturing, detaining, and caring for animals. 
1.  The human resources director will identify all positions whose duties include performing work as described in the list above. The county manager will review and approve the list after which the human resources director will distribute the list to relevant department directors. The department directors shall post the list in a place accessible to all department employees and affected employees will be notified of the designation of his or her position as safety sensitive. Employees whose positions are designated as safety sensitive shall be informed that because they occupy a safety sensitive position, they are subject to random drug and alcohol testing under the guidelines described in these rules and regulations and shall be required to sign an acknowledgment that they have been so informed. 
2.  Newly hired safety sensitive employees and employees performing safety sensitive duties because of promotion, transfer, demotion, or assignment to a safety sensitive position will be required to sign the acknowledgment and to submit to a drug and alcohol test with negative results before performing any duties in the safety sensitive position. 
3.  The human resources director will review the list of safety sensitive positions on a continuous basis to assure newly classified or newly created positions that require performance of safety sensitive positions are added. Following approval by the county manager, revised lists will be distributed to relevant department directors and affected employees will be informed and sign an acknowledgment of such. 
4.  No less than the minimum number of employees in safety sensitive positions mandated pursuant to federal and/or Georgia Law shall be randomly selected for drug and alcohol testing each calendar year by randomly generating an employee identifier from a pool of all safety sensitive employees. An employee in violation of this drug and alcohol and/or terminated because of a violation of the drug and alcohol use policy in the workplace shall not have appeal rights to the personnel board. 
5.  Drug and alcohol tests will be unannounced and spread throughout the calendar year. 
6.  Employees will remain in the pool and be subject to selection, whether or not the employee was tested previously. 
7.  Each safety sensitive employee will have an equal chance of being drawn each time selections are made. 
8.  When notified of his or her selection to be tested, the employee is required to proceed to the collection site immediately and must complete testing within two (2) hours of notification. 
9.  If the results of a test are inconclusive, a re-test will be ordered, and upon notification, a supervisor will accompany the employee to the testing site. 
(7)  Return to duty testing. 
All county employees in safety-sensitive positions who are absent from work for more than thirty (30) days for any reason shall be tested for drugs and alcohol immediately upon return to work and before performing any job duties. 
Employees in safety-sensitive positions who return to work from an approved treatment program for drug or alcohol abuse may be subject to unannounced testing at the discretion of the director of human resources for a period of one (1) year following the employee's return to work. 
(8)  Rehabilitation. 
Floyd County offers employees the use of counseling and rehabilitation services pursuant to coverage limitations and in accordance with the terms of the benefits programs. Employees are personally responsible for seeking treatment for alcohol and or drug dependency. Any voluntary request by an employee for assistance with his or her own alcohol and/or drug dependency will remain as confidential as possible and shall not, on its own, be used as a basis for disciplinary action. 
This section will not apply to an employee who tests positive through the testing program. The employee must voluntarily seek treatment prior to being notified of a random drug and/or alcohol test or being involved in a situation that requires a reasonable cause or post-accident drug and/or alcohol test. The employee cannot, after being notified of a pending test, self-identify to avoid testing. 
(9)  Searches. 
Employees have no right of privacy with respect to county facilities and equipment. The county reserves the right to conduct search of property, including county vehicles or equipment owned or being operated by Floyd County at any time or place. 
The county also reserves the right to search an employee's personal property and possession kept in county offices, vehicles, desks or lockers when there is reasonable suspicion that an employee is buying, selling, or otherwise in possession of controlled substances or alcohol on county property and/or during work time. 
A refusal to submit to or cooperate with a search may result in disciplinary action up to and including termination. 
The county police department shall be notified immediately if drugs or alcohol are found on county property. The sheriff or chief deputy shall be notified if drugs or alcohol are found on jail property. 
(10)  Records retention and access. 
Floyd County will maintain records of the drug and alcohol testing programs as required in federal rules and regulations. The records will be maintained in a secure location with controlled access. 
The human resources department will keep testing records. All reports of drug and alcohol test results, searches, or referrals to treatment or the employee assistance program will be maintained in strict confident to the extent allowed by law. The county will not release employee information except as allowed in compliance with federal and state laws and DOT regulations. 
An employee may obtain copies of records of his or her drug testing results with a written request to the human resources director. 
(11)  Conditions of re-employment. 
a.  An employee who has been terminated for violation of the drug-free workplace policy and/or the alcohol and drug testing policy may be considered for rehire provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  At least twelve (12) months have passed since termination. 
2.  The previous work history, attendance record and performance were favorable. 
3.  The former employee receives a recommendation from his or her previous Floyd County Supervisor. 
4.  The former employee tests negative on a pre-employment drug and alcohol screen. 
b.  The former employee may be required to produce a rehabilitation/assessment certification at his or her expense prior to employment. 
c.  If rehired, the employee may be drug and alcohol tested upon request at any time for a period of two (2) years in addition to participation in the random pool. 
(12)  Non-discrimination. 
Nothing in this policy is intended to discriminate against any person on the basis of addiction to drugs or alcohol, or on the basis of an individual's medical history of addiction to drugs or alcohol as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990. However, the county reserves the right to consider, for purposes of employment and disciplinary action, any history of criminal activity related to such use to the extent that it may lead to disqualification for employment. 
(Amend. of 1-23-96(2); Ord. of 8-22-17) 
Sec. 2-14-56. - Motor vehicle report policy for county drivers. 
(a)  Definition of "driver". For purposes of this policy, a "driver" is defined as any employee of Floyd County who regularly or frequently operates a motor vehicle which is owned or leased by Floyd County (hereinafter referred to as a "county" vehicle). Operators of private vehicles, or employees who only occasionally operate county vehicles, are exempt from the provisions of this policy. An employee is deemed to be a regular or frequent driver of county vehicles if he/she drives a county vehicle more than once a week on an ongoing basis or whose job description requires a valid driver's license. 
(b)  Obtaining MVR reports. 
(1)  Initial MVR checks. 
a.  Employee applications: If they are applying for positions requiring frequent driving of county vehicles, applicants shall be required to provide at their own expense, and prior to being hired, a copy of a MVR from the state or states in which they have been licensed covering the last seven (7) years. In addition, they shall be required to disclose on forms approved by the human resources department their complete driving history, and authorize annual MVR checks to be performed by Floyd County. If the information on the forms or MVR indicates that the applicant would be an "ineligible" or "high risk" driver as defined herein, the applicant shall be ineligible for employment in such positions. 
b.  Existing employees: If an existing employee desires to transfer into a position requiring frequent driving of county vehicles, the employee must disclose on forms approved by the human resources department his/her complete driving history, and authorize annual MVR checks to be performed by Floyd County. The human resources department shall use said forms to obtain a MVR. If the information on the forms or MVR indicates that the applicant would be an "ineligible" or "high risk" driver as defined herein, the applicant shall not be acceptable for such transfer. 
(2)  Periodic MVR checks: 
a.  Employees who frequently drive county vehicles, shall be required annually to disclose on forms approved by the human resources department their complete driving history, and authorize annual MVR checks to be performed by Floyd County. Failure to complete said forms, or knowingly providing false, inaccurate, or misleading information, may be grounds for disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. 
b.  Floyd County reserves the right to obtain an MVR on any such driver at any time in its discretion. 
c.  Ineligible drivers. 
1.  Ineligible drivers shall include all of the following: 
i.  Any driver without a valid driver's license. To be valid, the license must meet the following standards: the license may not be a provisional license limiting operating hours or restricting numbers or types of passengers; nor may the license limit operation to motorcycles or motor driven cycles; nor may the license be limited to an instructional or learners' permit. (The following classes of Georgia driver's licenses shall be deemed valid: Classes A, B, and C.) 
ii.  Any driver with the following violations regardless of the time period: 
A.  Homicide involving a vehicle; 
B.  Using a vehicle to elude an officer; 
C.  Hit and run; 
D.  Manslaughter with a vehicle; 
E.  False report to police; or, 
F.  Permitting an unlicensed driver to drive. 
iii.  Any driver convicted of any of the following violations within the last three (3) years: 
A.  Any alcohol or drug related offense including, but not limited to, driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs; 
B.  Refusal to submit to a blood alcohol content test or drug screen; 
C.  Reckless driving; 
D.  Negligent driving; or 
E.  License suspension or revocation. 
2.  Applicants who would be ineligible drivers shall not be hired or transferred into any position requiring the employee to drive a county vehicle. Existing employees who become ineligible drivers will cease all driving of county vehicles immediately, and if driving a county vehicle is a requirement of their position, must be transferred to another county position not requiring such driving, if such a position exists and is vacant, or be subject to dismissal. 
d.  High risk drivers. "High risk" drivers shall include all drivers whose driving history indicates any of the following: 
1.  Conviction for an alcohol and/or drug related driving offense within the past seven (7) years, or refusal to submit to a blood alcohol content test within the past seven (7) years; 
2.  Conviction for reckless driving within the past seven (7) years; 
3.  Any combination of three (3) or more moving violations, at-fault accidents, or preventable accidents within the most recent two (2) years; 
4.  Suspension, revocation or administrative restriction of driver's license within the last four (4) years; 
5.  Leaving the scene of an accident as defined by state laws; 
6.  Being at fault in a fatal accident within the last three (3) years; 
7.  Felony conviction involving a motor vehicle within the last seven (7) years; or 
8.  Any physical restrictions on driving as documented by a physician. 
e.  Management controls for high risk drivers. 
1.  If an employee is identified as a "high risk" driver, the employee's department head must choose to either: 
i.  Put the employee on probation in the manner described below; or, 
ii.  Suspend the employee's driving privileges in the manner described below. 
2.  Probation of high risk drivers. When an employee is placed on probation as a "high risk" driver, the department head shall do all of the following: 
i.  Place the "high risk" driver on probation until he/she re-qualifies for normal driving privileges under the terms of this policy. While on such probation, the employee may continue to drive county vehicles, but subject to any conditions imposed by the department head. 
ii.  Obtain a MVR from the human resources department every six (6) months for the duration of the probationary period when required by the human resources director. 
iii.  Confer with the human resources director concerning additional stipulations or limitations which may be made conditions of the probation, such as: 
A.  Loss of driving privileges for county owned or leased vehicles between work and home; and/or 
B.  Additional driver training. 
iv.  Notify the employee in writing of the terms of the probation and require the employee to sign an acknowledgement of same, and send this document to the human resources director to be made a part of the employee's personnel file. 
v.  Notify the human resources director if the employee has any additional moving violations, at-fault accidents; commits any additional act described in subsection c. (definition of ineligible drivers) or subsection d. (definition of high risk drivers); or violates any of the terms of his/her probation. Upon the occurrence of any of these events while on probation, the probation shall be revoked, and the employee shall immediately have his/her driving privileges of county vehicles suspended. 
vi.  Notify the human resources director when the probationary period has ended, and prior to restoring normal driving privileges. 
(3)  Suspension of driving privileges for high risk drivers. 
a.  When a department head chooses not to put a "high risk" driver on probation, or after an employee has had his/her probation revoked, the "high risk" driver shall be suspended from operating any county vehicle. If driving a county vehicle is a requirement of the employee's position, this action may result in the employee being transferred to a position which does not require such driving, if such a position exists and is vacant, or the employee may be dismissed. 
b.  Any employee driving a county vehicle while such driving privileges are suspended shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. 
c.  An employee may apply to have his/her driving privileges of county vehicles restored after he/she re-qualifies under the terms of this policy. 
(Ord. No. 2008-001A, § XXII, 1-8-08) 
Secs. 2-14-57—2-14-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RETIREMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Retirement, § 1-5-20 et seq. 

Sec. 2-14-66. - Plan adopted. 
(a)  The county hereby adopts the retirement program for its employees in accordance with the plan approved by the board of managers of the Association County Commissioners of Georgia. That plan, entitled "Retirement Plan for Employees of Participating Counties", is hereby incorporated by reference herein and copies thereof shall be available for public inspection in the office of the county clerk. 
(b)  The county manager is authorized and directed to take such steps as proper to terminate the present plan and transfer the assets to the new plan, and such other action as needful and necessary to carry out this section. 
(Code 1979, § 1-4091) 
Editor's note— In the 1979 Code, a note stated that the "present plan" referred to above was adopted by a trust agreement approved Feb. 8, 1973. 
Sec. 2-14-67. - Mandatory retirement age. 
All employees of the county, except elected officials, and members of appointive or elective boards, who shall have reached their sixty-fifth (65th) birthday shall be compelled to retire at the end of the month in which the sixty-fifth (65th) birthday of the employee is reached; provided, however, that any employee who does not wish to retire at age sixty-five (65) shall give written notice to the board of commissioners, at least ten (10) days prior to the employee's sixty-fifth (65th) birthday informing the board of commissioners that the employee desires to continue to be employed by the county for an additional year. The employee shall, at the time of giving written notice to the board of commissioners, submit evidence of such employee's good health and ability to discharge the duties required by such employee's employment. If a majority of the board of commissioners in its discretion shall determine that it would be in the best interest of the county to retain the individual as an employee of the county, the board of commissioners shall notify the employee of its decision and the employee shall be allowed to continue in the employ of the county until the next birthday of the employee at which time the same procedure shall apply if the employee does not wish to retire. The procedure shall apply for each succeeding birthday of an affected employee up to attaining the age of seventy (70). All employees, except elected officials, and members of appointive or elective board, who shall have reached their seventieth birthday shall be compelled to retire at the end of the month immediately following their seventieth (70th) birthday and such retirement shall be mandatory. 
(Code 1979, § 1-4092) 
State Law reference— Mandatory retirement, O.C.G.A. § 47-2-110. 
Chapter 2-15 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Rome-Floyd County Development Authority authorized, § 1-4-20; Unified Land Development Code, App. B. 
State Law reference— Planning authority, Const. 1983, Art. II, § 2, ¶ 4. 

Sec. 2-15-1. - Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission—Created. 
It is hereby resolved that there is hereby created a joint municipal-county planning commission of and for the City of Rome and County of Floyd under the provisions of and with all the functions, duties, powers and authority provided for such commissions in the act of the general assembly, approved March 13, 1957 (Ga. Laws. 1957, p. 420 et seq.) as amended, such commission to have the official title "Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission." 
(Ord. of 8-7-58; Ord. of 4-21-59; Code 1979, § 3-610) 
State Law reference— Such Act no longer exists, but see the zoning procedures law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-15-2. - Same—Composition; terms of members; appointment of successors; filling of vacancies; removal; service without compensation. 
(a)  The Rome-Floyd County Planning Com]mission shall consist of ten (10) voting members, none of whom are members of either the Rome City Commission or the Floyd County Board of Commissioners, and two (2) nonvoting ex officio members, one (1) of whom shall be a member of the Rome City Commission, appointed by that body, and the other shall be a member of the Floyd County Board of Commissioners, appointed by that body. Five (5) of the voting members shall be appointed by the Rome City Commission and five (5) of the voting members shall be appointed by the Floyd County Board of Commissioners. 
(b)  The terms of the members shall be for five (5) years, and they shall serve until their successors are appointed as herein provided for. In the initial appointment under the terms of this section, two (2) of the planning commission's voting members shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, two (2) for a term of four (4) years, and one (1) for a term of five (5) years, for each governing body respectively. 
(c)  Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing body which originally appointed that member. The appointing governing body shall also have the authority to remove its appointed members for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1979, § 3-611; Ord. of 6-10-80) 
Sec. 2-15-3. - Same—Organization; rules; staff and finances. 
(a)  The Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission shall elect its chairman and vice chairman from among its appointed members. The term of the chairman and vice chairman shall be one (1) year, or until they are reelected or their successors are elected. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the municipality, the county, or the planning commission. The planning commission shall determine its time of meetings and shall make its own rules of procedure, including any rule providing for termination of membership by reason of nonattendance at meetings. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the planning commission shall be of public record. 
(b)  The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for such work and may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from, federal, state or local, public or semi-public agencies or private individuals or corporations; may expend such funds; and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts and contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing bodies of the city and the county. 
(Code 1979, § 3-612; Ord. of 6-10-80) 
Sec. 2-15-4. - Same—Powers and duties. 
From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers, and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then said planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957 (Act No. 358), as amended. 
(Code 1979, § 3-613; Ord. of 6-10-80) 
State Law reference— Such Act no longer exists, but see the zoning procedures law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-15-5. - Development authority. 
(a)  There is hereby determined and declared a pressing, existing and future need for a development authority (as more fully described and defined in the Development Authorities Law, Ga. Laws 1969, p. 137) (O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.) to function in the county for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare, trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in the county, thereby promoting the general welfare of the citizenry and, in the futherance of that purpose, to finance projects permitted thereby including projects for air and water pollution control facilities by industries. 
(b)  There is hereby activated in the county, the public body corporate and politic known as the "Development Authority of Floyd County," which was created upon the adoption and approval of the development authorities law and particularly section 2 thereof. 
(c)  There are hereby elected as members of the first board of directors of the development authority the following named persons, each of whom is a taxpayer of the county and none of whom are officers or employees of the county: 
(1)  Burgett Mooney, two (2) years; 
(2)  H.E. Mize, two (2) years; 
(3)  Wesley Jonson, four (4) years; 
(4)  Elwood Hunt, four (4) years; 
(5)  Lloyd Summer, six (6) years; 
(6)  Richard McCullough, six (6) years; and 
(7)  Mather Payne, six (6) years. 
(d)  Each of the persons named as directors above shall serve in that capacity for the number of years set forth opposite such persons' respective names, and if at the end of any term of office of any director, a successor thereto shall not have been elected, then the director whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until a successor shall be so elected by this board. 
(e)  The board of directors hereinbefore elected shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and preogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the development authorities law as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(f)  The action taken by the board of commissioners as hereinbefore specified is not intended in any way to affect any public corporation, industrial development or payroll authority heretofore created by legislative act or constitutional amendment including, without limitation, its existence, purpose, organization, powers or function. 
(Code 1979, § 1-5021) 
Sec. 2-15-6. - Surface mining and soft material extraction ordinance. 
(a)  Mining means any activity constituting all or part of a process for the removal of minerals, ores or other solid matter from on or in the earth for sale of for processing or for consumption in the regular operation of a business. Quarries and quarrying are included in this definition. "Removal" means the actual process of digging or otherwise removing the substance being mined. Mining shall not include "soft material extraction" as hereinafter defined. 
(b)  Borrow pits are exempted from this section where less than 1.1 acres of land will be disturbed. This section does not prohibit the removal of earth and rock and filling and grading in any district done for land development purposes, upon issuance of a development permit in accordance with this development code. 
(c)  Mining is permitted only in the H-I district and only with the grant of a special use permit under section 2.2 as set forth in the Unified Land Development Code of Floyd County and the City of Rome, Georgia ("ULDC"). Mining is permitted only on sites of greater than two hundred (200) acres. In addition to the requirements of that section, the application for the special use permit related to mining must contain: 
(1)  Specific site plan and time schedule for completion of mining activities. 
(2)  Information on hours of operation and procedures (on-site and off-site) related to any on-site blasting that might occur. 
(3)  A transportation plan detailing routes to be used by vehicles serving the site, weight limits and traffic volumes. 
(4)  A plan for stormwater and runoff management, pursuant to the provisions of section 6.15 of the ULDC and the requirements of this section. 
(5)  A buffer plan pursuant to section 6.16 of the ULDC and the requirements of this section. 
(6)  Plans for the control of dust pollution, noise pollution and light pollution, consistent with the requirements of this section. 
(7)  A survey of the underground geology on the property and for all areas within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property, including showing water flows, aquifers and groundwater recharge areas. 
(8)  Application related to mining shall be made on such special forms, if any, as may be required by the Rome-Floyd County Planning Director or designated county agent and shall contain such additional information as the planning director or designated county agent may reasonably require. Assuming the application is complete, it shall be processed upon payment of a five hundred dollar ($500.00) application fee and shall be either granted or denied (with specific reasons for denial) within sixty (60) days after filing. And in the event of denial, the applicant shall be given the opportunity to resubmit the application without payment of an additional application fee until the fourth resubmission; whereupon a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) extension fee shall be payable; and the same extension fee shall be payable upon every fourth resubmission thereafter. 
(d)  Where the lot of record on which mining is conducted abuts a zoning district other than H-I, or where any point of the lot of record is within four hundred (400) feet of another zoning district other than H-I, a one thousand-foot natural buffer shall be provided. The natural buffer may be reduced to six hundred (600) feet if an earthen berm at least twelve (12) feet high is erected along the inner perimeter of the natural buffer, and otherwise complies with the design standards of section 6-16 of the ULDC. The natural buffer may be reduced to three hundred (300) feet if an earthen berm at least twenty (20) feet high is erected along the inner perimeter of the natural buffer, and otherwise complies with the design standards of section 6-16 of the ULDC. 
(e)  The removal area for mining shall be completely enclosed with a fence not less than six (6) feet in height. 
(f)  A plan for the redevelopment of the mining site when the removal is completed shall be submitted with the application for a development permit. Adequate provision shall be made to prevent excessive erosion or runoff. 
(g)  Concrete and asphalt plants are not accessory uses to mining and are not permitted. 
(h)  Blasting shall only be permitted between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. All lights on the property shall be shielded, as necessary, to minimize light pollution and prevent interference with surrounding land uses. Dust must be controlled so that no visible amount escapes past the natural buffer. 
(i)  Removal is not permitted within two hundred (200) feet of any river, stream or lake exceeding five (5) acres. Mining is not permitted in wetlands. Removal is not permitted within one hundred (100) feet of any lake or pond under five (5) acres, unless entirely contained in the mining tract, in which case removal is not permitted within fifty (50) feet. 
(j)  Stormwater and runoff must be detained for sufficient time for sediment to settle. Downstream contamination, or off-site contamination, or contamination of any body of water by sediment is not permitted. Any removal occurring within five hundred (500) feet of a stream, river or lake of any size must have and demonstrate special measures to insure no contamination of those bodies of water. The stormwater and runoff management plan shall show all such bodies of water and shall show the proposed design to prevent any contamination of those bodies of water. 
(k)  Mining existing at the time of enactment of this section shall be subject to the requirements of this section. Existing mining shall not be required to obtain special approval, but shall submit the plans in subsections (c) and (f) of this section for review within ninety (90) days of a written request by the county, unless an extension for compliance is granted by the county. However, if compliance with all requirements of this section is not possible because of the size, shape or topography of the existing mining property, existing mining uses shall not be prohibited. Such mining instead shall be considered a nonconforming use. The mining operator in such cases shall apply for and be entitled to a variance or variances from the existing requirement(s) it cannot meet, such variance(s) to grant the minimum possible reduction in the specified requirement(s) to permit continued operation of the existing mine. 
(l)  After the adoption of this section, any surface extension or enlargement of an area being mined across a lot line existing as of the date of the adoption of this section shall be considered a new mining operation subject to all the provisions of this section, including, but not limited to, an application for a special use permit. 
(m)  "Soft material extraction" is the removal of soft materials wherein: 
(1)  Blasting and the use of explosives is not employed in the mining operation; 
(2)  Groundwater aquifers will not be encountered; 
(3)  Removal does not take place below the water table; 
(4)  Such soft materials are limited to common clay and shale, ball clay, china clay, kaolin, umber, ochre, fullers earth, bentonite, barite, bauxite, sericite, sand and gravel. 
(n)  In addition to the requirements of the ULDC, the application for the special use permit related to soft material extraction must contain: 
(1)  Specific site plan and time schedule for the completion of the soft material extraction. 
(2)  A transportation plan detailing routes to be used by vehicles serving the site, weight limits and traffic volumes. 
(3)  A plan for stormwater and runoff management, pursuant to the provisions of section 6.15 of the ULDC. 
(4)  A buffer plan pursuant to section 6.16 of the ULDC. 
(5)  Plans for the control of dust pollution, noise pollution and light pollution. 
(6)  Application related to soft material extraction shall be made on such special forms, if any, as may be required by the Rome-Floyd County Planning Director or designated county agent and shall contain such additional information as the planning director or designated county agent may reasonably require. Assuming the application is complete, it shall be processed upon payment of a five hundred dollar ($500.00) application fee and shall be either granted or denied (with specific reasons for denial) within sixty (60) days after filing. And in the event of denial the applicant shall be given the opportunity to resubmit the application without payment of an additional application fee until the fourth resubmission; whereupon a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) extension fee shall be payable; and the same extension fee shall be payable upon every fourth resubmission thereafter. 
(o)  The board of commissioners shall also have the following powers, if appeals are made in writing to the county clerk within fifteen (15) days of the action or decision appealed from, or if a request for a variance is made setting forth the specific variance sought and justification for same in writing to the county clerk: 
(1)  To hear and decide the question where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this section of the Code. 
a.  In exercising the above powers, the board of commissioners may, in conformity with the provisions of this section, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
b.  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of commissioners, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the officer, that by reason of fact stated in the certificate a stay would, in such officer's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of commissioners or by a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
(2)  To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variance from the terms of this section as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this section will, in any individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the section shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted to the individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the board of commissioners that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The application of the section to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  There are conditions that are peculiar to the property which adversely affects its reasonable use or usability as currently zoned; and 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this section. 
(p)  Process for granting appeals or variances in relation to section 2-15-6: 
(1)  An application for an appeal or variance in relation to this section shall include such descriptions, maps or drawings as needed to clearly illustrate the action requested. The county manager or his designee may request such additional information from the appellant as necessary to provide a full understanding of the appellant's request. 
(2)  Once the record has been assembled, the county clerk shall schedule the appeal or variance for consideration at the next scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners for which adequate public notice can be given. 
(3)  Public notice. 
a.  Notification to the general public: 
1.  At least fifteen (15) days, but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. The county clerk or the clerk's designee shall prepare such notice, which shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
2.  A request for an appeal or variance shall be heard at a public hearing only upon: 
(i)  The published notice, in addition to the requirement above, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the nature of the requested action; and 
(ii)  At least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing, the county clerk, the county manager or their designee shall post a sign or signs of not less than six (6) square feet stating the date, time and place for the public hearing, the present zoning classification of the property, and the nature of the requested action. One (1) such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the subject property. If the property has no street frontage, a sign shall be placed on each street in which access will be gained to the property. 
b.  Notice to surrounding property owners. If the request is for an appeal or variance, notice shall be given to surrounding property owners as follows: 
1.  At least five (5) days prior to the public hearing, either the county clerk, the county manager or their designee shall cause a notice to be mailed to all persons on property located adjacent to or across the street from the property that is the subject matter of the request. 
2.  The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing by the board of commissioners. The written notice shall be mailed to the property as such names and addresses appear on the county's ad valorem tax records. 
(4)  Any appellant wishing to withdraw an appeal or request for variance prior to the meeting of the board of commissioners shall file a written request for such withdrawal with the county clerk. The appeal or request for variance shall therefore be removed from the board of commissioner's agenda and this request shall have no further effect. 
(5)  Board of commissioners and public hearing. 
a.  The chairman, vice chairman or board designee shall act as the presiding official and shall convene the public hearing at a scheduled time and place. 
b.  The presiding official may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
c.  The county clerk, county manager or their designee shall submit the assembled record of the appeal or request for variance to the board of commissioners. The county clerk, county manager or their designee, or other appropriate party if the appeal is taken from an administrative action or interpretation, shall provide such information or explanation as appropriate to the circumstances of the appeal or request for variance. 
d.  At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. No person in attendance shall speak unless first recognized by the presiding official. Upon rising to speak each person recognized shall state his or her name and home address. The presiding official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a request, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the request. No less than ten (10) minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking in support of the request and no less than ten (10) minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than allowed. If reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the general public may speak at a hearing. However, the appellant and nearby property owners shall be afforded the first opportunity to speak. 
e.  The appellant shall be allowed to speak first in order to present the request. Others in support of the request may then speak, followed by those in opposition to the request. The appellant will then be allowed time for rebuttal. Rebuttal must be limited to points or issues raised by opponents to the request at the hearing. 
f.  During the public hearing, the members of the board of commissioners may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
g.  At the meeting, following presentation of the appeal, action shall be taken by vote of the board of commissioners. 
1.  A motion to approve or deny an appeal or request for variance must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least three (3) members in order for the motion to be approved. 
2.  If a motion to approve an appeal or request for variance fails, the appeal or request for variance is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an appeal or request for variance fails, another motion would be in order. 
3.  A tie vote on a motion for approval of an appeal or request for variance shall be deemed a denial of the appeal or request for variance. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and other motion would be order. 
4.  If no action is taken on an appeal or request for variance, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners. 
h.  In taking action on an appeal or request for variance, the board of commissioners may: 
1.  Approve, approve with changes, or deny the request; 
2.  Table the appeal or request for variance for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or 
3.  Allow withdrawal of the appeal or request for variance at the request of the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 2001-006A, § I, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 2007-007A, § I, 10-9-07; Ord. No. 2007-007A, § II, 10-9-07; Ord. No. 2007-007A, § III, 10-9-07; Ord. No. 2014-004A, § 1, 8-26-14) 
Sec. 2-15-7. - Enforcement of left-hand turn only provision. 
(a)  History. A zoning request was made to the Floyd County Planning Commission on File #43-2016Z to rezone the property from agricultural residential (A-R) to light industrial (L-I) for a trucking company located on the property on what is commonly known as Booze Mountain Road. It is specifically identified as tax map #117X and parcels #045 and #046. The request for rezoning was approved by the planning commission on condition that all trucks exiting the property must turn left toward US Highway 27. 
(1)  The Floyd County Police Department and/or the Floyd County Magistrate Court shall be empowered to enforce the provisions of the ordinance change and the specific provision of a "left-hand turn only" toward US Highway 27 off the property site. 
(2)  A first violation of this section shall be a one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine and a second violation shall be a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine. As indicated, this fine shall be enforced by the Floyd County Police Department through the Floyd County Magistrate Court. 
(3)  The sole purpose of the ordinance codified in this section is to enforce the ordinance change as outlined above and the fact that the sole reason for the ordinance change was to include a "left-hand turn only" provision. 
(Ord. No. 2016-004A, 6-28-16) 
Chapter 2-16 - ROADS, STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State transportation code, county road system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq. 

Sec. 2-16-1. - Road and street classifications and limitation of maintenance. 
(a)  All roads and streets on the county road system and on county maintenance, as of the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived, shall have been classified as one (1) of the five (5) classifications of roads and streets established herein. All roads and streets accepted in the future on the county road system shall be designated as either a Class I, Class II, Class III, Class IV, or Class V road or street and the maintenance to be provided by the county shall be as defined and limited by this section according to the classification of each road and street. 
(b)  The minimum acceptable design standards for roads and streets shall be determined by the board of commissioners and filed in the office of the county manager. The procedures for property owners or residents of the county to petition to request the county to accept a road or street on the county road system shall also be determined by the board of commissioners and shall be filed in the office of the county manager. 
(c)  Because of the duty of fiscal responsibility and management imposed by law upon the board of commissioners, nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to require the board of commissioners to accept any road or street for Class III, Class IV or Class V on the county road system for maintenance even after compliance by the owners or residents of the county with the established procedures. 
(d)  The road and street classifications are as follows: 
Class I: Over three hundred (300) vehicles per day. All major county thoroughfares meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  Eighty-foot right-of-way; 
(2)  Twenty-four-foot (thirty-six-foot with curb and gutter) asphalt plant mix surface; 
(3)  Eight-foot shoulders; 
(4)  Adequate drainage structures and ditches to control stormwater; 
(5)  Grassed slopes; 
are eligible for full maintenance such as: 
a.  Widening, resurfacing, or repairs as needed; 
b.  Shoulder stabilization and maintenance; 
c.  Vegetation control within right-of-way; 
d.  Litter control within right-of-way; 
e.  Drainage structures and ditch maintenance. 
Class II: All subdivision streets as described in the uniform subdivision regulations, (Chapter 17). At the time of acceptance the streets should meet the minimum standards and specifications of the subdivision regulations: 
(1)  Fifty-foot to sixty-foot right-of-way; 
(2)  Twenty-two-foot to twenty-four-foot (twenty-six-foot to thirty-six-foot with curb and gutter) asphalt plant mix surface; 
(3)  Six-foot shoulders; 
(4)  Adequate drainage structures and ditches to control stormwater; 
(5)  Grassed slopes; 
are eligible for full maintenance and upgrading to Class I at county expense as transportation needs of the county may require: 
a.  Widening, resurfacing, or repairs as needed; 
b.  Shoulder stabilization and maintenance; 
c.  Vegetation control within right-of-way; 
d.  Litter control within right-of-way; 
e.  Drainage structures and ditch maintenance. 
Class III: One hundred (100) to three hundred (300) vehicles per day. All minor county roads meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  Fifty-foot right-of-way; 
(2)  Twenty-two-foot (twenty-six-foot with curb and gutter) asphalt plant mix or surface treatment pavement; 
(3)  Six-foot shoulders; 
(4)  Adequate drainage structures and ditches to control stormwater; 
(5)  Grassed slopes; 
are eligible for full maintenance and upgrading to Class I road at county expense as transportation needs of the county may require: 
a.  Widening, resurfacing, or repairs as needed; 
b.  Shoulder stabilization and maintenance; 
c.  Vegetation control within right-of-way; 
d.  Litter control within right-of-way; 
e.  Drainage structures and ditch maintenance. 
Class IV: Fifty (50) to ninety-nine (99) vehicles per day, roads meeting the following specifications: 
(1)  Thirty-foot right-of-way; 
(2)  Twenty-two-foot gravel surface; 
(3)  Adequate drainage structures and ditches to control stormwater; 
are eligible for limited maintenance and upgrading to a higher road classification at the abutting property owners' expense. 
a.  Surface maintenance limited to leveling and grading the gravel surface; 
b.  Vegetation control will be to the back of the roadway ditches only; 
c.  All existing drainage structures and ditches will be maintained and cleaned (no new or improved drainage system will be provided). 
Class V: Under fifty (50) vehicles per day, roads which the county will not improve and meet the following specifications: 
(1)  Thirty-foot right-of-way; 
(2)  Gravel or dirt surface with varying widths; 
are eligible for limited maintenance and upgrading to a higher road classification at the abutting property owners' expense. 
a.  The existing roadway surface will be leveled and graded to a passable condi]tion; 
b.  Vegetation control will be limited to roadway surface only; 
c.  The county will not provide or maintain any drainage structures or ditches. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1005) 
Sec. 2-16-2. - Repairs and construction. 
The county public works department shall construct and repair the streets and sidewalks of the county, or direct the same, as may be ordered by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1001) 
Sec. 2-16-3. - Excavations. 
(a)  No county road shall be cut or excavated in any way except on written permission of the county manager after written request has been made, accurately describing the excavation to be done and its location. 
(b)  The county police department shall be notified before any excavation is begun. 
(c)  Any road excavated hereunder shall be replaced and restored to reasonably the same condition as prior to the excavation, including the regrassing of the easement, if damaged thereby, within thirty (30) days of the completion of the excavation work for each area. 
(d)  Notice of the completion of the excavation restoration work required in subsection (c) above shall be made to the public works department and the superintendent, or a designee thereof, shall inspect the restoration to ensure its proper completion. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1002) 
Sec. 2-16-4. - Residential street lighting—Procedures for obtaining or continuing. 
(a)  Existing residential street lighting shall be discontinued not later than December 31, 1974 unless the affected residents, property owners, and/or legal title holders of the property agree to pay for this service at their own cost as delineated in this chapter and so indicate to the board of commissioners. Notwithstanding, incandescent lights shall be discontinued or replaced with vapor lights by that date. 
(b)  Subdivisions, for which a final plat under county subdivision regulations has not been approved, shall require certification that street lighting is provided and that any deeds therefrom shall contain a covenant to require any future owner to pay the appropriate assessment. Subdivisions are defined as those so defined by the county subdivision regulations. 
(c)  Existing residential and subdivision streets may have street lighting provided by petitioning the board of commissioners. The petitions shall: 
(1)  Be signed by the owners of more than sixty-five (65) percent of the front footage of the streetlight district of the petition; 
(2)  Be properly notarized by a notary public; 
(3)  Be submitted to the superintendent of public works for review and submission to the board of commissioners; 
(4)  Be valid for a period of ninety (90) days from the date the petition form is provided to prospective petitioners. 
(d)  The board of commissioners may, at its discretion, hold a public hearing to further determine the desires and objections of the citizens of a streetlight district. 
(e)  The board of commissioners shall act upon presented petitions by resolution in open meetings. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1003; Ord. of 2-28-17) 
Sec. 2-16-5. - Same—Assessment of charges. 
(a)  The cost of street lighting shall be assessed to, and be entirely the responsibility of, the residents, property owners, and/or legal title holders of the property within a street light district. 
(b)  The appropriate charge to residents, property owners, and/or legal title holders of property within a street light district shall be added to their annual tax assessments by the county tax assessor. 
(c)  Residents, property owners, and/or legal title holders of property within a street light district shall be assessed on the basis of the front footage owned. 
(d)  Corner lots, which shall be lighted on at least two (2) sides, shall be assessed on the basis of the total front footage along the longest side. 
(e)  In the event of any unusual factors, such as unusual spacing by request, the superintendent of public works shall recommend to the board of commissioners such judgment of an equitable assessment not covered in this chapter for residential street lighting. 
(f)  Assessments for street lighting shall begin at the beginning of the next calendar quarter following installation. 
(g)  The board of commissioners shall hear any request for relief in extraordinary cases and determine if those assessments should be adjusted. 
(h)  The board of commissioners may authorize a change in assessments from time to time as required. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1004; Ord. of 2-28-17) 
Sec. 2-16-6. - Same—Responsibilities and authority therefor. 
(a)  The superintendent of public works shall have the responsibility of the administration of residential street lighting. The authority necessary to carry out this responsibility is hereby delegated. 
(b)  The county tax assessor shall have the responsibility of assessing charges authorized by the board of commissioners. The authority to carry out this responsibility is hereby delegated. 
(c)  The superintendent of public works or the superintendent's representative shall: 
(1)  Administer the residential street lighting program in accordance with the 1963 edition of the American Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute, and recognized good engineering practices. Copies of the standard shall be maintained in the offices of the county clerk and the superintendent of public works for public inspection; 
(2)  Survey existing residential street lighting in the county and recommend appropriate action to the board of commissioners; 
(3)  Advise any prospective petitioners for streetlight districts of the procedures required by this chapter; 
(4)  Determine appropriate tax district limits for prospective petitioners; 
(5)  Advise petition originators of the approximate costs to property owners; 
(6)  Provide standard petition forms for prospective petitioners; 
(7)  Check petitions submitted for accuracy and conformance with this chapter; 
(8)  Notify residents of the streetlight district of the date and time the petition is to be considered by the board of commissioners; 
(9)  Submit recommended petitions to the board of commissioners, with accurate costs to property owners, for approval, with any recommendations required; 
(10)  Coordinate the installation of streetlights when authorized; and 
(11)  Perform any other duties necessary to carry out the street lighting activities, including proposing desirable amendments to this chapter. 
(Code 1979, § 4-1005) 
Sec. 2-16-7. - Driveway construction standards. 
(a)  No curb shall be changed or removed, and no driveway on or across a public street or a public right-of-way or public property shall be repaired or installed without first having a written permit from the county. 
(b)  Applications may be made at the building inspector's office in person, or by mail. 
(c)  A permit shall expire for work not started within ninety (90) days or completed within six (6) months after issuance of a permit, and a new permit shall be required before beginning or completing the work. 
(d)  All work shall conform to the following specifications and standards. These standards are implemented by the county for the purpose of assuring safe entrance and exit of vehicles from private driveways into the county road system. These regulations therefore set forth certain standards with regard to driveway width, angle of entry, percent grade, minimum piping for ditches, and restrictions on minimum sight distance. All of these standards must be applied at the time when a proposed development is initially being considered so that the builder or property owner can accurately and properly assure that this feature of the overall building process is handled correctly at the beginning to avoid future problems for county property owners and taxpayers. The following are the general requirements which must be met by a private driveway prior to issuance of a building permit by the building inspection office. 
(1)  Residential driveways: 
a.  Maximum driveway width shall be thirty (30) feet at the ditchline or point of intersection with the road right-of-way. 
b.  Angle of driveway into the county road right-of-way must be between sixty (60) and ninety (90) degrees. 
c.  Maximum grade which shall be permitted is fifteen (15) percent within the right-of-way. 
d.  The driveway surface connecting with the county road must have a minimum of a five (5) percent slope down and away from the county road to the center line of the ditch or at least six (6) feet from the edge of pavement to preclude ordinary surface water drainage from the driveway flowing onto the county road surface. 
e.  The driveway shall not obstruct or impair drainage in roadside ditches or roadside areas. The driveway piping shall be adequate for surface water drainage along the roadway and in no case less than fifteen-inch-diameter pipe. Reinforced concrete, galvanized corrugated metal or corrugated high-density plastic will be acceptable pipe materials. 
f.  No landscaping, fences, terraces, or other natural or artificial features adjacent to the driveway shall impair visibility from approaching vehicular traffic where that visibility is a threat to safety. 
g.  The driveway shall be located on the property so as to provide proper sight distance. Minimum sight distance requirements are: 
400 feet—Minor arterial roads.  300 feet—Local roads.  200 feet—Subdivision roads. 
i.  The building inspection office shall issue driveway permits separate from other building permits. 
1.  When the driveway permit is requested by the builder, the builder will be given two (2) stakes to mark the proposed driveway location at the site. 
2.  The public works department will inspect the location and state the required pipe size and other special notes on the location of the driveway. 
(2)  Commercial driveways: A drawing of the proposed driveway and parking lot shall be submitted to the building inspection office for approval before a permit is issued. 
(3)  Variances: 
a.  A variance may be requested in cases where these requirements might create an undue hardship. 
b.  Before a variance can be considered, a letter must be submitted to the public works director stating the reasons for requesting a variance. 
c.  Within five (5) working days, a decision on granting the variance will be made by the director of public works. The party requesting the variance will be notified by letter if the variance is to be granted or not. Any special conditions attached to the variance will also be stated in this letter. 
d.  The decision of the public works director may be appealed to the county manager, who shall have the authority to reverse the decision. An appeal to the county manager shall be decided in a timely manner. 
e.  If the decision of the public works director is upheld by the county manager, the applicant may further appeal to the board of commissioners by submitting a written notice of appeal. Appeals to the board of commissioners shall be considered and decided within thirty (30) days of the date of written notice of appeal. 
(4)  Maintenance of driveway: The department of public works will be responsible for the maintenance of the drainage pipe under the driveway and will also be responsible for providing a smooth transition from the county road to the driveway within the road right-of-way. The property owner is responsible for maintaining the surface of the driveway and any associated improvements to the property which has encroached upon the county right-of-way such as landscaping, fences, etc. If any improvements encroaching on the county right-of-way are found to be in violation of this section or are a safety hazard, the property owner will be notified in writing to remove such improvement. If the property owner does not comply within a reasonable period of time, the county will remove such improvement. 
(e)  Before the grading, paving, construction and repair of any driveway, the building inspector must be notified and must make, or cause to be made, an inspection thereof; and the proposed improvements must receive approval of the building official that the proposed improvements shall meet the standards herein set forth. 
(Ord. of 7-24-90, §§ 1—5) 
Chapter 2-17 - TRAFFIC[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicle regulation at airport, § 2-3-16; vehicles in recreation areas, § 2-13-17 et seq.; moving of buildings along streets, § 2-6-4 et seq.; road and street classification, § 2-16-1; wreckers as authorized emergency vehicles, § 2-18-25; solid waste collection vehicles, § 2-7-58. 

Sec. 2-17-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372, §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395 of that title known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, definitions, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this county with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1002) 
Sec. 2-17-2. - Traffic engineering. 
The public works department shall direct or perform all traffic engineering studies which may be necessary for the safe and efficient operation of the county road system. The department shall also maintain all traffic-control signs, markings and devices in the county system established pursuant to section 2-16-1. 
Sec. 2-17-3. - Traffic-control devices. 
(a)  Upon approval of the board of commissioners, the county engineer, or a designee thereof, is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic-control devices: 
(1)  Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; 
(4)  Speed, parking, or other traffic-control zones; 
(5)  Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices; and 
(6)  Any other device necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the county. 
(b)  All traffic-control devices shall conform to specifications in the manual on uniform traffic-control devices adopted by the state transportation board. All such devices required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the county. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic-control devices of the county. 
(c)  The county engineer shall keep and maintain an accurate official map or maps with descriptions of all traffic-control devices. The map or maps and any amendments or changes thereto shall be adopted by resolution of the board of commissioners. An official copy thereof shall be kept in the office of the county clerk; shall be available to the public; and copies certified by the county clerk shall be admissible in court as proof of the location of any traffic-control device. 
(d)  No person shall be charged with violating a traffic-control device unless appropriate devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(e)  Any violation of any traffic-control device established hereunder shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1003) 
State Law reference— See O.C.G.A. §§ 32-6-50, 40-6-20. 
Sec. 2-17-4. - Speed limits. 
Speed limits for county roads are hereby adopted and posted accordingly with the proper authorities notified of said limits. A complete listing of county road speed limits is available for public inspection in the county clerk's office. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1003.1) 
Sec. 2-17-5. - Load limits generally, trucks. 
(a)  Under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 32-4-42(10), which provides that: "In addition to the power specifically delegated to it in that title, a county shall have the authority to adopt and enforce rules and regulations or ordinances to require permits and to perform all other acts which are necessary, proper or incidental to the efficient operation and development of the county road system, and the provisions of that title are to be liberally construed to that end. Any power vested in or duly placed on a county, but not implemented by specific provisions for the exercise thereof, may be executed and carried out by a county in a reasonable manner, subject to such limitations as may be provided by law." 
(b)  The superintendent of public works shall study the roads of the county, and in such superintendent's discretion, without impeding the flow of necessary commercial traffic, make and determine proper load limits for those roads which are being damaged and destroyed by overweight traffic, and having determined a proper load limit, shall report the same to the board of commissioners for its approval, and recordation in the official minutes of the board, and shall post both ends of the road, with the standard state-designed sign, notifying the travelling public of the load limits, and after the signs have been in place for a period of one (1) week, the county police shall be instructed to enforce the same, under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 32-1-10, which make it a misdemeanor to violate that title of the code. 
(c)  In the event it is necessary for trucks carrying a greater weight to use the road for any purpose, the superintendent of public works shall have discretion upon application to permit the usage for the specific purpose requested, and on the terms and conditions which will protect the road, as determined by such superintendent. 
(d)  A copy of this section shall be published once a week for two (2) weeks in the Rome News Tribune, posted on the bulletin board, and information as to the same be disseminated by the superintendent of public works in any other reasonable manner, so as to enable the citizens to become aware of this section, and to understand the meaning of the signs, after the superintendent of public works has determined proper and reasonable load limits, and has posted the road and reported the same to the board of commissioners, and has the load limits, the name of the road and the limits of the same duly entered in the minutes of the board. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1004) 
State Law reference— Weight of vehicle and load, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-26. 
Sec. 2-17-6. - Truck routes. 
(a)  All motor vehicles having a gross weight in excess of thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds, including the load thereon, or having an overall length in excess of thirty (30) feet, except vehicles designed to carry passengers, are prohibited from using any public road within the county that is maintained by the county, except those herein designated as truck routes, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Motor vehicles, whose terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters which are not on a designated truck route, shall have ingress to, and egress from, such places by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters and nearest designated truck route; and 
(2)  Motor vehicles engaged in making a specific pickup or delivery on a public road not designated a truck route. On those road designated as county-maintained truck routes, the maximum gross weight for any motor vehicle shall be fifty-five thousand (55,000) pounds, except bridge limits indicated, and the maximum length shall be seventy-five (75) feet and the maximum width shall be ninety-six (96) inches. 
(b)  Any person driving or in charge or control of any restricted vehicle as defined in subsection (a) of this section, when upon a public road other than those designated as truck routes, shall be prepared to present for the inspection of police officers such person's log book, weight slips, delivery slips or other written evidence of such person's destination and point of origin, to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a street other than a designated truck route. 
(c)  If any designated truck route, or portion thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, restricted vehicles, as defined in subsection (a) of this section, shall use other temporary truck routes as may be designated by the county. 
(d)  Violation of this section, or any part hereof, shall be punishable by the judge of the probate court by a minimum fine of four hundred dollars ($400.00) for up to ten thousand (10,000) pounds over the maximum allowable load of four hundred dollars ($400.00) plus five dollars ($5.00) for each one hundred (100) pounds over ten thousand (10,000) pounds exceeding the maximum allowable load. 
(e)  The county shall coordinate with the City of Rome in establishing truck routes that are reasonable, that provide for continuous vehicular passage in and out of the city, and that serve the interest of the general public. 
(f)  The following routes are hereby designated as truck routes: 
Bridge  Limitation Load   
Route (in pounds) 
(1)  Calhoun Road, from SR 20 to SR 53 ..... 55,000 
(2)  Burnett Ferry Road, from SR 20 to Loop 1 ..... 35,000 
(3)  Walker Mountain Road, from US 27 to Blacks Bluff Road ..... 55,000 
(4)  Blacks Bluff Road, from Walker Mountain to Loop 1 ..... 32,000 
Blacks Bluff Road, from Loop 1 to SR 100\32,000 
(5)  Chulio Road, from US 411 to county line ..... 37,000 
(6)  Pleasant Valley Road, from SR 101 to county line ..... 20,000 
(7)  Big Texas Valley Road, from Huffaker Road to Sike Storey Road ..... 28,000 
(8)  Ward Mountain Road, from Calhoun Road to Morrison Campground ..... 20,000 
Morrison Campground (east), from Ward Mountain Road to SR 293\20,000 
(9)  Sike Storey Road, from US 27 to US 27 ..... 55,000 
(10)  Huffaker Road, East from Fouche Gap Road to SR 20 ..... 55,000 
Huffaker Road, West from Fouche Gap Road to SR 20\26,000 
(11)  Wax Road, from SR 101 to county line ..... 21,000 
(12)  Reeceburg Road, from Old Rockmart Road to county line ..... 21,000 
(13)  Booze Mountain Road, from US 27 to Reeceburg Road ..... 15,000 
(14)  Old Rockmart Road, from Maple Road to SR 101 ..... 20,000 
(15)  Turner Bend Road from Loop 1 to SR 20 ..... 55,000 
(16)  Industrial Boulevard, from US 27 to Governors Drive ..... 55,000 
(17)  Superior Drive, from Industrial Boulevard to Booze Mountain Road ..... 55,000 
(18)  Enterprise Drive, from Superior to Dead End ..... 55,000 
(19)  West Hermitage Road, N.E., from SR 53 to Calhoun Road ..... 55,000 
(20)  Ball Drive, N.E., from W. Hermitage to Dead End ..... 55,000 
(21)  Armuchee Connector, N.E., from City Limits to US 27 ..... 55,000 
A map entitled "Floyd County Truck Routes", clearly delineating all current truck routes, shall be maintained in the office of the county clerk for inspection by the public. 
(Code 1979, § 8-1004.1; Res. of 6-11-85; Ord. of 2-22-94, § 1; Ord. of 3-28-17(2)) 
Sec. 2-17-7. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them as below: 
County property parking zone means: 
(1)  The public parking spaces located at the 3 Government Plaza Court House. 
(2)  The public parking spaces located at 12 E. 4 th Street, Rome, Ga, adjacent to the Floyd County Administration Building. 
(3)  Any and all public parking under the authority of, or managed by, the Floyd County Government. 
Handicap parking means: 
(1)  Handicap parking place means any area on Floyd County property which has been designated as reserved for the use of handicapped persons by any sign or pavement marking bearing the word "handicapped", or a symbol representing a person in a wheelchair. 
(2)  Handicap person means a person who by reason of illness, injury, age, congenital malfunction, or other incapacity or disability has a significant loss or impairment of mobility. 
Reserved or permit parking zone means: 
(1)  Reserved parking means any area on or within Floyd County property which has been designated by sign or pavement marking bearing the word "Reserved". 
(2)  Permit parking means any area on or within Floyd County property which has been designated by county authority, to be within an area where permits may be or are issued allowing employees or other persons to park. 
(Ord. No. 2016-003A, 2-9-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-003A, adopted Feb. 9, 2016, deleted the former § 2-17-7, and enacted a new § 2-17-7 as set out herein. The §2-17-7 was entitled "Parking on county property—Rules and regulations," and derived from: Amends. of Jan. 24, 1995, § 1; Nov. 14, 1995; and Corr. of Feb. 29, 1996. 
Sec. 2-17-7(a). - Parking prohibited in handicap parking without permit or license plate. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any vehicle in a handicapped parking place unless there is displayed on the dashboard or hung from the rear view mirror of the parked vehicle a valid, unexpired handicapped parking permit or unless there is attached to the vehicle a specially designated license plate for disabled persons authorized under O.C.G.A. § 40-6-222(d). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park any vehicle in a handicapped parking place except for the purpose of allowing a handicapped person to enter or get out of such vehicle while in such parking place. However nothing in this subsection shall prevent an ambulance or other emergency vehicle from stopping in a handicapped parking place. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or institution, other than the one to whom the handicapped parking permit or license plate for the disabled person is issued, to make use of the handicapped parking permit or license plate for disabled person. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a handicapped parking permit for any institutional vehicle other than the vehicle for which the permit has been issued. 
(d)  No person shall park a vehicle so as to block any entrance or egress ramp used by handicapped persons on public or private property. 
(e)  Authorities of the county shall honor visitors out of state handicapped license tags or similar special parking permits on the same basis as tags and permits issued within this state. 
(Ord. No. 2016-003A, 2-9-16) 
Sec. 2-17-7(b). - Parking violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place a vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in any parking place or area governed by Floyd County, for a time period in excess of the posted time limitations. The time limitations for each area shall be visibly posted either by sign or pavement marking within this zone. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or place a vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in any area governed by Floyd County, which is designated as "Reserved", without said person is assigned that parking space by the authority of the county. This designation shall be marked either by sign or pavement marking within this zone. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally remove the tire marking placed on a parked vehicle in an attempt to gain more time while in a time restricted parking zone. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is an employee of Floyd County, to park their vehicle in the designated employee parking area without having displayed on their vehicle, an authorized permit or decal issued to them by the county. In addition it shall also be unlawful for any employee of this county to park their vehicle in a non-designated employee parking zone for a time period of more than thirty (30) minutes, i.e., court house parking area. 
(e)  Vehicles must be parked within the designated lines marking the parking space to be utilized by the vehicle. 
(f)  The violater can pay the fee for the parking violation as per the fee schedule adopted by the governing authority if the citation is paid within fourteen (14) days. 
(Ord. No. 2016-003A, 2-9-16) 
Sec. 2-17-7(c). - Notice on illegally parked vehicle. 
Whenever any motor vehicle without driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by ordinance of this county or by state law, the officer or duly authorized agent finding such vehicle shall take it's registration number and any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify it's user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the county, for the driver to answer to the charge against him/her within fourteen (14) days during the hours and at a place specified in the notice. The officer or duly authorized agent will then forward a copy of the notice to the appropriate authority. 
(Ord. No. 2016-003A, 2-9-16) 
Sec. 2-17-7(d). - Failure to comply with notice attached to vehicle. 
If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing, or parking under the traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a notice affixed to such motor vehicle within the fourteen-day period following the violation, the Floyd County Magistrate Court shall mail a court notice to the defendant. 
(Ord. No. 2016-003A, 2-9-16) 
Sec. 2-17-7(e). - Presumption in reference to vehicle ownership. 
In any prosecution charging in any law or ordinance governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or ordinance, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle shall constitute in evidence a prima-facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which the violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 2016-003A, 2-9-16) 
Sec. 2-17-7(f). - Penalties and fines. 
In the event the required fee for a parking violation is not paid within fourteen (14) days the fine for said offense shall be in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 2016-003A, 2-9-16) 
Sec. 2-17-7(g). - Towing and removal of improperly parked vehicles. 
(a)  Vehicles that are parked in violation of this section, including but not limited to, any vehicle left in a handicapped parking space, may be removed and towed to a garage in the County of Floyd, Georgia, as directed by the parking authorities. Said vehicle to remain there until such time as all court fines have been paid; and, the fees due to the towing company, including removal, towing and storage fees, have been paid by the legal owner, the registered owner, a person determined and verified by the towing company to have permission of the registered owner, or someone who has purchased the vehicle from the registered owner who produces proof of ownership or written authorization; and, such individual signs a receipt for the return of the vehicle. 
(b)  Floyd County shall not be liable or responsible in any manner whatsoever, for any damage or loss when an offending vehicle, or a vehicle reasonably considered to be offending at the time enforcement action was taken, is removed, towed, seized, held or stored. 
(Ord. of 12-13-16) 
Sec. 2-17-8 - Fire lanes. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Fire lane means any area on public or private property which has been designated as a fire lane or prohibited zone by any sign or pavement markings bearing "Fire Lane" or "Prohibited Zone" and shall apply at all times. 
(b)  Application. The provisions of this section shall apply to all vehicles operated at shopping centers or parking lots or similar areas customarily used by the public. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park any vehicle within any fire lane or prohibited area which would prohibit access to the structure by any fire truck or fire apparatus, police, ambulance or other emergency equipment. 
(c)  Exceptions. Any vehicle designated as an emergency vehicle when responding to an emergency or fire alarm may park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the police department and/or the fire marshal, or his designee, to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Penalty for violations. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision under this section shall be punished as provided in section 2-1-8. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002A, § 1, 2-28-12) 
Chapter 2-18 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-18-1—2-18-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WRECKER AND TOWING SERVICES FOR POLICE-INITIATED TOWS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-001A, adopted June 8, 2010, deleted the former Art. II, §§ 2-18-20—2-18-27, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to wrecker and towing services. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
State Law reference— Removal of junked motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; local ordinances, etc., relating to wrecker services. 

Sec. 2-18-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Passenger cars, light trucks and similar vehicles means any vehicle weight up to ten thousand (10,000) pounds of GVW. 
Vehicle means unless otherwise indicated, a vehicle to be towed shall be: (1) a vehicle damaged to such an extent that it is unable to be moved safely under its own power; (2) a vehicle abandoned by its owner, driver or other person; (3) a vehicle impounded or under the control of a Floyd County police officer or other lawfully empowered officer of the city, county, or state; (4) a vehicle, the owner or operator or person in possession of which is under arrest or in the custody of the Floyd County police or other lawfully empowered officer of the city, county, or state; (5) a vehicle, the owner or operator or person in possession of which is not in physical or mental condition to operate a vehicle. 
Wrecker means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles. The term "wrecker" also includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for the purpose of towing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles. This definition includes "rollback" or "slide back" wreckers. 
Wrecker service means any partnership, individual person, corporation, limited liability company or other business entity, either as principal, agent or employee, in the business of removing, towing and/or storing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles by the use of a wrecker or other towing device within the city or county. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001A, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-18-21. - Procedures for county police officers and employees. 
(a)  A schedule shall be set up by the chief of police on a rotating basis for all qualified wrecker service companies, which have qualified under this article, which wrecker service companies shall be used as hereinafter provided, except in an extreme emergency, where persons are trapped or pinned in or under vehicles, or in burning vehicles, or in danger of drowning by submersion, or where traffic is blocked to prevent normal flow in which event, and only in which event, a police officer or other lawfully authorized officer shall be authorized to call the nearest, most qualified company to prevent serious injury or death. 
(b)  The police officer or other lawfully authorized officer, shall first determine whether or not a wrecker is needed, and if a wrecker is needed, shall ascertain whether the owner or operator is in condition to make a preference known, what wrecker service company the owner or operator desires to be called, and shall then call the preferred company desired by the owner or operator of the vehicle if the wrecker service can respond within a reasonable time. 
(c)  In the event the owner or operator is unable, due to injury or due to a physical or mental impairment, to make a choice, or does not have any preference, then said police officer or other authorized officer shall call the wrecker service company on schedule for that week. 
(d)  In the event the dispatcher is unable to reach the wrecker service company on call, then the backup wrecker service company, which shall be the company that was on the previous week's schedule, shall be called to provide the needed wrecker service. In the event that the on call wrecker service is reached but cannot respond to the scene then the on call wrecker service shall be responsible for sending another county approved list wrecker service in their stead. In this case the original on call wrecker service shall immediately notify Floyd County 911 as to which wrecker service will be responding to the scene. In this event, it is the sole responsibility of the on call wrecker service to insure that an approved wrecker service respond to the scene. 
(e)  Except in extreme emergencies, the police officer or other authorized officer, shall await the arrival of the wrecker and shall in the meantime, try to make the scene of the accident safe for other automobiles, using the road in the vicinity thereof, giving warnings and directing traffic. 
(f)  The police officer or other authorized officer shall make out a tow-in report, which shall contain the information and details prescribed by the county (especially the name of operator and owner), on a form made up for that purpose. The police officer shall have wrecker operator sign tow-in report and provide copy to the wrecker operator before leaving scene. The officer shall retain the original for department records. 
(g)  A thorough inventory shall be made, by the officer on the scene, of personal articles and equipment in the vehicle to be towed, such inventory to be written upon a form provided by the police department. 
(h)  If an officer requests that a vehicle be towed to the police department, the wrecker operator shall have the officer sign the tow-in bill. The officer will assume the responsibility for said vehicle, and indicate where said vehicle is to be placed. The officer shall forward the tow bill and make notification to person/persons responsible for follow-up regarding the vehicle. 
(i)  Officers are to insure that department personnel mail an owner/operator copy of the tow-in report to the registered owner of an abandoned vehicle. 
(j)  The public safety committee of Floyd County may also promulgate additional operating procedures not in conflict with this article. Such procedures shall be posted and filed in the same manner as the fee schedule referred to in section 2-18-25. 
(k)  Officers will give the 911 dispatch center as much information as possible about size of the vehicle and circumstances surrounding the tow. This information will be passed on to wrecker service that will make the determination of what equipment to respond. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001A, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-18-22. - Qualification of wrecker service companies. 
(a)  Any wrecker service company desiring to be qualified to be placed on the rotating schedule for use by Floyd County, under the conditions set out herein, shall file an application before October 1, with the chief of police. After the creation of the initial schedule, all wrecker services seeking to be placed on the rotating wrecker schedule shall if qualified be placed on the rotating list beginning the next calendar year following receipt of a pre-October acceptable application. A continuing responsibility for eligibility shall include an adequate and reasonable response time to calls made to the scheduled wrecker service company to assure efficient service on a 24-hour basis, and compliance with all sections of this article entitled wrecker and towing services for police initiated tows. 
(b)  Wrecker service companies desiring to be qualified on the rotating schedule shall agree to waive all charges to Floyd County on cases of innocent false arrests. 
(c)  Wrecker service companies desiring to be qualified on the rotating schedule shall agree to a schedule for calls determined by the chief of police. Wrecker service companies desiring to be qualified on rotating schedule shall agree to charge its on-call customers according to the fee schedule for towing service charges established pursuant to section 2-1-12. Where an owner or driver requests a specific wrecker service, the wrecker service shall not be required to follow the fee schedule. 
(d)  The fee schedule which is made a part of this article shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the place of business by each wrecker service company qualified, and each wrecker of the company shall carry a copy of the schedule, for the purpose of furnishing the same for vehicle owners or operators. 
(e)  Not withstanding anything contained in the article to the contrary, any wrecker service that has an owner or operator that has been convicted of a felony within five (5) years will not be allowed to be on the county rotating schedule for police/county initiated tows. All wrecker services desiring to be placed or remain on said rotating schedule agree to provide the Floyd County Police at the time of seeking qualification under this article and thereafter annually with a release executed by all owners of each wrecker service and all operators for each wrecker service which authorizes the Floyd County Police to conduct a criminal records search of said individuals. All wrecker services desiring to qualify or remain qualified shall also provide a release to the police department with respect to all new owners or operators of the wrecker service. 
(f)  Failure to comply with this article will result in a written warning for the first offense, a suspension of six (6) weekly rotations for the second offense and permanent suspension for a third offense. The wrecker service shall have a right of appeal to the county manager; and if they are still aggrieved, they can appeal to the county board. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001A, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-18-23. - Conditions prerequisite to furnishing towing service at request of county. 
Unless the person needing wrecker services specifically requests that a wrecker service unauthorized under this article be called, a wrecker service shall not be called upon, by police officers or other authorized employees of the county, to furnish the service of towing any vehicle upon the streets of the city or county, unless the wrecker service shall have complied with the following conditions: 
(1)  The wrecker service shall be available twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, to provide the service; 
(2)  The wrecker service shall have qualified licensed employees, skilled and knowledgeable in performing their duties, and available at all times to avoid delay; 
(3)  The wrecker service shall operate at least two (2) wreckers, at least one (1) of which shall be an eight thousand (8,000) pound dual cable wrecker and at least one (1) of which shall be a "rollback" wrecker. The wreckers shall be in good operating condition, meeting all requirements of state law, and being equipped with a flashing light mounted on top of the tow car, or on top of the crane or hoist, which light will be visible for a distance of one thousand (1,000) feet, and mounted in such a manner that it can be seen, both by approaching and rear traffic, and also, sufficient red flares, lanterns or warning lights and reflectors, to be able to mark the scene of a wreck on both sides of the same, so as to warn all traffic on the highway of the emergency existing while the wreckers are in operation. The wreckers shall also carry brooms, shovels, and fire extinguishers suitable for extinguishing fires in wrecked vehicles and for cleaning up the debris and glass from the area where the wreck has occurred. The fire extinguisher shall be of a type capable of extinguishing a fire of flammable liquid. Wrecker services on large wrecker calls shall have available heavy duty wrecker/s having a twenty-five thousand (25,000) pounds minimum gross weight rating with a twenty-ton winch or an equivalent wrecker having same minimum capabilities capable of moving vehicles, including large trucks, buses and loaded and unloaded tractor trailers; 
Wreckers must be certified and inspected by the police department before being placed in service. 
(4)  The wrecker service shall have attached and displayed in a conspicuous place, on both right and left sides of a tow car, the name of the towing service/company. No magnetic or removable decals or signs shall be allowed. 
(5)  The wrecker service shall maintain in the wrecker service's name at a minimum the following insurance policies: (i) an automobile liability insurance policy having a combined single limit of not less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00), (ii) a comprehensive general liability policy providing bodily injury coverage limits of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per occurrence and property damage coverage limits of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per person and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) annual aggregate, (iii) cargo and garage keepers liability insurance with a limit of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), and (iv) workers' compensation insurance in the minimum coverage required by Georgia law. Said insurance shall name Floyd County as an additional insured under the policy and shall provide for written notification within fifteen (15) days of policy modification, expiration or cancellation. The wrecker service shall provide to the chief of police a full copy of the insurance policy no later than five (5) days from date of execution of agreement or extension thereof or any modification of the policy and upon renewal of the policy; 
(6)  The wrecker service shall provide a storage area for the storage and safekeeping of vehicles towed under this article. The area shall be enclosed with a solid wall, or a substantial wire fence. Such fence shall not be less than eight (8) feet in height, except that all wrecker services in operation as of November 15, 1993, may maintain a fence not less than six (6) feet in height until such time as the service elects to construct a new or replacement fence. All fences must be visually screened, and have a capacity for a minimum of thirty (30) cars; 
(7)  The wrecker service's operating personnel of wrecker units shall be technically qualified and physically capable of responding immediately to all calls received; 
(8)  The wrecker service must maintain registration with the Georgia Public Service Commission and possess all state-required permits; 
(9)  The wrecker service must obtain through the Floyd County Police Department identification cards for each operator which shall be worn at all times while responding to calls under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001A, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-18-24. - Responsibility of wrecker service companies. 
(a)  In order for a wrecker service to maintain eligibility for Floyd County's rotating schedule of calls to wrecker services, the wrecker service shall: 
(1)  Maintain a daily list of vehicles towed and/or stored for police-initiated towing and storage services. The list shall contain details as to the make, year, model, color, vehicle I.D. number, license plate number, name of owner, and the purpose of removing and/or storing vehicle. The records shall be retained for a period of twelve (12) months and shall be made available to the police department at any reasonable hour; 
(2)  Be responsible to the vehicle owner for all damages done during towing and storage of any vehicles entrusted to them under this article; 
(3)  Have a response time of thirty (30) minutes or less for at least ninety (90) percent of all calls during every calendar year. Response time is the time elapsed from the time the 911 center dispatches the wrecker service until the time that the wrecker actually arrives at the location of the vehicle which is to be towed; 
(4)  tow vehicles in a professional manner in accordance with standards in the contract and deal with the public in a professional and courteous manner; 
(5)  take reasonable care to ensure no further damage will occur to the vehicle towed either through carelessness or from natural elements, and the wrecker service shall use the proper equipment of whatever nature necessary (i.e. dollies, wheel lifts etc.) in order to prevent further damage to the vehicles towed; 
(6)  Shall cooperate with all duly authorized law enforcement officers, in the protection of any evidence or in any investigation arising out of a wreck or seizure of a vehicle by any officials; 
(7)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-276, prior to leaving the scene of any collision, the responding wrecker service shall clean the pavement and right-of-way of all debris of the collision, including all glass off paved roadway; In the event that engine fluids have been spilled on the roadway the wrecker service shall provide and spread only that amount necessary of oil dry material on the affected area in order to render the roadway safe for vehicular traffic. 
(8)  release any vehicle to the registered owner upon payment unless a hold has been placed on the vehicle by the arresting officer or a court order prohibits the release; 
(9)  Not go to any accident scene unless: 
a.  Called by the police department; 
b.  Called by the vehicle owner/operator; or 
c.  There exists an extreme emergency immediately endangering life or property; 
(10)  Whenever any wrecked or abandoned vehicle is removed without the request, direction or participation of the police department, if the owner is unknown, within seventy-two (72) hours of such removal, furnish to the police department on a form supplied or approved by the police department the following information with respect to such vehicle: tag number and description, including year, model, make, color and vehicle identification number and upon receipt of such information, the police department shall immediately take steps to ascertain the identity of the vehicle owner and notify him of the time and place of removal and of the present whereabouts of the vehicle. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall relieve any wrecker service of any of the requirements imposed by virtue of O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. or by virtue of any other law with respect to the duties, among others, to make diligent inquiries as to the ownership of vehicles and notification to owners. 
(c)  In order for a wrecker service to maintain eligibility for Floyd County's rotating schedule of calls to wrecker services, on call wrecker services shall be subject to monthly inspections of insurance and required equipment to insure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001A, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-18-25. - Regulation of fees for services rendered. 
All wrecker services qualifying under this article shall post towing fees reflecting the prices to be charged to the public. Fees shall be posted in open view to the public in the wrecker service's lobby. In addition, the wrecker service shall be responsible for delivering, at the wrecker services expense, to each owner or representative of every towed vehicle present at the scene of the tow a pre-printed disclosure in a form the same as that prepared by the Floyd County Police that states the fees to be charged by the wrecker service, location of storage lots, times of vehicle release, and phone number(s) of the wrecker service. In order for a wrecker service to maintain eligibility for Floyd County's rotating schedule of calls to wrecker services, the wrecker service shall furnish the person who pays for wrecker services a written receipt on a pre-printed form drafted by Floyd County which contains the same information as the within-described disclosure form and which provides an itemization of all charges, the name of the person on the scene who recovered the vehicle, and the telephone number of a representative of the Floyd County Police designated to receive comments about wrecker service. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001A, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-18-26. - Responsibility for payment. 
All charges and fees for towing and storage of the vehicle towed shall be at the expense of the owner of the vehicle, and against the vehicle itself, as provided by state law. All liability and responsibility for payment for the services of the wrecker service shall lie with the owner/operator; neither Floyd County nor any employee of Floyd County shall be responsible for payment. This article neither creates nor establishes any right owed nor does it create any legal duty owed to any wrecker service or its owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001A, 6-8-10) 
Chapter 2-20 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL 

Sec. 2-20-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as the "Floyd County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance". 
(Ord. of 3-28-17(1)) 
Sec. 2-20-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnvironCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 2-20-4(c) of this chapter. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenway: An area along the course of certain locally designated state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, or which may contain limited minor land disturbances such as trails and picnic areas. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 2-20-3(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Major river corridors: The portions of the Coosa, Etowah and Oostanaula Rivers flowing through Floyd County. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 125-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on-site becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
River tributary corridors: All portions of Horseleg Creek, Silver Creek, Armuchee Creek, Dry Creek, Big Cedar Creek, Johns Creek and Dykes Creek flowing through Floyd County. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled roadway consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Coosa Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or re-issued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with. 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 3-28-17(1)) 
Sec. 2-20-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the "Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. The applicant for such construction shall be required to complete a standard 1 and 2 family erosion control affidavit, provided by the building inspection department. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 2-20-4(c)(15) and (16) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph. "State waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 3-28-17(1)) 
Sec. 2-20-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) below, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  A greenway is hereby established to include all lands within one hundred (100) feet of each major river and forty (40) feet of each river tributary, inclusive any islands, as measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the river or tributary bank. No land may be used, and no vegetation shall be disturbed within the greenway by building construction, development activity, installation of septic tanks or septic drain fields, the handling of hazardous waste or for any other purposes except for the following permitted uses: 
a.  Land uses that existed prior to the adoption of the Rome/Floyd County Unified Land Development Code. 
b.  A single-family dwelling, provided that: 
1.  Each dwelling shall be located on a lot having an area of at least two (2) acres, not including any area that lies between the banks of the protected area. 
2.  Only one (1) dwelling is located on the lot. 
3.  No septic tank drainfield may be located within the River Corridor Greenway. 
(16)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(17) of this section, there is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground water table year-round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-5(6), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
c.  There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-2, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
1.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
2.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  There is established a twenty-five-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a twenty-five-foot buffer would consume at least eighteen (18) percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; and 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than five hundred (500) square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in EPD Rule 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least fourteen (14) days prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 3-28-17(1)) 
Sec. 2-20-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Floyd County without first obtaining a permit from the environmental compliance section of the Rome/Floyd County Inspection Department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the Rome/Floyd County Inspection Department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 2-20-4(b) and (c) of this chapter will be met. 
Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three (3) copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 2-20-4(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this chapter, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 2-20-4(b) and (c) of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsections 2-20-4(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three (3) years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 3-28-17(1)) 
Sec. 2-20-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The environmental compliance section of the Rome/Floyd County Inspection Department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The Rome/Floyd County Inspection Department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 3-28-17(1)) 
Sec. 2-20-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be served with a summons to appear in the Magistrates Environmental Court of Floyd County and may be subject to a monetary penalty of no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) but not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Each day during which permit violations or failure or refusal to comply continues, shall be a separate violation of this chapter. Persons found in violation of any part of this chapter may be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. When violations occur involving the discharge of significant amounts of sediment or other pollutants as defined in the state general permit, a summons to appear in the Magistrates Environmental Court of Floyd County shall be served upon the operator/owner or person responsible for the site from which significant sediment or other pollutants were discharged. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 2-20-5(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), but not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), but not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) but not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 3-28-17(1)) 
Sec. 2-20-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on-site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on-site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. of 3-28-17(1)) 
Sec. 2-20-9. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Floyd County Board of Commissioners within thirty (30) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Floyd County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-28-17(1)) 
Sec. 2-20-10. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. The ordinance from which this chapter derives shall become effective on the 28 th day of March, 2017. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 3-28-17(1)) 
APPENDIX B - UNIFIED LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
THE UNIFIED LAND DEVELOPMENT CODE  of  Floyd County and the City of Rome, Georgia  As recommended by the ULDC Implementation Study Committee  Initial Adoption: August 2001  Revised Through: 2015 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-001ULDC, adopted Jan. 13, 2009, added a new App. B to read as herein set out. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2-2; buildings; construction and related activities, ch. 2-6; planning and development, ch. 2-15; soil erosion and sedimentation control, §§ 2-6-20—2-6-29; county utilities and services, ch. 2-7; roads, streets and sidewalks, ch. 2-16. 
State Law reference— Zoning procedures law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL 

1.1. - Title and authority. 
1.1.1. - Title.This Ordinance regulates the use of land, the location and use of buildings and other site improvements, and the construction of public facilities and private improvements related to the development of land. This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as "The Unified Land Development Code of Floyd County and the City of Rome, Georgia" or, for brevity, "The Rome-Floyd County Development Code." 
1.1.2. - Authority.This Ordinance is adopted under authority of Article 9, Section 2, Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and pursuant to the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.) and other applicable laws enacted by the General Assembly. 
1.2. - Adoption. 
1.2.1. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances.All conflicting ordinances or parts of ordinances are hereby repealed to the extent of their conflict. Where this Ordinance and another overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restriction shall prevail. 
1.2.2. - Severability.If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance or any amendment to it is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed as a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Development Code or an amendment to it. 
1.2.3. - Effective date.This Ordinance shall take effect for each jurisdiction upon its adoption by, respectively, the City Council and the Board of Commissioners. 
1.3. - Purpose and intent. 
a.  The purpose of this Ordinance is: To promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public, and is intended: 
(1)  To promote the orderly and beneficial development and expansion of the City and County; 
(2)  To provide adequate access to natural light and air; 
(3)  To provide adequate water, sewerage, and surface drainage; 
(4)  To prevent undesirable overcrowding of population; 
(5)  To secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; 
(6)  To promote the orderly and desirable subdivision of land; 
(7)  To insure the orderly and desirable development of streets; 
(8)  To promote the orderly and desirable development of public and private utilities and services; and 
(9)  To insure proper legal description and recordation of all subdivided land. 
b.  In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Deemed neither to limit, nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
c.  This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any valid easement, covenant or deed restriction duly recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
1.4. - Applicability. 
1.4.1. - General applicability. 
a.  Use of land or structures. 
(1)  No structure or land shall hereafter be used, located, extended, converted or structurally altered except in full compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(2)  No part of a yard, buffer or off-street parking spaces required in connection with any use or structure for the purpose of complying with this Ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, buffer or off-street parking spaces required for any other use or structure, unless specifically allowed under the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(3)  Street rights-of-way shall not be considered a part of a lot or front yard setback for the purpose of meeting the minimum requirements of this Ordinance. 
b.  Acceptance of public streets. The Governing Body shall not accept a public street unless such street substantially corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a preliminary subdivision plat approved under the provisions of this Ordinance. 
c.  Recordation and transfer of property. 
(1)  A properly approved plat must be filed and recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court on any division of a property into two (2) or more lots as required by this Ordinance. 
(2)  No construction permit shall be issued on any parcel for which a plat has not been properly filed and recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court; provided further, that the description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring such land shall not exempt the transaction from the requirements of this Ordinance. 
d.  Street frontage required. No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot unless the street giving access to such lot upon which said building is proposed to be placed shall be accepted, opened, and maintained as a public street prior to that time; shall be guaranteed to be completed, as provided in Article 6.4.6; shall otherwise be maintained by the City or County; or shall have been designated by the City or County as a private street. 
e.  One principal dwelling on a lot. With respect to single-family detached dwellings, one (1) principal building and its customary accessory building may be erected on any one lot except that in the A-R and S-R districts two single-family dwelling units may be permitted on one lot if they are served by on-site sewage disposal as permitted by the Floyd County Health Department. 
f.  Lot reduction prohibited. No yard or lot existing prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or any other subsequent amendment thereto shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this Ordinance. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this Ordinance. 
1.4.2. - Exemptions. 
a.  Previously issued permits. The provisions of this Ordinance and any subsequent amendments shall not affect the validity of any lawfully issued and effective building or development permit if: 
(1)  The development activity or building construction authorized by the permit has been commenced prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or the amendment, or will be commenced after such effective date but within six (6) months of issuance of the permit; and 
(2)  The development activity or building construction continues without interruption (except because of war or natural disaster) until the development or construction is complete. If the permit expires, any further development or construction on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this Ordinance in effect on the date of the permit expiration. 
b.  Governmental bodies. All Governmental Bodies and authorities generally, legally exempt from regulation under the police power of Floyd County or the City of Rome shall not be exempt from the regulations contained in this Ordinance. 
1.4.3. - Nonconforming development.Lawful nonconforming uses, structures, lots and signs are declared by this Ordinance to be incompatible with land uses, structures, lots and signs that conform to the requirements of the zoning districts in which the nonconformity exists. 
a.  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  To avoid undue hardship, the lawful but nonconforming use of any structure or land at the time of the enactment of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment may be continued even though the use does not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance, except that the nonconforming use: 
(a)  Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(b)  Shall not be re-established after its removal from the property or its discontinuance for twelve (12) months or more. 
(c)  Shall not be repaired, rebuilt or altered after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction. 
(d)  Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increase its nonconformity if the structure or land is located in the city. 
(e)  Shall not be enlarged or altered in any way that increase its nonconformity if the structure or land is located in the county unless the nonconforming use shall comply with all applicable building codes, setback requirements, lot size requirements, and public safety issues that exist for the least restrictive zoning district in which the current use would normally be allowed. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
(a)  The strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health, shall be allowed upon order of such official. 
(b)  A nonconforming single-family detached, duplex or triplex may be repaired, rebuilt or replaced after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent by approval as a special use, in accordance with the procedures of Article 2; provided, however, that a tri-plex dwelling constructed prior to the adoption of the Code may be repaired, rebuilt, or replaced after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent; and may be re-established after its removal from the property or its discontinuance for twelve (12) months or more as a use permitted by right in the D-R Duplex-Residential zoning district. 
(c)  A use that was lawfully established prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Ordinance, but which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment now requires approval as a Special Use in the zoning district where the use is located, shall not be considered a nonconforming use under the provisions of this Ordinance, and, therefore is not subject to the prohibitions on enlargement or alteration of an existing use. 
(d)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of deteriorated elements such as roofs, foundations, windows, walls, fixtures and systems (plumbing, electrical, HVAC) shall be allowed if such maintenance, repair or replacement will not expand, enlarge or alter the use or structure in a way that increases its nonconformity; and if such maintenance will not exceed fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost at the time. 
b.  Nonconforming structures. 
(1)  A nonconforming structure may continue to be occupied and used, except that the nonconforming structure: 
(a)  Shall not be repaired, rebuilt or altered after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost at the time of destruction. 
(b)  Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  Exceptions. 
(a)  The strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health, shall be allowed upon order of such official. 
(b)  A nonconforming single-family detached, duplex or triplex dwelling may be repaired, rebuilt or replaced after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent by approval as a special use, in accordance with the procedures of Article 2; provided, however, that a tri-plex dwelling constructed prior to the adoption of the code may be repaired, rebuilt, or replaced after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent; and may be re-established after its removal from the property or its discontinuance for twelve (12) months or more as a use permitted by right in the D-R Duplex-Residential zoning district. 
(c)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of deteriorated elements such as roofs, foundations, windows, walls, fixtures and systems (plumbing, electrical, HVAC) shall be allowed if such maintenance, repair or replacement will not expand, enlarge or alter the structure in a way that increases its nonconformity; and if such maintenance will not exceed fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost at the time. 
c.  Nonconforming lots. 
(1)  Where the owner of a legal lot of record at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance does not own sufficient land to conform to the minimum lot size or lot width requirement of this Ordinance, such lot may nonetheless be used as a building site provided that access to a public street is provided directly or through a recorded easement, and further provided that the minimum building setbacks are not reduced below the minimum specified in this Ordinance. 
d.  Nonconforming signs. 
(1)  Permanent signs. A nonconforming sign that is permanently affixed to the ground or to a building may continue to be used, except that the nonconforming sign: 
(a)  Shall not be replaced except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Shall not be repaired, rebuilt or altered after damage exceeding fifty (50) percent of its replacement cost of the time of destruction. 
(c)  Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  Permanent signs in the county. Subsection 1.4.3.d(1) shall have application only in the city, and subsection 1.4.3d(2) shall have application only in the county. In the county, a nonconforming sign structure that is permanently affixed to the ground or to a building may continue to be used or repaired as a legal, nonconforming use except: 
(a)  If the repair of a sign structure or any portion thereof causes the area of the sign face to be greater than one hundred ten (110) percent of the area of the previous sign face, then the sign structure may be repaired but only in conformance with the provisions of article 5 Sign Regulations of this Ordinance; and 
(b)  If the repair of a sign structure or any portion thereof relates to anything other than minor repairs such as painting, replacement of defective parts, cleaning or similar minor maintenance to a sign designed to keep a sign at an acceptable functional and aesthetic level, then the sign structure may be repaired but only in conformance with the provisions of article 5 Sign Regulations of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2009-008ULDC, § 1, 4-30-09; Ord. No. 2012-005ULDC, § I, 11-29-12) 
1.5. - Interpretation. 
1.5.1. - Responsibility for interpretation. 
a.  The Chief Building Official shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions or any other provision of this Ordinance. 
b.  Interpretations of the Chief Building Official may be appealed under the provisions of Article 2 relating to Appeals. 
1.5.2. - Use of figures.Figures associated with defined terms or regulatory paragraphs in this Ordinance are provided for illustration only and do not limit or change the meaning of the term as defined or the requirements of the regulation as written. 
1.5.3. - Use of words and phrases.For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following shall apply to the use of words and phrases: 
a.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular tense include the plural tense, and words used in the plural tense include the singular tense. The masculine person "he" or "his" also means "her" or "hers." 
b.  Use of the capitalized word "City" refers to the government of the City of Rome, Georgia, while the lower case word "city" refers to its incorporated geographical area. 
c.  Use of the capitalized word "County" refers to the government of Floyd County, Georgia, while the lower case word "county" refers to its unincorporated geographical area. 
d.  References to the "City" and to the City Commission and any public officials or appointed bodies of the City not otherwise named by political jurisdiction or defined in this Ordinance shall always mean the City of Rome, Georgia, and its Governing Body, appointed or employed officials, and appointed bodies as named. 
e.  References to the "County" and to the County Commission and any public officials or appointed bodies of the County not otherwise named by political jurisdiction or defined in this Ordinance shall always mean Floyd County, Georgia, and its Governing Body, appointed or employed officials, and appointed bodies as named. 
f.  References to public officials, departments or appointed bodies of jurisdictions other than Floyd County or the City of Rome shall always mean such persons or bodies having jurisdiction over or relative to Floyd County or the City of Rome, Georgia. These may include one or more of the following: 
(1)  The Clerk of the Superior Court of Floyd County, Georgia. 
(2)  The Floyd County Health Department. 
(3)  Rome/Floyd County Historic Preservation Commission. 
(4)  The Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(5)  The Coosa Valley Regional Development Center. 
(6)  The Georgia Departments of Natural Resources and Transportation. 
(7)  The United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Federal Aviation Administration, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Environmental Protection Agency, the Natural Resource Conservation Service. 
g.  The word "person" is intended to include any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality, or other political subdivision of this State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
h.  The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory and not discretionary, while the word "may" is permissive. 
i.  The word "and" indicates that all of the conditions, requirements or factors so connected must be met or fulfilled, while the word "or" indicates that at least one condition, requirement or factor so connected must be met. 
j.  The term "such as" is intended to introduce one or more examples in illustration of a requirement or point, and is intended to mean "including but not limited to the following." 
k.  The verbs "zone" and "rezone" have the same meaning and refer to the act of amending the Official Zoning Map through the process established by this Ordinance. 
l.  The nouns "zone," "zoning district" and "district" have the same meaning and refer to the zoning districts established under this Ordinance. 
m.  The word "day" shall mean a calendar day unless otherwise specified. 
1.5.4. - Meaning of words and phrases. 
a.  All words and phrases shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence, paragraph, section and Article in which they occur. 
b.  Words and phrases defined in this Ordinance shall be interpreted as defined without regard to other meanings in common or ordinary use, unless the context of the word or phrase indicates otherwise. Words and phrases not defined in this Ordinance shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined by a contemporary dictionary. 
ARTICLE 2. - PROCEDURES 

2.1. - Generally. 
2.1.1. - Purpose of article 2.This Article describes the process through which a zoning change may be approved on a property, the approved process for construction of land development projects, the procedures for amendments to the text of this Development Code, and the process for appeals from an administrative decision, for a special exception or for hardships. 
2.1.2. - Overview-land development.The following presents a summary of the plans and procedures involved in the land development approval and construction. 
a.  Zoning changes. All applications for rezoning or a special use permit for a multifamily or nonresidential use must be filed with the Rome/Floyd County Planning Department. 
b.  Multifamily and nonresidential projects. 
(1)  Project Approval is granted by the Planning Department upon review and approval of a Site Plan for the project. 
(2)  A Development Permit is issued by the Chief Building Official, based on review and approval of development plans for construction of the project. 
(3)  The Chief Building Official, based on review and approval of architectural plans, issues a Building Permit. Buildings falling under the authority of the State Fire Marshall shall be approved by the Fire Department prior to issuance of the building permit. 
(4)  Receipt by the Public Works Department of accurate surveys of the as-built condition of all public improvements is required in order to authorize permanent water and sanitary sewer service. 
(5)  The Chief Building Official, based on final inspection and issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, authorizes permanent electric power and occupancy of the building. 
c.  Single-family residential projects. Single-family residential projects shall follow the process outlined in Article 6 for the review and approval of preliminary and final subdivision plat and development permits. 
d.  City-county coordination. In order to assure full coordination between all affected departments and agencies and to increase efficiency in the processing of permits, all applications for a rezoning or special use approval shall be submitted to the Planning Department for handling. All applications for a development permit or flood area permit shall be submitted to the Building Inspection Department for handling. 
2.2. - Zoning changes. 
The Official Zoning Map may be amended from time to time and the Governing Body under the procedures in this Section, may approve special uses for specific properties. In addition, the Governing Body, following the procedures in this section, may also approve changes in the conditions of approval pertaining to a specific rezoning or conditional use approval. All of these types of actions are referred to as "zoning changes" and must be filed with the Rome/Floyd County Planning Department. 
2.2.1. - Initiation. 
a.  An application for a zoning change for any property or properties may be initiated by the Governing Body, by the Planning Commission, or by the owner of the property. Unless the initiated by the Governing Body or the Planning Commission, the owner of a majority interest in the property affected shall initiate all such applications. 
b.  All applications shall be submitted to the Planning Department on the Department's application forms. A non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the Governing Body shall accompany all applications. A fee shall not be charged if the Governing Body or the Planning Commission has initiated the application. 
c.  The Planning Department shall review the application for completeness within five business days of submission. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. 
d.  An application for a zoning change affecting the same property shall not be considered by the Governing Body more often than once every 12 months; provided, however, that the Governing Body may approve a reduction in the waiting period to no less than six months. 
2.2.2. - Sketch plan. 
a.  An application for a rezoning or special use permit approval, related to any use other than a single family residence, shall be accompanied by a sketch plan if any new construction is proposed or alteration of the site is required under the site or development design standards of the Development Code (Article 6). A plat drawing may be submitted in lieu of a sketch plan, if the purpose of the rezoning request is to market the property. 
b.  All sketch plans shall be considered binding when made a condition of approval of the rezoning or special use by the respective Governing Body. 
c.  The applicant, a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a landscape architect, a land planner, or any other person familiar with land development activities may prepare a sketch plan. 
d.  The sketch plan shall be drawn to approximate scale on a boundary survey of the tract or on a property map showing the approximate location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract. 
e.  The sketch plan shall show the following, as appropriate to the zoning or special use requested: 
(1)  Name and address of the property owner. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, if different from the owner. 
(3)  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(4)  Proposed use of the property, if known. 
(5)  Location (Land District and Land Lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
(6)  Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Sketches may be drawn freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey Maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
(7)  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries if they cross the property. 
(8)  Manmade features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing building to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
(9)  The proposed project layout including the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas and driveways. 
(10)  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
(11)  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. 
(12)  The approximate location of proposed storm water detention facilities. 
(13)  Such additional information as may be useful to permit understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
2.2.3. - Process for zoning changes.Before the Governing Body may take final action on a proposed zoning change, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. 
a.  Public notice. 
(1)  Notification to the general public. 
(a)  At least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. The Planning Department shall prepare such notice, which shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
(b)  A zoning change initiated by a party other than the Governing Body or the Planning Commission shall be heard at a public hearing only upon: 
1)  The published notice, in addition to the requirements above, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification, and the proposed zoning classification of the property or the special use requested; and 
2)  At least 15 days prior to the public hearing, the Planning Department shall post a sign or signs of not less than six square feet stating: "Zoning Action Pending. For further information please contact the Rome-Floyd County Planning Department at (phone number) or (e-mail address)." One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the property for which the zoning change has been requested. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. 
(2)  Notice to surrounding property owners. All adjacent property owners are to be notified of any proposed zoning change without regard for who the applicant is for a zoning change. 
(a)  Notice shall be given to all surrounding property owners as follows: At least five days prior to the Planning Commission public hearing, the Planning Department shall cause a notice to be mailed to all persons owning property located adjacent to or across the street from the property that is the subject matter of the zoning change. 
(b)  The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearings. The written notice shall be mailed to the property owners as such names and addresses appear on the County's ad valorem tax records. 
b.  Planning commission public hearing. The public hearing held by the Planning Commission for zoning changes shall be held within 30 days of receipt of a complete application. The public hearing shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(1)  The Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson, or the Planning Commission's designee, who shall act as the Presiding Official, shall convene the public hearing at the scheduled time and place. 
(2)  The Presiding Official shall call for each proposed zoning change to be presented to the Planning Commission. 
(3)  No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. Upon rising to speak each person recognized shall state his or her name and home address. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the proposed zoning change. No less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking in support of a zoning change and no less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. If reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the public may speak at a hearing. However, the applicant and nearby property owners shall be afforded the first opportunity to speak. Each side shall be afforded an equal minimum time period for the presentation of data, evidence, and opinion. 
(4)  The applicant shall be allowed to speak first in order to present the application. Others in support of the application may then speak, followed by those in opposition to the application. The applicant will then be allowed time for rebuttal provided they have not used all their allotted time during the presentation. Rebuttal must be limited to points or issues raised by opponents to the application at the hearing. 
(5)  During the public hearing, the Planning Commission members may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
(6)  Following the public hearing on each zoning change, the Planning Commission at that time shall make its recommendation or take such other action as may be appropriate. 
(a)  A motion to recommend approval that receives an affirmative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded to the Governing Body as a recommendation for approval. A motion to recommend approval that receives a negative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded as a recommendation for denial, unless another motion receives a majority vote to approve. 
(b)  A motion to recommend denial that receives an affirmative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded to the Governing Body as a recommendation for denial. A motion to recommend denial that receives a negative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded as a recommendation for approval, unless another motion receives a majority vote to deny. 
(c)  A tie vote on a motion will be forwarded to the Governing Body as no recommendation with the actual vote transmitted. 
(d)  If no action is taken on an application, it will go forward to the Governing Body with no recommendation. 
(e)  A motion to postpone that receives an affirmative vote form a majority of the voting members present will result in action on the zoning change being deferred for a period of time as specified by the members of the Planning Commission. However, where the governing body has initiated a zoning changed, the Planning Commission shall act on the zoning change by the date specified by the Governing Body. At the discretion of the chair, a postponed zoning change may be considered at a specially called meeting. 
(7)  In making its recommendation or taking such action as may be appropriate, the planning commission shall not discriminate against any person in violation of law, including the Fair Housing Act. 
c.  Governing body public hearing. 
(1)  The Governing Body shall conduct a public hearing to consider an application for a zoning change within its jurisdiction. Said public hearing shall be held no later than the second regular meeting of the Governing Body following the public hearing of the Planning Commission. At a regular meeting prior to its public hearing, the Governing Body shall have a first reading of any proposed rezoning or Special Use ordinance. 
(2)  The Chairperson of the Governing Body or another person designated by the Governing Body shall act as Presiding Official. 
(3)  The Presiding Official shall call for each proposed zoning change to be presented to the Governing Body. As each application for a zoning change is called for consideration, the Presiding Official shall have the recommendation of the Planning Department read and shall present such other documentation as may be deemed pertinent. 
(4)  No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. Upon rising to speak each person recognized shall state his or her name and home address. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the proposed zoning change. No less than ten minutes shall be provided for all those speaking in support of a zoning change and no less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. If reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the public may speak at a hearing. However, the applicant and nearby property owners shall be afforded the first opportunity to speak. Each side shall be afforded an equal minimum time period for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion. 
(5)  The applicant shall be allowed to speak first in order to present the application. Others in support of the application may then speak, followed by those in opposition. The applicant will then be allowed time for rebuttal provided they have not used all their allotted time during the presentation. Rebuttal must be limited to points raised by opponents to the application at the hearing. 
(6)  During the public hearing, the members of the Governing Body may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
(7)  Following the public hearing on the zoning change (or upon second reading), action shall be considered by vote of the Governing Body. 
(a)  A motion to approve or deny an application must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least a quorum of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
(b)  If a motion to approve an application fails, the application is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an application fails, another motion would be in order. 
(c)  A tie vote on a motion for approval of an application shall be deemed a denial of the application. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(d)  If no action is taken on an application, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the Governing Body. 
(8)  If taking action on an application, the Governing Body may: 
(a)  Either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposal; or 
(b)  Allow withdrawal if so requested by the applicant (with or without imposing a six-month period during which another zoning change on the property may not be considered); or 
(c)  Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or 
(d)  Refer the application back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
(9)  In taking action on an application the Governing Body shall not discriminate against any person in violation of law including the Fair Housing Act. 
d.  Referral to planning commission for further consideration. If the Governing Body refers an application back to the Planning Commission for further study: 
(1)  The Planning Department shall give public notice of the Planning Commission's hearing for further consideration in the same manner as described above, and the Planning Commission shall conduct its additional public hearing and take action as described above. 
(2)  After the Planning Commission's rehearing and recommendation on the referred application, the Governing Body shall follow the same procedures set forth above to consider the application. 
e.  Rezoning of areas to be annexed into the city. An area proposed for annexation into the city shall first be considered for rezoning prior to its annexation. Consideration of the rezoning shall be subject to the same procedures, standards, and requirements for any zoning change as contained in this Section, except as modified below: 
(1)  Where the property to be annexed does not include a request for a change in zoning district classification, the Planning Commission shall review the annexation request and make a recommendation to the City to approve or deny the annexation (NOTE: Approved by County, not by City). 
(2)  If the property to be annexed is proposed or requested to be rezoned, upon or following the date of notice to the County of the proposed annexation as required under O.C.G.A. § 36-36-6, the City Commission shall initiate the rezoning of the property to be annexed or consider an application for a zoning change submitted by or on behalf of the owner of such property under the provisions of this Section. 
(3)  The Planning Commission and the Governing Body shall conduct their public hearing on the zoning change prior to the annexation of the land into the city. Notice of such hearing shall be provided under the provisions of this Section, provided further that the notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
(4)  Following its public hearing on a zoning change for a property proposed to be annexed, the governing body may take action on the zoning change or it may table such action pending action on the proposed annexation. In any event, the zoning change shall become effective on the later of: 
(a)  The date the zoning is approved by the governing body; or 
(b)  The date that the annexation becomes effective under O.C.G.A. § 36-36-2. 
(5)  Disputes between the City and County concerning annexation shall be resolved in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-36-110 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2010-004ULDC, § 1, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 2011-008ULDC, § I, 11-22-11) 
2.2.4. - Standards for zoning changes. 
a.  Zoning map amendments (rezoning). The Planning Commission and the Governing Body shall consider the following standards in considering any zoning proposal that would result in a change in the boundary of a zoning district, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(1)  Is the proposed use or development consistent with the stated purpose of the zoning district? 
(2)  Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
(3)  Will the proposed use not adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
(4)  Is the proposed use compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
(5)  Are there substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently zoned? 
(6)  Will the proposed use not cause an excessive or burdensome use of public facilities or services, including but not limited to streets, schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection? 
(7)  Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the Comprehensive Plan or reflected in the existing zoning on the property or surrounding properties? 
(8)  Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and the right to unrestricted use of property? 
b.  Special uses. A special use otherwise permitted within a zoning district shall be considered to be compatible with other uses permitted in the district, provided that due consideration is given to the following objective criteria as applicable to the specific use proposed: 
(1)  Is the proposed special use consistent with the stated purpose of the zoning district? 
(2)  Is or will the type of street providing access to the use be adequate to serve the proposed special use? 
(3)  Is or will access into and out of the property be adequate to provide for traffic and pedestrian safety, the anticipated volume of traffic flow, and access by emergency vehicles? 
(4)  Are or will public facilities such as schools, water or sewer facilities, and police or fire protection be adequate to serve the special use? 
(5)  Are or will refuse service, parking and loading areas on the property be located or screened to protect other properties in the area from such adverse effects as noise, light, glare, or odor? 
(6)  Will the hours and manner of operation of the special use have no adverse effects on other properties in the area? 
(7)  Will the height, size or location of the buildings or other structures on the property be compatible with the height, size or location of buildings or other structures on neighboring properties? 
c.  Change in conditions of approval. Any application that proposes a change in the conditions of approval previously established by the Governing Body through action on a zoning change shall be reviewed in light of the standards set forth in this Section for a map amendment or special use, as appropriate. 
2.2.5. - Withdrawal.Any applicant wishing to withdraw a proposed zoning change prior to final action by the Governing Body shall file a written request for withdrawal with the Director of Planning. 
a.  If the request for withdrawal is received prior to the publication of notice for the public hearings, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the Director of Planning without restriction on the re-filing of a proposed zoning change on the property in the future. 
b.  If notice has been published but the application has not been heard by the Planning Commission, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the Director of Planning upon receipt of a written request. An application for zoning change on the property may then be resubmitted by the applicant, without waiting the period of six months. If a second application for rezoning is withdrawn within six months of withdrawal of an application for rezoning of the same property, a third application may not be resubmitted for six months. 
c.  Should any request for withdrawal be made by the applicant at or following the Planning Commission hearing, the application shall remain on the Governing Body's public hearing agenda and the withdrawal request shall be considered for approval or denial, with or without prejudice, by the Governing Body. 
2.2.6. - Developments of regional impact. 
a.  Any application for rezoning, Special Use Permit, or development or building permit that would result in an activity or project that meets or exceeds any of the State of Georgia thresholds shall be considered a Development of Regional Impact: 
b.  Any Development of Regional Impact (DRI) shall be submitted by the applicant to the Coosa Valley Regional Development Center (RDC) prior to submission of the application to the Planning Department. Once the RDC has accepted the completed form, and has made an official determination that the project is a DRI (within five calendar days), the 30-day review period officially begins. 
c.  The Governing Body shall not take final action to approve a Development of Regional Impact until either: 
(1)  A report has been received from the Coosa Valley RDC reflecting its finding and recommendations, if any; or 
(2)  Said report is not received within 30 days of submittal of the application to the RDC. 
2.2.7. - Effect. 
a.  Approval of a zoning change shall be in full force and effective upon its approval by the Governing Body, except that: 
b.  Approval of a zoning change on a property that is being annexed into the city shall become effective on the latter of: 
(1)  The date the rezoning is approved by the City Commission; or, 
(2)  The date that the annexation becomes effective pursuant to the State law under O.C.G.A. § 36-36-2. 
c.  For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a zoning change affecting the property, any such building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed under the provisions for Nonconforming Development in Article 1 of this Development Code. 
d.  Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a zoning change affecting the property may continue to completion as though no change has occurred and, upon completion, shall be governed under the provisions for Nonconforming Development in Article 1 of this Development Code, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2009-009ULDC, §§ I—IV, 8-25-09) 
2.3. - Land development project approval. 
The Planning Department must first approve the site plan for development of a multi-family or nonresidential project prior to the issuance of a Development Permit or initiation of any land disturbing or construction activities. 
2.3.1. - Responsibility. 
a.  The Chief Building Official is responsible for administering the review and approval process for site plans. The Chief Building Official shall forward a copy of the project approval application to appropriate City or County Departments, the Georgia Department of Transportation, or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. The Chief Building Official shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, who shall work with each City or County Department or other agency as necessary to resolve all issues. 
b.  A professional engineer, registered land surveyor or landscape architect registered to practice in the State of Georgia may prepare the site plan. 
2.3.2. - Procedure for project approval. 
a.  An application for project approval may be processed independently or in conjunction with an application for issuance of a development permit. 
b.  The property owner or their authorized representative shall submit an application for project approval to the Building Inspection Department. The application shall include: 
(1)  A properly completed application form, as furnished by the Building Inspection Department, requesting review for project approval. 
(2)  Copies of the site plan showing the entire ownership drawn to the specifications of this Section, in a number as required by the Building Inspection Department. 
(3)  Payment of all applicable application and review fees, as established by the Governing Body from time to time. 
c.  The Building Inspections Department shall review the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
d.  Within two weeks following the receipt of the application, the Building Inspection Department shall return to the applicant, on the drawing or in writing, all comments related to compliance with this Development Code. 
e.  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments. 
f.  The Building Inspection Department may not approve any site plan whereon is shown a lot or situation that would clearly require a variance to order to be reasonably usable, whether due to the presence of flood plain, unusual configuration, zoning compliance, lack of public utilities, or for any reason. 
g.  When the Building Inspection Department has determined that the site plan is in compliance with the requirements, purpose and intent of this Development Code, it shall be approved. The Chief Building Official or his designee shall sign and date the CERTIFICATE OF PROJECT APPROVAL stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the site plan. One copy of the approved drawing shall be transmitted to the applicant and one copy shall be retained by the Building Inspection Department. 
h.  The Certificate of Project Approval shall remain in effect for a period of six consecutive months after which time it shall become null and void and a new Certificate may be required after which time it shall become required if either no permit has been issued or a permit has been issued but no development activity has begun. 
2.3.3. - General standards. 
a.  The proposed name of the development shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other development in the city or county. If shown to the contrary, the Building Inspection department may refuse to accept such. 
b.  The site plan shall be prepared on a boundary survey of the entire tract to be subdivided or developed showing the location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract to be developed. 
c.  The site plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of 100 feet or less to one inch. The recommended maximum dimensions of the sheet size is 36 inches by 48 inches and the minimum dimensions of 17 inches by 22 inches; however, the Chief Building Official may approve other sheet sizes and scales as appropriate. 
d.  For property of over 1,000 acres, a smaller scale may be used where, in judgment of the Chief Building Official, presentation of detailed data is not necessary to evaluate the entire project. It is the intent of this provision that in all cases sufficient information shall be provided for an adequate evaluation of the public and private improvements. 
2.3.4. - Site plan requirements. 
a.  Proposed name of development. 
b.  Name and address of the property owner and developer. 
c.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
d.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
e.  Proposed use of the property. 
f.  Location (Land District and Land Lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
g.  Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well known landmarks such as arterial streets, railroads, or others. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
h.  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
i.  Delineation of required buffers, landscape areas, tree protection areas, and river corridor buffers, as applicable. 
j.  Rezoning or conditional use application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. Variances obtained on the property by application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. 
k.  Recorded deed names of adjoining property owners. 
l.  Natural features within, affecting or affected by the property, including wetlands, drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all watercourses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year flood plain and wetlands, if any shall be outlined. The location of the site within a protected groundwater recharge area shall be noted if applicable. 
m.  Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including street right-of-way and pavement widths, names of existing streets, all easements, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location and dimensions of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features. 
n.  The proposed project layout including: 
(1)  For multi-family and nonresidential development site plans, the outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas, driveways, curb cuts, and designated fire lanes. 
o.  The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
p.  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
q.  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. For those properties that will not be served by a public sanitary sewerage system, written approval by the Floyd County Health Department shall be submitted. 
r.  The approximate location of proposed storm water detention facilities. 
s.  Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate evaluation of the development activity proposed in the application. 
2.3.5. - Evidence of project approval.Each site plan shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped on the plat. 
a.  Signed approval from the County Health Department (if septic tanks will be allowed by the Governing Body). 
b.  Certificate of Project Approval, to read as follows: 
CERTIFICATE OF PROJECT APPROVAL 
All applicable requirements of the Rome-Floyd County Unified Land Development Code relative to the project approval having been fulfilled, approval is hereby granted by the Rome-Floyd County Building Inspection Department, subject to further compliance with all provisions of said Development Code. 
_____ Chief Building Inspector 
Date ____________ 
This "Certificate of Project Approval" shall expire 6 months from the date of approval if a Development Permit has been issued but development activity has not been commenced. 
2.4. - Development plans. 
2.4.1. - General requirements. 
a.  Persons seeking to undertake development activity shall not commence or proceed until development plans are approved and the Chief Building Inspector issues a Development Permit. The process for approval of a development permit is presented in Section 2.5 below. 
b.  The development plans for a project shall conform in all respects with the requirements of this Development Code, and shall contain each of the plans in this Section as appropriate to the project, including: 
(1)  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan 
(2)  Grading Plan 
(3)  Stormwater Management Plan 
(4)  Street Improvement Plan 
(5)  Buffer/Landscaping/Tree Conservation Plan 
(6)  Public Utility Plan 
c.  All development plans and supporting studies shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a professional engineer registered in Georgia. 
2.4.2. - Erosion and sediment control plan. 
a.  Plans must be prepared to meet the erosion and sedimentation control requirements of Section 6 of this Development Code or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia; or through the use of alternate design criteria that conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The erosion and sediment control plan shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed water ways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. 
b.  Data Required for Erosion and Sediment Control Plan: 
(1)  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes for narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
(2)  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
(3)  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner and the developer. 
(4)  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sediment controls. 
(5)  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
(6)  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters that "the installation of erosion and sediment control measures shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
(7)  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
(8)  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year round seeding. 
(9)  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(10)  Maintenance statement: "Erosion and sediment control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sediment control measures will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection." 
c.  Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying or erosion and sediment control. The certified plans shall contain: 
(1)  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
(2)  Vicinity map showing location of project and existing streets. 
(3)  Boundary line survey. 
(4)  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
(5)  Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 

 
(6)  Spot Elevations: 
(a)  For sites smaller than one acre in size, show the direction of drainage and spot elevations at all breaks in grade and along drainage channels or swales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
(b)  For sites of one acre and larger with slopes of less than two percent, show contours at intervals or not more than two feet and spot elevations at all breaks in grade along drainage channels and swales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
(7)  Adjacent areas and features such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
(8)  The limits of the 100-year flood plain and the flood way. 
(9)  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
(10)  The limits of any required greenway adjacent to state waters. 
(11)  Delineated 100-foot horizontal greenway along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
(12)  Location of erosion and sediment control measures using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
d.  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sediment control measures, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
2.4.3. - Grading plan. 
a.  Grading plans shall identify existing and proposed topographic contour lines at the interval required for erosion and sediment control plans, above. 
b.  Grading plans shall outline any area that is required to remain undisturbed, such as a natural buffer (see "buffers" and Article 6) or greenway (see "greenways" under Article 6) and shall identify and describe the protective fencing or staking to be placed surrounding such area. 
c.  If the property contains any area of special flood hazard (the 100-year flood plain), grading plans in and around the flood plain shall be designed in conformance to all requirements relating to Flood Damage Prevention under Article 6 of this Development Code. 
2.4.4. - Buffer plan.A buffer plan shall be prepared for any structural buffer required in accordance with the specifications and standards contained in Article 6 of this Development Code. Plans shall not be required for natural buffers, which are to be shown on the grading plan. The plan shall show: 
a.  All grading and construction details for earthen berms, walls and fences that are proposed as part of the visual screen. 
b.  A planting plan showing the location and type of proposed plant materials. 
c.  Typical cross-sections of the buffer illustrating the improvements proposed and typical location of vegetation. At least one cross-section shall be provided for each. 
2.5. - Development permit. 
2.5.1. - Responsibility. 
a.  No person shall conduct any pre-construction, land-disturbing and/or development activity involving more than 0.4 acres without first obtaining a development permit from the Chief Building Official to perform such activity, unless exempted under other sections of this code. (See Article 6.13.) 
b.  Any person proposing development shall first submit to the Building Inspection Department an application for a Development Permit, including all civil design and construction drawings required by this Development Code. 
c.  The Building Inspection Department is responsible for administering and coordinating the review process for issuance of development permits. The Building Inspection Department shall forward a copy of the Development Permit application, including the civil design and constructions drawings for the project, to the Planning Department, Public Works Department and other departments, the Soil and Water Conservation District, the Georgia Department of Transportation or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. The Building Inspection Department shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, and shall issue the Development Permit when all requirements of this Development Code are met. 
d.  Approval of plans by the City or County shall not imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture or any other profession, from the professional, corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
e.  The completion of inspections and authorization for work continuation shall not transfer responsibility for the quality of the work performed or materials used from the owner, nor imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for project design or engineering from the professional, corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
f.  No development permit shall be interpreted to relieve any owner of the responsibility of maintaining full compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances, and other regulations. Any development permit issued in error or in contradiction to the provisions of this Development Code shall be considered to have been null and void upon its issuance. 
g.  Liability. 
(1)  The approval of an erosion and sediment control plan or other plans under the provisions of this Development Code, the issuance of a development permit, or the compliance with any other provisions of this Development Code shall not relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor any liability upon the Governing Body or the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation Commission for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that any activity for which a development permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Development Code or of the terms of the Development Permit. 
2.5.2. - Development activities authorized.A development permit shall be issued to authorize all activities associated with development activity regulated by this Code, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading and the construction of such improvements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, storm water drainage facilities, sidewalks, or other structures permanently placed on or in the property except for buildings, signs, or other structures requiring the issuance of a building permit. 
2.5.3. - Process for approval of development permit.An application for a development permit may proceed simultaneously with an application for site plan approval, but may not be issued prior to project approval of such plan by the Building Inspection Department. 
a.  The application for a Development Permit shall be submitted to the Building Inspection Department and must include the following: 
(1)  Application for a development permit shall be submitted to the Building Inspection Department, requesting review for issuance of a Development Permit. 
(2)  Six copies of: 
(a)  The civil design and construction drawing prepared in conformance with the specifications and standards in this Development Code. 
(b)  Site plan requesting or reflecting project approval by the Building Inspection Department. 
(3)  Payment of any Development Permit fee, as established from time to time by the Governing Body. 
b.  The application will be checked for completeness within five business days of its submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
c.  Upon receipt of a complete Development Permit application, the Building Inspection Department shall refer the soil erosion and sediment control plan to the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sediment control plan. No Development Permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances and bonding, if required, have been obtained. 
d.  The applicant may be required by the Building Inspection Department to secure development approval from other agencies if they are affected by the development. Development approval may be required from but not limited to: 
(1)  The Planning Department 
(2)  The Public Works Department 
(3)  The Public Utilities Department 
(4)  Fire Department 
(5)  County Health Department 
(6)  Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation Commission District 
(7)  Georgia Department of Transportation 
(8)  Georgia Department of Natural Resources 
(9)  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 
(10)  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
e.  Upon receipt of comments from other departments, the Building Inspection Department shall forward all comments related to compliance with this Development Code, conditions of zoning approval, and other regulations or ordinances, as appropriate. 
f.  The applicant shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the comments received from the various departments and agencies. 
2.5.4. - Required performance surety. 
a.  If the applicant has had two or more violations of previous development permits, the Development Code or the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the Chief Building Official shall refer the Development Permit to the Governing Body. 
(1)  The Governing Body may deny the Development Permit application; or, 
(2)  The Governing Body may require the applicant to post a performance bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre (or fraction thereof) of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the Development Permit. If the applicant does not comply with this Development Code or with the conditions of the Development Permit after issuance, the Governing Body may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may 
use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
2.5.5. - Issuance of development permit. 
a.  Following satisfaction of all comments, receipt of approvals from all affected agencies and receipt of all bonds, the Chief Building Inspector shall issue a Development Permit authorizing development activities to begin based on the approved civil design and construction drawings. 
b.  No Development Permit shall be issued unless the erosion and sediment control plan has been approved by the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District and has been affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with all requirements of this Development Code. If the Development Permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. (See Article 6.13.) 
c.  If the tract is to be developed in separate and distinct phases, then a separate Development Permit may be required for each phase. (See Article 6.13.) 
d.  The Development Permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this Development Code. A holder of a Development Permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the Development Permit. (See Article 6.13.) 
2.5.6. - Expiration of development permit. 
a.  A Development Permit shall expire if the development activity described in the permit is not begun within six months from the date of issuance. 
b.  The Chief Building Inspector may renew any development permit that has expired with the concurrence of the respective Public Works Department, within six months of expiration. If a Development Permit has expired for more than six months, the applicant shall be required to apply for a new Development Permit under the Development Permit approval process of this Development Code. 
2.6. - Flood area permit. 
2.6.1. - Permit required.If development or construction is proposed within or affecting an area of special flood hazard, approval of a flood area permit application shall be required. An application for a flood area permit may be included with and reviewed as part of a Development Permit application. 
2.6.2. - Application process for a flood area permit. 
a.  Application for a flood area permit shall be made to the Building Inspection Department on forms furnished by them prior to any development activities. 
b.  The application for a flood area permit is to include the following: 
(1)  Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question. 
(2)  Location of existing or proposed structures, fill, storage or materials and drainage materials. 
(3)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings. 
(4)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential building will be flood-proofed. 
(5)  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that any nonresidential flood-proofed building will meet the flood-proofing criteria in Article 6 of this Development Code. 
(6)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
c.  An application for a flood area permit shall be processed in the same manner as a Development Permit. 
2.7. - Driveway approval. 
a.  No curb shall be changed or removed, and no driveway connected to a public street, or on, or across a public right-of-way, or public property shall be repaired or installed without first having the written approval of the Public Works Department. 
b.  Applications may be made at the Public Works Department. 
c.  Approval shall expire for work not started within 90 days or completed within six months of the date of approval. 
2.8. - Building permitting. 
2.8.1. - Approval of technical codes and supplements for enforcement.The building codes adopted and enforced by the City of Rome and Floyd County shall include those mandated by the State of Georgia; and may include those approved by the state. Building codes may be revised from time to time as mandated or approved by the state. 
2.8.2. - Procedures to obtain a building permit.A building permit issued by the Chief Building Official is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving or alteration of any building or structure, unless such construction, erection, moving or alteration, is exempted from permitting requirements by the building codes that have been adopted and are enforced by the City of Rome and Floyd County. No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in the city or county unless access has been established in accordance with this Development Code. No building permits shall be issued before approval of the final plat. All structures shall comply with the requirements of this Development Code, whether or not a building permit is required. 
a.  Procedure for approval. The Chief Building Official shall be responsible for administering and enforcing the Building Codes of the City and County. 
(1)  Prior to issuance of a building permit the owner shall have received a Development Permit if required by this Development Code. 
(2)  Zoning verification shall be obtained from the Planning Department. The following shall be attached to the Zoning Verification Application: 
(a)  For a single-family detached or two-family dwelling, a plat of the lot showing the outline of the principal building and minimum building setback lines for the lot or an affidavit signed by the owner and stating that the site complies with the provisions of this Code concerning the placement of the dwelling 
(b)  For multi-family or nonresidential building, the site plan upon which was granted project approval by the Planning Commission. 
(c)  A street address number assigned by the appropriate local government department as required by 43-4-14 Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Application for a building permit shall be made to the Chief Building Official. The application shall include. 
(a)  Application on the form furnished by the Chief Building Official, requesting issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  A copy of the zoning verification approved by the Planning Department. 
(c)  Two sets of building plans for principal multi-family or non-residential buildings prepared in conformance with this Development Code and the applicable building codes. Plans shall be prepared by or under the supervision of, or reviewed and approved by, an architect registered in Georgia, who shall sign and seal each sheet in the original set of drawings. 
(d)  The Governing Body has allowed County Health Department approval if an on-site sewage disposal system. 
(e)  Payment of the building permit application and review fee. 
(f)  Water meter receipt issued by the appropriate local department. 
(g)  For applications to move a site-built house, structure or building, the following additional information is required: 
1)  The name of the person performing the moving; 
2)  The origin and destination of the moving; 
3)  The names of the owners of the property from which the structure is removed and of the property to which it is moved; 
4)  A detailed outline of the route to be followed and the equipment to be used; and 
5)  An estimate of the time involved, including time of the day when said operation shall be conducted. 
6)  Any application for a permit must be made at least 48 hours prior to the proposed moving. 
7)  In addition to a fee charged for permits, the mover of any site-built house, building or structure shall deposit with the Chief Building Official $400.00 for each structure, to be returned to the mover within five days after such moving if no damage is done to public property. 
8)  The Chief of Police shall furnish a police escort if he deems it necessary. 
(4)  The Chief Building Official will check the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
(5)  For multi-family and non-residential buildings, within two weeks following receipt of a complete application, the Building Official shall indicate on one copy of the building plans or in writing all comments related to compliance of the building plans with this Development Code, applicable building codes, and any conditions of zoning approval. 
(6)  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with this Development Code and all building code requirements, regulations, and for the satisfaction of all of the comments of the Building Official. 
(7)  At such time as the owner has addressed the comments to the satisfaction of the Building Official and the State Fire Marshall, a building permit shall be issued for the structure. 
(8)  Plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits shall be issued separately by the Building Official or separately identified on the building permit. Such permits must be issued prior to commencement of work by each affected trade. 
b.  Standards for approval. 
(1)  Building permits shall be issued only on buildable lots of record, as defined in this Development Code. 
(2)  Building permits shall be issued in conformance with the adopted technical codes and supplements that constitute the Building Code and with this Development Code. 
2.8.3. - Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use of any building, or structure, or premises, or part thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued stating that the building or structure or premises conforms to the requirements of the building codes and this Development Code. 
b.  If the property is served by an on-site sewage disposal system, the Certificate of Occupancy shall not be issued by the Chief Building Official until the Health Department has approved a septic tank and in return notifies the Chief Building Official that the system installed meets the County Health Department's standards. 
c.  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period not to exceed six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building or structure pending its completion, provided that such temporary conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public are in place. 
d.  A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
(1)  Occupancy and use of a building or structure constructed or enlarged. 
(2)  Change in use of existing buildings to uses of a different classification. 
(3)  Any change in use of a nonconforming use, lot or structure. 
(4)  Permanent electric power may not be supplied to any structure until a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued. Electrical service shall be supplied by a temporary meter pack to be installed on the permanent meter socket until all phases of inspections have been satisfactorily completed. 
e.  A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be maintained by the Building Inspection Department and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person. 
(Ord. No. 2009-005ULDC, § I, 4-30-09; Ord. No. 2009-006ULDC, § I, 4-30-09) 
2.9. - Building construction. 
2.9.1. - Building permit required. 
a.  Building permits for all structures or interior finishes are issued after meeting the applicable requirements of the fire prevention and life safety code and the various health and building codes. A permit is also required for the movement of any site-built house, structure or building. 
b.  For any structure served by an on-site sewage disposal system, a permit issued by the Floyd County Health Department shall be required prior to issuance of a Building permit. Said permit may first require approval by the Floyd County Health Department of a plan showing the location of the sewage disposal system and other on-site improvements, in accordance with their regulations. 
c.  Building permits shall only be issued on lots of record, as defined in this Development Code. 
2.9.2. - Building inspection. 
a.  Inspections shall be scheduled with the Chief Building Inspector at least 24 hours before the inspection is needed for all foundations and footings, and 48 hours prior to all other inspections. Requests for inspection should include the street address, lot number, building permit number, and type of inspection. 
b.  Required inspections: 
(1)  Foundation. Verify minimum required building and setbacks, footing, trenches dug and reinforcing steel in place. 
(2)  Plumbing Connections. Water supply line and sewer lateral in slab foundation. 
(3)  Framing. Completion of all rough-ins and insulation is installed. 
(4)  Interior walls may not be covered until the following inspections are completed: 
(a)  Mechanical. Rough-ins complete with pressure test on gas line. 
(b)  Electrical. Rough-ins with neutral, ground, and service cable wired are completed. 
(c)  Plumbing. Rough-ins complete and all fixtures installed. 
(d)  Other inspections are completed as required by the Building Inspection Department as necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable codes. 
(5)  Final Inspection. Building is complete and ready to occupy. 
2.9.3. - Construction in flood area.Construction of a building for which a flood area permit was issued shall be governed by the following: 
a.  Upon placement of the lowest floor, or flood proofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the Development Permit holder to submit to the Chief Building Inspector a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, flood proofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, which ever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. 
b.  Certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by such registered land surveyor or professional engineer. When flood proofing is utilized for a particular building, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the professional engineer or architect. 
c.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the Development Permit holder's risk. 
d.  The Chief Building Inspector shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. The Development Permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed shall correct deficiencies detected by such review. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
2.10. - Text amendments. 
The Rome-Floyd County Development Code may be amended from time to time in whole or in part under the provisions of this section. For an amendment having application in both the city and the county to become effective, the Governing Bodies of both the City and County must approve it. For an amendment having on its face application only in the city to become effective, the Governing Body of the City only must approve it. For an amendment having on its face application only in the county to become effective, the Governing Body of the County only must approve it. 
2.10.1. - Initiation.A Governing Body or the Planning Commission may initiate a proposed change to the text of the Rome-Floyd County Development Code by a majority vote of those voting. 
2.10.2. - Text amendment process.Before the Governing Bodies may take final action on a proposed text amendment, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. 
a.  Public notice. The public shall be notified of any proposed text amendments in the following manner. 
(1)  At least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing, notice shall be given in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. The Planning Department shall prepare such notice, which shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing.. 
(2)  For overlay district text amendments, the Planning Department shall give notice to each property owner, as such names and addresses appear on the County's ad valorem tax records, whose property lies within the boundaries of such overlay district. The notice shall be mailed at least five days prior to the hearing and shall state the nature of the proposed amendment; and the time and place of the hearing. 
b.  Planning commission public hearing. The public hearing held by the Planning Commission for a text amendment shall be conducted in the following manner: 
(1)  The Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson, or the Planning Commission's designee, who shall act as the Presiding Official, shall convene the public hearing at the scheduled time and place. 
(2)  The Presiding Official shall call for each proposed text amendment to be presented to the Planning Commission. 
(3)  No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. Upon rising to speak each person shall state his or her name and home address. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the proposed text amendment. No less than ten minutes shall be provided for all those speaking in support of a text amendment and no less than ten minutes shall be provided for all those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. Each side shall be afforded an equal minimum time period for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion. 
(4)  Following the public hearing on each text amendment, the Planning Commission at that time shall make its recommendation or take such other action as may be appropriate. 
(a)  A motion to recommend approval that receives an affirmative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded to the Governing Body as a recommendation for approval. A motion to recommend approval that receives a negative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded as a recommendation for denial, unless another motion receives a majority vote to approve. 
(b)  A motion to recommend denial that receives an affirmative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded to the Governing Body as a recommendation for denial. A motion to recommend denial that receives a negative vote from a majority of the voting members present will be forwarded as a recommendation for approval, unless another motion receives a majority vote to deny. 
(c)  A tie vote on a motion will be forwarded to the Governing Body as no recommendation with the actual vote transmitted. 
(d)  If no action is taken on an amendment, it will go forward to the Governing Body with no recommendation. 
(e)  A motion to postpone that receives an affirmative vote from a majority of the voting members present will result in action of the text amendment being deferred for a period of time as specified by the members of the Planning Commission. However, where the governing body has initiated a text amendment, the planning commission shall act on the text amendment by the date specified by the governing body. At the discretion of the chair, a postponed text amendment request may be considered at a specially called meeting. 
c.  Governing body public hearing. 
(1)  Each Governing Body shall conduct a public hearing to consider a text amendment at no later than its second scheduled meeting following the public hearing of the Planning Commission, except that no public hearing or vote shall be conducted by the County where the proposed amendment has on its face application only in the city, and no public hearing or vote shall be conducted by the City where the proposed amendment has on its face application only in the county. 
(2)  The Chairperson of each Governing Body or another person designated by the Governing Body shall act as Presiding Official. 
(3)  The Presiding Official shall submit each proposed amendment to the Governing Body. The Presiding Official shall read the recommendation of the Planning Department and shall present such other documentation, as he may deem pertinent. 
(4)  No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the Presiding Official. Upon rising to speak each person shall state his or her name and home address. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a proposal, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the proposed text amendment. No less than ten minutes shall be provided for all those speaking in support of a text amendment and no less than ten minutes shall be provided for all those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than the minimum allowed. Each side shall be afforded an equal minimum time period for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion. 
(5)  During the public hearing, the members of the Governing Body may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
(6)  Following the public hearing on the text amendment (or at the second reading), action shall be considered by vote of the Governing Body. 
(a)  A motion to approve or deny an amendment must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least a quorum of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
(b)  If a motion to approve an amendment fails, the amendment is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an amendment fails, another motion would be in order. 
(c)  A tie vote on a motion for approval of an amendment shall be deemed a denial of the amendment. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(d)  If no action is taken on an amendment, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the Governing Body. 
(7)  In taking action on an amendment, each Governing Body may: 
(a)  Approve, approve with changes, or deny the proposal; or 
(b)  Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or, 
(c)  Refer the amendment back to the Planning Commission for further consideration. 
d.  Referral to planning commission for further consideration. If the Governing Body refers an amendment back to the Planning Commission for further study: 
(1)  The Planning Department shall give public notice of the Planning Commission's hearing for further consideration in the same manner as described above, and the Planning Commission shall conduct its additional public hearing and take action as described above. 
(2)  After the Planning Commission's rehearing and recommendation on the referred amendment, the Governing Body shall follow the same procedure set forth above to consider the amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2010-002ULDC, § 1, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 2010-003ULDC, § 1, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 2010-007ULDC, § 1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 2010-008ULDC, § 1, 9-28-10) 
2.10.3. - Standards for text amendments.The Planning Commission and each Governing Body shall consider the following standards in considering any proposal that would result in a change to the text of this Development Code, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
a.  Is the proposed amendment consistent with the purpose and intent of this Development Code as stated under Article 1? 
b.  Does the proposed amendment further, or is it compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
c.  Is the proposed amendment required to adequately address new or changing conditions or to properly implement the Comprehensive Plan? 
d.  Does the proposed amendment reasonably promote the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare? 
2.10.4. - Effect. 
a.  Approval of a text amendment having application in both the city and the county shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the Governing Bodies of both the City and the County or upon the stated effective date thereof, and shall thereupon apply to every property for which a use has not been established or for which a building permit or development permit may be subsequently requested. Approval of a text amendment having on its face application only in the city shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the Governing Body of the City, or upon the stated effective date thereof and shall thereupon apply to every property in the city for which a use has not been established or for which a building permit or development permit may be subsequently requested. Approval of a text amendment having on its face application only in the county shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the Governing Body of the County, or upon the stated effective date thereof and shall thereupon apply to every property in the county for which a use has not been established or for which a building permit or development permit may be subsequently requested. 
b.  For a property on which a use, building, structure, or other improvements existed in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a text amendment affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed under the provisions for nonconformities in Article 1 of this Development Code. 
c.  Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this Development Code prior to the effective date of a text amendment may continue to completion as though no change had occurred and, upon completion, shall be governed under the provisions for nonconformities in Article 1 of this Development Code, as applicable. 
2.11. - Appeals. 
2.11.1. - Types of appeals.Persons may appeal to the Board of Adjustment for relief under the following circumstances: 
a.  When aggrieved by an action or an interpretation of an administrative official made under this Development Code. 
b.  When an exception is desired for a particular property from a certain requirement of this Development Code, as specified in this Section. 
c.  When compliance with the requirements of this Development Code would create a particular and unique hardship. 
d.  When the requirements for flood protection affect an historic structure. 
2.11.2. - Initiation. 
a.  All requests for relief shall be taken as an appeal to the Board of Adjustment, as provided in this Section. 
b.  If denied, an application for a hardship variance or special exception affecting the same property shall not be considered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the Board of Adjustment may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
2.11.3. - Appeals of an administrative decision. 
a.  Appeals of an administrative decision to the Board of Adjustment may be initiated by any person aggrieved, or by an officer or department head of the City or County. Such appeal shall be initiated within 15 days of the action, or decision appealed from, by filing with the Chief Building Official a notice of said appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
b.  The holder of or applicant for a Development Permit or a building permit may appeal any of the following actions taken by an administrative official: 
(1)  The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a Development Permit by the Chief Building Official upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan or other approved plans. 
(2)  The determination by the Chief Building Official that the holder is in violation of Development Permit or building permit conditions. 
(3)  The determination by the Chief Building Official that the holder is in violation of any other provision of this Development Code. 
c.  Interpretations. The Board of Adjustment, upon appeal of an aggrieved party or at the request of the Chief Building Official shall: 
(1)  Interpret the use of words or phrases within the context of the intent of this Development Code as pertinent to their jurisdiction. 
(2)  Determine the boundaries of the various zoning districts where uncertainty exists. 
(3)  Decide appeals from any order, determination, decision or other interpretation by the Chief Building Official or other person acting under authority of this Development Code, where a misinterpretation or misapplication of the requirements or other provisions of this Development Code are alleged. 
(4)  Interpret such other provisions of this Development Code as may require clarification or extension in specific or general cases. 
d.  An appeal of an administrative decision stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer or department head from whom the appeal is made certifies to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which must be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
e.  A decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be final unless the aggrieved party requests an appeal before and/or adjudication by the City or County Attorney in an effort to resolve appeals, prior to going to court. Only a court of competent jurisdiction may hear such appeals. 
2.11.4. - Special exceptions. 
a.  General limitations on relief. Special exceptions shall be limited to relief from the following requirements of this Development Code: 
(1)  Maximum building setbacks. 
(2)  Maximum building height. 
(3)  Minimum lot width. 
(4)  Public street frontage. 
(5)  Buffers and screening. 
(6)  Signage, in accordance with a uniform sign plan. 
(7)  Parking requirements. 
b.  Standards for approval. A special exception may be granted upon a finding that the relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of the Development Code. 
c.  If denied, an application for a special exception affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the Board of Adjustment may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
d.  In no case shall a special exception be granted from the conditions of approval imposed on a property through a zoning change granted by the Governing Body. 
2.11.5. - Hardship variances. 
a.  General. 
(1)  Relief from the application of the provisions of this Development Code may be granted by the Board of Adjustment upon a finding that compliance with such provision will result in a hardship to the property or owner that is substantially unwarranted by the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare, and the need for consistency among all properties similarly zoned. 
(2)  Such relief may be granted only to the extent necessary to alleviate such unnecessary hardship and not as a convenience to the applicant nor to gain any advantage or interest over similarly zoned properties. 
b.  Standards for approval. A hardship variance may be granted in whole or in part, or with conditions, in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the Board of Adjustment that: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; or, 
(2)  The application of the Development Code to this particular property would create an unnecessary hardship; or, 
(3)  There are conditions that are peculiar to the property which adversely affect its reasonable use or usability as currently zoned. 
c.  If denied, an appeal for a hardship variance affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the Board of Appeals and Adjustments may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
d.  In no case shall a hardship variance be granted for any of the following: 
(1)  A condition created by the applicant, including the result of an unwise investment decision or real estate transaction. 
(2)  A change in the conditions of approval imposed through a zoning change granted by the Governing Body. 
(3)  Reduction of a minimum lot size required by a zoning district. 
(4)  A use of land or building or structures that is not permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
(5)  Any increase in the number of dwelling units or nonresidential building floor area otherwise permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
2.11.6. - Flood protection variances. 
a.  Flood protection variances may be approved for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of a building listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places provided that the proposed reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration will not result in the building losing its historical designation. 
b.  In passing a flood protection variance, the Board of Adjustment shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this Development Code relating to flood damage prevention, and the: 
(1)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  Susceptibility of the facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  Importance of the services provided by the facility to the community; 
(5)  Necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in case of a functionally dependent facility; 
(6)  Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(7)  Compatibility of the use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  Relationship of the use to the comprehensive plan and flood plain management program for that area; 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
c.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this Development Code, the Board of Adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of the variance as it deems necessary to further the purposes of flood damage prevention. 
d.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
e.  Conditions for variances are as follows: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historical character and design of the building. 
(2)  Variances shall only be approved upon: 
(a)  Showing of good and sufficient cause; 
(b)  Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(c)  Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expenses, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing laws or Development Codes. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The Chief Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
2.11.7. - Process for granting appeals. 
a.  Upon receiving a notice of an appeal, the Chief Building Official shall assemble such memos, papers, plans, or other documents as may constitute the record for the appeal or as may provide an understanding of the issues involved. 
b.  An application for an appeal shall include such descriptions, maps or drawings as needed to clearly illustrate or explain the action requested. The Chief Building Official may request such additional information from the appellant as necessary to provide a full understanding of the appellant's request. 
c.  Once the record has been assembled, Chief Building Official shall schedule the appeal for consideration at the next scheduled Board of Adjustment for which adequate public notice can be given. 
d.  Public notice. 
(1)  Notification to the General Public. 
(a)  At least 15 days, but not more than 45 days, prior to the public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. The Building Inspection Department shall prepare such notice, which shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
(b)  A request for a special exception, hardship variance, or flood protection variance shall be heard at a public hearing only upon: 
1)  The published notice, in addition to the requirements above, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the nature of the requested action; and 
2)  At least 15 days prior to the public hearing, the Chief Building Official shall post a sign or signs of not less than six square feet stating: "Zoning Action Pending. For further information please contact the Rome-Floyd County Planning Department at (phone number) or (e-mail address)." One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the property for which the zoning change has been requested. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. 
(2)  Notice to Surrounding Property Owners. If the request is for a special exception, hardship variance, or flood protection variance, notice shall also be given to surrounding property owners as follows: 
(a)  At least five days prior to public hearing, the Chief Building Official shall cause a notice to be mailed to all persons owning property located adjacent to or across the street from the property that is the subject matter of the request. 
(b)  The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing by the Board of Appeals and Adjustments. The written notice shall be mailed to the property as such names and addresses appear on the County's ad valorem tax records. 
e.  Any appellant wishing to withdraw an appeal prior to the meeting of the Board of Adjustment shall file a written request for such withdrawal with the Chief Building Official. The appeal shall thereupon be removed from the Board's agenda and the request shall have no further effect. 
f.  Board of adjustment public hearing. 
(1)  The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, or the Board of Adjustments' designee, who shall act as the Presiding Official, shall convene the public hearing at the scheduled time and place. 
(2)  The Presiding Official may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
(3)  The Chief Building Official shall submit the assembled record of the appeal to the Board of Adjustment. The Chief Building Official, or other appropriate party if the appeal was taken from an administrative action or interpretation, shall provide such information or explanation as appropriate to the circumstances of the appeal. 
(4)  At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. No person in attendance shall speak unless first recognized by the Presiding Official. Upon rising to speak each person recognized shall state his or her name and home address. The Presiding Official may place reasonable limits on the number of persons who may speak for or against a request, on the time allowed for each speaker, and on the total time allowed for presentation of the request. No less than ten minutes shall be provided for all of those speaking in support of the request and no less than ten minutes shall be provided for of those speaking against, unless such proponents or opponents take less time than allowed. If reasonable time limitations permit, any member of the general public may speak at a hearing. However, the appellant and nearby property owners shall be afforded the first opportunity to speak. 
(5)  The appellant shall be allowed to speak first in order to present the request. Others in support of the request may then speak, followed by those in opposition to the request. The appellant will then be allowed time for rebuttal. Rebuttal must be limited to points or issues raised by opponents to the request at the hearing. 
(6)  During the public hearing, the members of the Board of Adjustment may ask questions at any time. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
(7)  At the meeting, following presentation of the appeal, action shall be taken by vote of the Board of Adjustment. 
(a)  A motion to approve or deny an appeal must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least three members in order for the motion to be approved. 
(b)  If a motion to approve an appeal fails, the appeal is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an appeal fails, another motion would be in order. 
(c)  A tie vote on a motion for approval of an appeal shall be deemed a denial of the appeal. A tie vote on any motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(d)  If no action is taken on an appeal, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the Board of Adjustment. 
(8)  In taking action on an appeal, the Board of Adjustment may: 
(a)  Approve, approve with changes, or deny the request; or 
(b)  Table the appeal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting; or 
(c)  Allow withdrawal of the appeal at the request of the appellant. 
(Ord. No. 2009-007ULDC, § I, 4-30-09; Ord. No. 2011-009ULDC, § I, 11-22-11) 
2.12. - Temporary suspension of permitting. 
Upon submission of a valid application for a zoning change or for the granting of an appeal on a property, no permits shall be issued, nor shall any actions be undertaken on the property that may be affected by the outcome of such application. 
ARTICLE 3. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

3.1. - Purpose of article 3. 
This Article describes the specific uses to which land and structures may be put in the various zoning districts, and includes special requirements in order for certain uses or structures to be allowed. District regulations such as lot size, building setbacks, residential floor area and structure height are included. 
3.2. - Zoning map. 
3.2.1. - Official zoning map. 
a.  The boundaries of the various zoning districts shall be shown on a set of parcel specific, tax maps collectively entitled "Zoning Districts Maps, Rome-Floyd County, Georgia" and adopted on the respective dates of adoption for this ordinance, and as subsequently amended thereafter from time to time in conformance with this code. 
b.  The "Zoning Districts Maps, Rome-Floyd County, Georgia" is adopted as the Official Zoning Map(s) and is hereby made a part of this Code, and all notations, references and other information shown on it shall be a part of this Code. 
c.  The Official Zoning Map(s), as adopted by the governing body and subsequently amended from time to time by its action, shall be maintained by the Rome/Floyd County Planning Department. 
The Official Zoning Map(s) shall be stored and maintained in an electronic database. So stored and maintained, the Official Zoning Map(s) shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of all land, water, buildings, and structures within the county. 
On a quarterly basis the Official Zoning Map(s) shall be printed. All printed maps shall be identified by the following words: 
"Zoning District Maps, Rome-Floyd County, Georgia: This is the Official Zoning Map(s) referred to in Article 3.2.1. of the Rome-Floyd County, Georgia, Unified Land Development Code, as of ____________ (date)." 
3.2.2. - Changes to official zoning map. 
a.  Changes due to map amendment. No changes of any nature shall be made to the Official Zoning Map(s) except in conformity with amendments to the map approved by the governing body. 
b.  Changes due to annexation. Where city limit boundaries change by virtue of annexation, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Land area incorporated through annexation shall retain its existing zoning classification until an application for rezoning is filed for rezoning with the Planning Department. 
(2)  Any application for a building permit or development permit will be processed in the customary fashion as it would have been prior to annexation. 
c.  Notification upon amendment. Following the approval of a zoning map amendment by the Governing Body, the Clerk shall transmit a copy of the amendment to the Planning Director. If the action was to rezone property, the Planning Director shall cause the Official Zoning Map to be amended to show the change. 
3.2.3. - Interpretation of boundaries. 
a.  The boundaries of the districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined on the basis of the legal descriptions associated with approved zoning petitions, or, lacking such legal descriptions, on the basis of the location of the boundary as depicted on the Official Zoning Map along with any dimensions shown. 
b.  Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundary lines are center lines of streets or railroads or such lines extended, property lines or such lines extended, a line lying in the center of a stream or drainage way, or the city limits of Rome. 
(2)  Where district boundary line parallels a street right-of-way or discernible topographic feature but no dimension is given, the distance shall be scaled from the Official Zoning Map. 
(3)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot that is of single ownership at the time of the effective date of this Code, the zoning classification of the larger portion may be interpreted to extend into smaller portion for a distance of no more than ten feet. 
(4)  In the event the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the Board of Adjustment shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
(5)  Where a public road, street, alley or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it is reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street, alley or right-of-way. 
3.3. - Zoning districts. 
3.3.1. - Establishment of districts. 
a.  Zoning districts established: 

 
b.  Permitted uses. Principal and accessory uses permitted by right or as special uses are shown in Section 3.4 - List of Permitted Uses. 
c.  Density, lot width, setback, and height standards. Applicable density, lot width and setback standards are contained in Section 3.5 - Lot Size, Density, and Setbacks and Section 3.6 - Structure Heights. 
d.  Residential cluster overlays, neighborhood office commercial and planned developments. 
e.  Application and hearing procedures Procedures for filing rezoning, subdivision or site approvals are contained in Article 2 - Procedures. 
f.  Restrictions regarding particular uses. Applicable standards regarding specific uses, regardless of the zoning district where they are located are contained in Article 4 - Restrictions Regarding Particular Uses. 
g.  Sign standards. Applicable regulations are contained in Article 5 - Sign Regulations. 
h.  Buffers, landscaping, tree protection and parking standards. Applicable regulations are contained in Article 6 - Subdivision and Project Standards. 
i.  Construction development standards. Standards regarding site grading, flood hazard areas, erosion control, installation of streets, drainage, public utilities and building construction are contained in Article 6 - Subdivision and Project Standards. 
3.3.2. - Purpose of zoning districts. 
a.  A-R Agricultural Residential. 
(1)  The A-R Agricultural Residential District is established to provide areas for agricultural and forestry uses and residential development. 
(2)  Manufactured and mobile homes are permitted with limitations throughout the A-R District outside the City of Rome. A Special Use Permit is required within the City. 
b.  S-R Suburban Residential. 
(1)  The S-R Suburban Residential District is established for three levels of residential development (in addition to all forms of agricultural crop production and forestry): 
(a)  In areas where public sanitary sewer and public water are not available, the S-R District is established to provide areas of primarily low density residential development of one unit per acre. 
(b)  In areas where public water is available, but not public sanitary sewer, minimum 20,000 square foot lots are required. 
(c)  In areas where sanitary sewer and public water are available, the S-R District is established to provide moderately dense, primarily single-family residential development with minimum 7,200 square foot lots. 
(2)  Manufactured home subdivisions are deemed appropriate in the S-R Residential District within the city and county. Manufactured homes on single parcels outside an established subdivision are permitted in this district except where a Special Use Permit is required: 
(a)  Within the city; and 
(b)  Within those portions of the county consisting of a land development project in which two or more lots are created in, along with streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots. 
(3)  Attached single-family dwelling as defined in Article 8 may be considered appropriate as infill development if the design is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in terms of scale, height, roof pitch, provision of parking, and orientation toward the street. Such development, if approved by Special Use Permit, must meet the standards listed in Article 4.1.28. 
c.  HT-R High Density Traditional Residential. 
(1)  The HT-R Traditional Residential District is established to provide opportunities for higher density single-family residential averaging four—seven units per acre. The HT-R District development patterns and architectural styles are reflective of the residential neighborhoods established before the 1940's. Streets were developed along a grid pattern with neighborhoods conveniently located to local shopping areas. Although these are older areas of the community, it is envisioned that this zoning district is also appropriate for new single-family development built in this "neo-traditional" style. 
(2)  Manufactured homes are not considered appropriate in the HT-R District. 
(3)  Duplexes may be considered appropriate as infill development if the design is compatible with the predominant development pattern of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(4)  Attached single-family dwelling as defined in Article 8 may be considered appropriate as infill development if the design is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in terms of scale, height, roof pitch, provision of parking, and orientation toward the street. Such development, if approved by Special Use Permit, must meet the standards listed in Article 4.1.28. 
d.  LT-R. 
(1)  The LT-R Traditional Residential District is established to provide opportunities for lower density single-family residential averaging one—four units per acre. The LT-R District development patterns and architectural styles reflect the residential neighborhoods established before and/or during the 1940's, 50's, and early 60's. Streets were largely developed along a grid pattern with sidewalks and neighborhoods conveniently located to local shopping areas. Although these are older neighborhoods of the community, it is envisioned that this zoning district is also appropriate for new single-family development built in "neo-traditional" style in accordance with current new urbanism concepts. 
(2)  Manufactured housing units are not considered appropriate within the Low Density, Traditional Residential District. 
(3)  Duplexes may be considered appropriate as infill development if the design is compatible with the predominant development pattern of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(4)  Attached single-family dwelling as defined in Article 8 may be considered appropriate as infill development if the design is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in terms of scale, height, roof pitch, provision of parking, and orientation toward the street. Such development, if approved by Special Use Permit, must meet the standards listed in Article 4.1.28. 
e.  D-R Duplex Residential. 
(1)  The Duplex Residential District is established to provide a location for two attached residential units with a maximum density of ten—14 units per acre. 
(2)  The Duplex-Residential District includes only single-family detached, single-family attached, and two-family attached (duplex) residential units. 
(3)  The Duplex District is intended to allow for an intermediate density of residential that blends easily with nearby single family residential units. Such units, if effectively sited, are deemed to be suitable buffers between single-family residence (S-R or T-R) and higher density. Multifamily Residential (M-R), Office/Institutional (O-I), and/or Neighborhood Office Commercial (N-O-C) uses. Attached single-family dwelling as defined in Article 8 may be considered appropriate as infill development if the design is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in terms of scale, height, roof pitch, provision of parking, and orientation toward the street. Such development, if approved by Special Use Permit, must meet the standards listed in Article 4.1.28. 
f.  M-R Multifamily-Residential. 
(1)  The M-R Multifamily Residential District is established to provide a location for attached units with densities of ten—14 units per acre. Multifamily development includes duplexes, triplexes, apartments of four units or more, townhomes, condominiums, and manufactured home parks. The M-R district is designed for areas served by publicly provided sanitary sewer. 
(2)  The M-R District is intended to accommodate higher density attached residential development that blends easily with nearby single-family units. M-R District developments such as duplexes, triplexes, townhomes, and low density apartment complexes are considered appropriate in proximity to the S-R and T-R residential districts, if effectively sited, landscaped, buffered, and adequate provisions for access and open space are made. 
(3)  A wide range of multifamily densities and dwelling types may also be appropriate in large-scale mixed use developments or as a residential re-use option in obsolete commercial centers. 
(4)  Manufactured home parks are allowed as a M-R District use with restrictions, but are not considered appropriate options in proximity to a single-family subdivision development or as re-use options for commercial properties. 
g.  N-O-C Neighborhood Office Commercial. 
(1)  The N-O-C Neighborhood Office Commercial District is established to accommodate modestly sized professional offices and retail services in close proximity to and in harmony with nearby residential properties. 
(2)  The N-O-C District is designed for locations where existing residential is no longer the most appropriate use due to conflicts from nearby nonresidential uses and traffic. This district is also appropriate for small-scale retail/office in newly developed planned residential areas. 
(3)  The N-O-C District recognizes the need to protect adjacent residential uses, thus the basic character of the N-O-C District encourages a compatible mixture of residential, office, and specialty retail types of land uses. This district is identified as one in which the physical character and design of existing and proposed new structures play an important role in assuring compatibility with existing residential development. Review of building design, uses, buffers, landscaping, lighting, and parking are recognized as essential for the establishment and maintenance of the character of the district. Uses that create issues with noise, traffic, or odors are not permitted in this district. 
(4)  Areas zoned N-O-C are not intended to be moderate-to-large retail or office centers. 
(5)  Businesses that prepare and serve food are limited to custom service restaurants that do not create smoke, noise, or undue congestion. No drive-in windows are permitted. 
(6)  Beauty shops and barber shops in this district shall have no more than two chairs or operator stations. Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Tanning salons, nail care, massage, and skin care services; boutiques; or other uses customarily associated with beauty shop and barber shops businesses shall not be permitted in this zoning district (NOTE: Approved by County, not by City). 
(7)  New buildings in the N-O-C District may not exceed 2,500 square feet. However, pre-existing residential structures that exceed this building maximum, may be considered for rezoning to N-O-C. 
(8)  Uses are limited to services that generate no more than 150 vehicular trips per day. 
(9)  The residential character and design of existing and proposed new structures are required to be maintained. 
(10)  No front or side yard parking is permitted. 
(11)  Review of building design, uses, buffers, lighting, and parking is required. Such reviews shall be accomplished by a Special Review Panel consisting of the Director of Planning, Historic Preservation Director, and Chief Building Official or their designee(s) as required. 
(12)  Signage shall be in accordance with Article 5—Sign Regulations, and should be designed to have minimal impact on neighboring residential properties. 
(13)  Window displays or other displays of work are not permitted to be visible from the exterior of the building. 
(14)  Landscaping similar to that of residential properties between the nonresidential and residential uses. 
(15)  New structures: 
(a)  New structures shall utilize the shapes and proportions common to single-family residential architecture as guides to the architectural design, and alterations of or additions to existing structures. 
(b)  The rhythm or pattern of placement of windows, doors, chimneys, gables, dormers, roof pitch, offsets in the walls, and other elements should also be considered by the Review Panel as in creating residential compatibility. 
h.  O-I Office Institutional. 
(1)  The O-I Office Institutional District is established to provide for both private and public administrative and professional offices and on sites greater than those permitted in the N-O-C District. 
(2)  The O-I District is established to provide for institutional uses such as hospitals, clinics, churches, schools, cemeteries, etc., occurring in the more densely developed areas of Rome-Floyd County (the S-R and T-R zoning districts). This is due to the potential for conflicts between the institutional uses and densely developed residential neighborhoods. 
(3)  Within this district the sale, wholesale, storage or processing of merchandise is not permitted, except as accessory uses to the primary O-I uses. Areas zoned to this classification are not intended to be commercial or industrial centers. 
(4)  The district is intended primarily to be located along major streets, but it can also be located in an area dominated by institutions such as a college where a wide range of land uses is required. 
i.  C-C Community Commercial. 
(1)  The C-C Community Commercial District is established to provide a location for a full-range of retail and office development serving the general needs of the community. The C-C District is considered inappropriate for heavier commercial uses that border on being more "light industrial" in nature, and thus more appropriate for the H-C or L-I District. 
(2)  It is the intent of the C-C District to promote a streetscape that encourages buildings to be moved forward adjacent to the front yard setback line and the edge of the required landscape improvements. This site design improves the benefits derived from the required landscaping and the overall image of the commercial corridor. 
j.  C-B-C Central Business Commercial. 
(1)  Within C-B-C Central Business Commercial District the most intensive use of land is permitted in combination with a variety of commercial and residential uses. The district is intended to serve as the central headquarters for economic and administrative activity in the community. The district is designed to have uses that are centrally located and compact so that maximum convenience is afforded the users and occupants of the district. 
(2)  It is the intent of the C-B-C District to be pedestrian friendly. Structured parking is encouraged over surface parking lots. There are no yard setbacks to encourage buildings to locate adjacent to the property line and utilize on-street or structured parking to the greatest extent possible. 
(3)  In the C-B-C District residential use is encouraged above commercial operations in existing buildings, as well as within new, freestanding high-rise residential buildings. Commercial store fronts in existing buildings shall be maintained in both form and function and shall not be converted to residential use. 
(4)  The CBC zoning district may also be used in the unincorporated areas where the availability of water, sewer, transportation routes and other services and utilities make high density, mixed used development possible. 
k.  H-C Heavy Commercial. 
(1)  The H-C Heavy Commercial District is established to provide for the sales and service of commercial uses that are not considered as compatible with traditional retail sales and services allowed in the C-C District. 
(2)  Uses within the H-C District border on being more "light industrial" in nature. These are uses such as major car repair or service, auto painting and body shops, construction contractors, large trucks, manufactured home, boat or heavy equipment sales, and retail home improvement stores with outside storage, etc. 
l.  L-I Light Industrial. 
(1)  The L-I Light Industrial District is intended to provide areas for light manufacturing uses that primarily involve finishing, or assembly of previously manufactured goods. The district is also intended to provide for the location of wholesaling or warehousing uses, as well as office uses. 
(2)  The L-I District excludes manufacturing or industrial uses that emit noxious odors, dust, fumes, gas, noise, or vibration outside of any building on the premises. It also excludes hazardous materials such as those materials involving bulk storage of gasoline or toxic chemicals. 
(3)  This district is designed for industrial and warehousing uses that do not have a detrimental effect upon adjoining residential or commercial developments. 
m.  H-I Heavy Industrial. 
(1)  The H-I Heavy Industrial District is intended for the location of primarily heavy manufacturing uses with restrictions on noxious odors, dust, fumes, gas, noise, or vibration. 
(2)  Due to the potential for uses in the H-I District to handle materials that are potentially hazardous, emit smoke, dust or odors, or require large transport services, a five acre minimum lot size is required. 
n.  P-D Planned Development. 
(1)  The P-D Planned Development District is established for two purposes. First it provides a district for addressing specific site and building design issues for and needs created by large scale residential, commercial, office, institutional or industrial uses. Secondly, it allows for more flexible placement, mixture, arrangement and orientation of residential, office institutional, commercial and/or industrial uses. This provides for accompanying flexibility in the subdivision of land and the grouping of open space and accessory facilities. 
(2)  Uses or developments that are subject to the requirements of the P-D Planned Development District are: 
(a)  Buildings that exceed 70,000 square feet, this does not include industrial space if the persons employed (b) and the vehicular trips generated (c) per site are not exceeded. 
(b)  Operations that would employ over 200 persons. 
(c)  Developments that generate over 10,000 vehicle trips per day. 
(d)  Residential development involving over 250 units or in excess of 300 acres. 
(e)  Mixed use developments: developments that desire to provide a mix of residential, office, commercial and/or industrial uses. 
(3)  Application requirements. Developments that are subject to the P-D Planned Development District are required to follow normal submission requirements, zoning and subdivision approvals and construction standards as outlined in other sections of the Code. 
(4)  Site requirements. 
(a)  Single-Purpose Development. 
1)  Defined: A single purpose development is one that involves only one type of general land category such as retail, industrial, institutional, or residential development. A single purpose development may be one building or multiple buildings. 
2)  As a requirement of zoning, a single purpose development is required to submit the following information (in addition to that which is required in other sections of the Code). 
a)  Overall compatibility of development with adjacent land uses. 
b)  Traffic management plan and a street continuation plan (if applicable). 
c)  Orientation of building(s) to the public rights-of-way. 
d)  Parking lot configuration and orientation to the street. 
e)  Non-residential building(s) exterior treatment and signage plans. 
f)  Proposed outside storage and treatment of buffers and landscaping. 
g)  Hours of business operation and service vehicle routing plan. 
h)  Any other information that is deemed useful in determining the proposed use's impact on surrounding properties and the community as a whole. 
(b)  Mixed use developments. 
1)  Defined. A mixed use development is a development that provides a mix of residential, office, commercial and/or industrial uses under a unified plan of development. 
2)  Development standards. 
a)  Overall standards. Lot densities, lot areas, widths, and setbacks are to be established as conditions of zoning approval for each Planned Development. 
b)  Residential densities. The maximum dwelling units permitted is six units per acre. In calculating permitted residential densities, land devoted to non-residential uses and road rights-of-way may not be included. However, open space held in common may be included in the calculations of densities. 
c)  Open space. Within the residential portion of the development, 20 percent of the land must be preserved in open space, half of which is usable open space for active or passive recreation use. Said open space shall be held in common by a legally constituted homeowners association with the financial capability to maintain the open space. For the purposes of calculation, open space does not include any public rights-of-way but does not include lakes, walking trails, and active recreation areas. 
d)  Compatibility. On-site land uses developed at the perimeter of the site shall be developed in a manner that is compatible with adjacent offsite land uses. 
e)  Enclosure of uses. All uses except off-street parking and loading shall be located and maintained entirely within completely enclosed structures. 
3)  Protection of residential uses. Where a mixture of residential and non-residential uses are proposed for a site, or where a non-residential use is proposed on property adjoining a residential use, plans shall provide for protection of the residential use to ensure a suitable living environment. 
a)  Increased separation between residential and non-residential uses, 
b)  Placement of parking areas to minimize noise and screen the view of vehicle movements, 
c)  Use of vegetative screening, 
d)  Location within the structure or on the lot of a use causing adverse impact so as to minimize the impact, 
e)  Use of building alterations or special equipment or devices to minimize adverse impacts, 
f)  Landscaping similar to that of residential properties between non-residential and residential uses, or 
g)  Placement of signs to minimize impact of residential uses. 
4)  Site plan requirements. 
a)  Mixed use development site plans shall contain the same information requested for single purpose development. 
b)  In addition to the requirements above, the following are required: 
1.  Streets rights-of-way, 
2.  Proposed building sites, 
3.  Uses proposed for buildings, 
4.  General drainage improvements. 
5.  Proposed reservations of dedications for streets and other public facilities, and 
6.  A contour map of the site. 
c)  Written report. A written report, including photographs or other relevant illustrations or information, may be submitted: 
1.  To explain features that cannot be shown adequately on the site plan; 
2.  To explain the means by which compatibility between a mixture of uses shall be ensured; or, 
3.  To illustrate the existing architecture on which the proposed design is based. 
o.  U. M. U. Urban Mixed Use. 
(1)  The UMU district is established to accommodate intensive development, including infill development, and to provide for relatively high density residential, commercial, and office/institutional uses in a pedestrian friendly, urban environment. The district may be appropriate in areas that are adjacent and peripheral to the CBC district. 
(2)  The uses allowed in the UMU district are similar to the uses allowed in the CBC district and are shown in Table 3.2. 
(3)  No building setbacks or landscaping requirements shall apply, and a buffer requirement of no less than 20 feet shall apply only where adjacent properties are zoned for residential uses. The height limitation for structures shall be 100 feet. No minimum lot size or lot width shall apply. Each lot shall abut a street that has been opened and accepted for public maintenance; that has been designated by the City or County as a private street; or whose construction has been guaranteed, as provided under Article 6.4.6 of this Code; for a distance of no less than 26 continuous feet. 
(4)  In order to efficiently utilize limited land resources, structured parking shall be provided wherever it is feasible. Shared parking arrangements shall be encouraged. 
(5)  Sidewalks and streetscapes shall be provided along all street frontages to promote attractive, safe, and convenient pedestrian access. Multi-purpose trails or other pedestrian walkways may also be appropriate to ensure connectivity. 
(6)  Loading areas, material handling areas, and waste containers shall be located, screened or enclosed so that they are not visible from streets, sidewalks and other public areas. The design of such facilities shall be approved by the Building Official. 
(7)  The UMU zoning district may also be used in the unincorporated areas where the availability of water, sewer, transportation routes and other services and utilities make high density, mixed use development possible. 
(Ord. No. 2010-006ULDC, § 1, 7-27-10; Ord. No. 2015-003ULDC, § I, 2-24-15) 
3.4. - List of permitted uses. 
a.  Principal and accessory uses that are permitted by right, permitted by right but with limitations, and uses permitted as special uses are shown on the following tables: 
(1)  Table 3-1 shows all such uses for the residential and agricultural districts. 
(2)  Table 3-2 lists all such uses for the districts that are primarily nonresidential in nature. 
b.  In P-D Planned Development District uses that are permitted are specified as part of the zoning approval for each development. 
c.  The following permitted uses herein identified and listed are not intended to be exhaustive, but only representative of those uses permitted in each Zoning District. It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Director and Chief Building Official to concur in any additional uses not herein specifically identified as permitted uses. Any use not shown in the following Table of Permitted Uses that cannot be concurred upon shall be brought before the Planning Commission for final resolution, and shall require a Special Use Permit. Uses that are specifically prohibited are listed in Article 4. 
List of Permitted Principal and Accessory Uses  Table 3-1. Residential and Agricultural Districts 

 
1  Special Use Permit also required in the City. 
2  Special use permit also required in the City, and a special use permit also required in the County within those portions of the County consisting of land development project in which two or more lots are created, along with the streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots, except where such development is specifically designed for manufactured homes. 
3  Where served by sanitary sewer. 
4  Special use permit required by City. 
(Ord. No. 2011-002ULDC, § I, 3-22-11; Ord. No. 2012-001ULDC, § I, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 2013-002ULDC, § I, 3-26-13; Ord. No. 2014-003ULDC, § I, 8-12-14) 
List of Permitted Principal and Accessory Uses  Table 3-2. Nonresidential Districts 5 

 
5  See Article 4—Restrictions regarding particular uses, for specific requirements that apply to uses permitted by right but with limitations. 
6  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
7  As an adaptive re-use of an existing building only. 
8  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
9  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
10  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
11  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
12  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
13  With the footnote: "Business operation only, with no repossessed vehicles received, parked, stored, displayed, or sold from any property within the NOC district. 
14  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
15  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
16  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
17  As adaptive reuse of existing building only. 
18  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
19  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
20  See Article 3-Section 3.8, regarding Neighborhood Office Commercial development standards. 
(Ord. No. 2010-006ULDC, § 2, 7-27-10; Ord. No. 2011-006ULDC, § I, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 2012-001ULDC, § II, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 2012-003ULDC, 5-22-12; Ord. No. 2012-004ULDC, § I, 10-23-12; Ord. No. 2013-002ULDC, §§ II, III, 3-26-13; Ord. No. 2014-001ULDC, § I, 6-24-14; Ord. No. 2014-002ULDC, § I, 8-12-14; Ord. No. 2014-003ULDC, § II, 8-12-14; Ord. No. 2014-005ULDC, § I, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2015-002ULDC, § I, 1-13-15; Ord. No. 2015-003ULDC, § II, 2-24-15; Ord. No. 2015-005ULDC, § I, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2015-006ULDC, § I, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 2015-007ULDC, § I, 7-28-15) 
3.5. - Lot size, density and setbacks. 
3.5.1. - Minimum lot size.Every property upon which a principal use may be located shall meet or exceed the following requirements for its respective zoning district except that the Minimum Lot Size (square feet) requirements in column three of Table 3-3 shall have application only in the city; everything else in Section 3.5.1 shall remain the same. 
Table 3-3 Minimum Lot Size 

 
*  ;hg;Unless specified elsewhere in this Code 
**  Development that is not permitted along major streets 
***  Specific standards are found in Article 4 of this Code 
****  Minimum lot width may be reduced to 150 feet if shared access is provided with adjacent lot 
(Ord. No. 2015-001ULDC, § I, 1-13-15) 
3.5.2. - Minimum principal building setbacks.All principal buildings on a lot shall be set back from the rights-of-way lines and property lines bounding the lot no less than the distances shown on the following table: 
Table 3-4  Minimum Setback—Principal Buildings 

 
*Residential lots shall not be platted to front directly on the right-of-way of a major arterial, unless adequate provisions for access have been established. 
**Development that is not permitted along major streets 
***If the adjacent property on both sides is developed with a similar use, new construction or infill development shall provide a setback equal to the average setback on the adjacent properties 
****Individual townhouse units may provide zero feet side yard separation, but end units must provide 20-foot side yards on the periphery of the lot. 
*****No setback required where adjacent to rail line. For parcels zoned H-I, side and rear setbacks shall be the same as for the L-I district when adjacent to other H-I properties. 
3.6. - Structure heights. 
3.6.1. - Maximum structure heights.The maximum height of all structures in each zoning district (except as provided in the subsections below) shall be as follows: 
Table 3-5  Maximum Structure Heights 

 
3.6.2. - Exception to height restrictions.The following structures are exempt from the height limitations: 
a.  Agricultural buildings such as but not limited to barns, silos, windmills, grain elevators, and other farm structures, but not including dwellings. 
b.  Cooling towers, gas holders, or other industrial structures where required as part of the manufacturing process. 
c.  Church spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, monuments, water towers, observation towers, wireless communication towers, commercial radio and television transmission towers, windmills, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, and TV reception antennae. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001ULDC, § II, 6-24-14) 
ARTICLE 4. - RESTRICTIONS REGARDING PARTICULAR USES 

4.1. - Principal uses. 
The following specific requirements apply to each of the following uses in all zoning districts where each use is permitted with limitations. 
4.1.1. - Agricultural and forestry. 
a.  Concentrated animal feeding operation. 
(1)  All livestock buildings or feeding enclosures shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line. 
(2)  Chicken broiler houses and other covered animal feeding operations are included in the definition of animal feeding operation to the extent that they must meet set back requirements and that their waste by-products must be disposed of in a timely and environmentally acceptable manner. 
(3)  Minimum parcel size is ten acres. 
(4)  There shall be at least 5,000 square feet of fenced area not covered by the principal structure for each animal unit, excluding poultry. (See Definitions) All confined animal feeding operations shall comply with the requirements of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division and the U. S. Department of Agriculture Rules and Regulations for Water Quality (July 6, 1999) relating to animal waste disposal. 
b.  Livestock sales pavilions, operated in accordance with state and county health department regulations, are required to be located at least 50 feet from any property line. 
c.  Riding stable: 
(1)  Lot must be at least five acres. 
(2)  Structures shall be located at least 50 feet from any property line. 
d.  Temporary or portable sawmill: 
(1)  Shall not exceed a period of six months. 
(2)  Such use must be at least 200 feet from any property line. 
e.  Tenant Dwelling for persons employed on land used for bona fide agricultural purposes may not be rented for any other purposes but to provide housing for persons employed by agricultural operations upon the same parcel of land; except that such dwellings that were built prior to the adoption of this Ordinance may be rented. 
4.1.2. - Automotive, truck, boat and trailer sales and service. 
a.  Automotive parking lot or parking garage, commercial may include gasoline pumps if located entirely within the principal structure. 
b.  Automobile repair and paint shops. 
(1)  CITY: Such use shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any property used for school, park, playground, day care home or center, nursing home, convalescent home, personal care home, or hospital; or within 300 feet of any residentially zoned property. 
COUNTY: Such use shall not be permitted within 300 feet of any property used for a school, park playground, or hospital. 
(2)  All activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
(3)  CITY: Damaged vehicles shall be stored within a storage area that meets the criteria outlined in Article 4.1.2 i. 
COUNTY: Such use shall not be established on a lot that is either adjacent to or directly across the street from any residentially zoned property. 
c.  Automobile and truck salvage and retail sales. 
(1)  Automotive salvage operations where parts are to be retailed or wholesaled as usable replacement parts are permitted provided they are properly screened from view on all sides by a solid fence a minimum of eight feet tall. 
d.  Automotive service business and automobile service station. 
(1)  Auto repair shall not be permitted. 
(2)  Gasoline pumps and other service facilities shall be set back not less than 15 feet from the right-of-way line. 
(3)  All activities and storage of tires, parts, etc., shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
(4)  No inoperable vehicles shall be stored on the site for more than 24 hours. 
(5)  Such use in a P-D District shall not be constructed until the primary structure has been constructed. 
e.  Automobile, boat, truck and trailer sales, lease and rentals. All parking areas shall be clearly marked, and no unit shall be parked within the setback areas of the district. 
f.  Automobile wash service. A paved area shall be located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting service equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the wash machines. 
g.  Automobile wrecking or junkyards. 
(1)  Such use shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than eight feet in height that provides total visual screening. Such screening shall be maintained in good condition and meet the standards established for buffers in Article 6. 
(2)  The storage of vehicles shall be on asphalt, concrete or gravel. Vehicles shall be arranged in rows and not stacked upon one another. 
(3)  No such activity may be conducted within 100 feet of any property line or 200 feet of any property zoned or used for residential purposes. The incidental sale of auto parts removed from cars on the site shall be permitted. 
h.  Retail automobile parts and tire store. 
(1)  Unless elsewhere permitted within the district, there shall be no dismantling of vehicles on the premises to obtain auto parts. 
(2)  Unless elsewhere permitted within the district, the only auto part installation that shall be permitted in connection with this use shall be the installing of tires and the installation of minor maintenance or accessory parts. 
(3)  Unless elsewhere permitted within the district, major auto repair shall not be permitted in connection with this use. 
i.  Storage yards for damaged or confiscated automobiles (application in city only). 
(1)  This use shall be enclosed by a fence or wall at least eight feet in height that provides total visual screening. Such screening shall be maintained in good condition and meet the buffer standards of Article 6 - "Site Design Standards." 
(2)  The storage of vehicles shall be on an all-weather treatment such as asphalt, concrete or gravel. Vehicles shall be arranged in rows and not stacked upon one another. 
(3)  No such activity may be conducted within 100 feet of any property line or 200 feet of any property zoned or used for residential purposes. The incidental sale of auto parts removed from cars on the site shall be permitted. 
(4)  No dismantling, repair, or other such activity shall be conducted unless otherwise permitted in the district. 
(5)  No automobiles shall be held longer that the expiration of its current registration period. 
j.  Temporary vehicle storage (application in county only). 
(1)  This use shall be enclosed by a fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height that provides total visual screening. Such screening shall be maintained in good condition and meet the buffer standards of Article 6 - "Site Design Standards." 
(2)  The storage of vehicles shall be on an all-weather treatment such as asphalt, concrete or gravel. Vehicles shall be arranged in rows and not stacked upon one another. 
(3)  No dismantling, repair, or other such activity shall be conducted unless otherwise permitted in the district. 
(4)  No vehicle shall be held longer than sixty (60) days from its arrival on the property. 
(Ord. No. 2012-004ULDC, § II, 10-23-12; Ord. No. 2014-005ULDC, § II, 9-23-14 
4.1.3. - Churches and other religious facilities. 
a.  When abutting a residentially zoned district, any building or structure shall be set back not less than 50 feet from any side or rear property line. 
b.  No parking area shall be established within 20 feet of a residential zone. 
c.  For new construction on undeveloped ground the site must be at last one acre in size and have frontage on a public street of at least 100 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2013-001ULDC, § I, 2-26-13) 
4.1.4. - Civic, social and fraternal organizations.All structures shall be at least 50 feet from any property line, and parking. 
4.1.5. - Communications, radio and TV towers. All towers must be set back from any adjacent (next to or across the street) lot or unrelated structure a distance equal to the height of the tower. Article 4.1.5 shall not have application to towers located in the county. 
Note— 1 Setbacks for communications, radio and TV towers located in the county shall be established through a separate comprehensive ordinance of the county and not in the ULDC. 
(Ord. No. 2011-001ULDC, § 1, 2-8-11) 
4.1.6. - Construction contractors.Storage of materials not within a building or structure shall be screened by a permanent fence, wall or approved planted buffer. Such screen shall be at least six feet in height or two feet higher than stored materials, whichever is higher. Such screen shall also be in conformance with buffer standards in Article 6 - "Site Design Standards." 
4.1.7. - Custom order and specialty shops.Such uses are allowed by right if less than 10,000 square feet and if the sales area is within a building and occupies more than 10,000 square feet of building floor area, it shall be permitted with limitations by special use permit. 
4.1.8. - Custom service restaurants.A restaurant in this district shall be a custom service restaurant and shall be located in a pre-existing residential structure modified for such use. 
4.1.9. - Day care and kindergartens. 
a.  The lot shall have access on an arterial or major collector. 
b.  There shall not be less than 30 square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum enrollment, and not less than 100 square feet per child of outdoor play area, for the maximum number of children that will use the play area at any given time, but in no case less than one-third of the maximum enrollment. 
c.  A fence not less than four feet in height shall enclose the outdoor play area. 
d.  A circular drive shall be provided for off-street loading and unloading. 
e.  In P-D and C-B-C Districts the use shall be permitted only as accessory use to a primary use. 
4.1.10. - Dry cleaning plants. 
a.  Dry cleaning plants using systems that make use of solvents rated at above 40 according to the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., standard of classification known as class I systems, shall be prohibited. 
b.  Dry cleaning plants that make use of solvents rated at more than five but less than 40 according to the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., standard of classification, known as class II and III systems, shall not be established in buildings with other occupancy. They shall be established in buildings that are set back at least 20 feet from any side or rear property line and another building. 
c.  The applicant for such a plant shall certify in writing at the time of application that all the above conditions shall be met. Such dry cleaning plant shall comply with all of the requirements of the Life Safety Code NFPA No. 101. 
d.  Such plant shall be designed to operate in a manner that will not emit noise, smoke, odor, or objectionable waste materials. 
4.1.11. - Lodging. 
a.  Bed and breakfast inn. 
(1)  Permitted only in federally designated National Historic Register districts and the A-R District as a Special Use. 
(2)  Bed and Breakfast Inns are permitted to offer one to ten units. 
(3)  Parking requirements are stated in Article 6 - Subdivision and Project Standards. 
(4)  Signs shall meet the sign standards of the district wherein the facility is located. 
b.  Fraternity and sorority houses and residence halls. 
(1)  The use must be located within 1,000 feet of an accredited institution of higher education. 
(2)  In computing area required to determine dwelling unit densities, each six beds or fraction thereof shall be considered as one dwelling unit. 
4.1.12. - Manufactured homes.These regulations shall govern the use and operation of all manufactured homes used for residential purposes and manufactured home communities within the County. It is the intent of these regulations to empower the Planning Commission, the fire department, the county health department, and the building inspection department to review the development of manufactured home sites and parks within the county for the purposes stated in this article. 
a.  Purpose. These regulations are being promulgated to project the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the County. The County recognizes that manufactured housing meets the needs of many county residents for affordable housing. 
b.  General standards. 
(1)  No mobile home shall be brought into the County after the effective date of this Development Code. 
(2)  Zoning requirements: 
(a)  A-R District: Manufactured and mobile homes are permitted with limitations within unincorporated Floyd County and only by Special Use Permit inside the City of Rome. 
(b)  S-R or P-D Residential Districts: Manufactured homes on individual lots are permitted only by special use permit within those portions of the county consisting of land development projects in which two or more lots are created, along with streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots. In other portions of the county in said Residential Districts, manufactured homes are permitted with limitations. Manufactured homes on individual lots in the city are allowed only be special use permit. Manufactured home subdivisions are permitted with limitations. 
(c)  HT-R and LT-R Residential District: Manufactured homes on individual lots are not permitted. 
(d)  D-R Residential District: Manufactured homes on individual lots are excluded from the Duplex District. Manufactured home subdivisions are excluded from this zone. 
(e)  M-R Multifamily Residential District: Duplex manufactured homes are permitted. Manufactured home parks are permitted with limitations. 
(f)  Manufactured and mobile homes are prohibited from any historic district. 
(3)  Mobile home inspection. No mobile home shall relocate from a site within the county without the following inspection. The cost of such inspection shall be the responsibility of the mobile home owner. 
(a)  Structural inspection by the Building Official to assure integrity of outside structural items such a windows, doors, and siding. 
(b)  HVAC inspection conducted by the Building Inspection Department: 
1)  Gas piping systems shall stand a pressure of six inches mercury or three psi gauge for a period of not less than ten minutes without showing any drop in pressure. 
2)  When appliances are connected to the gas piping system, the entire system shall be pressurized to not less than ten inches and not more than 14 inches water column and the appliance connections tested for leakage with soapy water or bubble solution. 
(c)  Electrical inspection shall be conducted by Building Inspection and shall meet the requirements of the latest edition of the National Electrical Code. 
(d)  Smoke detectors shall be installed and operational using the mobile home's internal electrical wiring. At the minimum, a detector shall be located in the hallway(s) leading to the sleeping area(s). Detectors shall be Underwriter's Laboratories approved and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(4)  An annual location decal is required and shall be filed by the owner of a manufactured or mobile home located in the county. The filing is at the office of the tax commissioner. Homes having filed for a homestead exemption in the property tax assessor's office are excluded from such requirement. 
(5)  Permanent additions may be built onto any manufactured home or mobile home provided such addition or modification meets the requirements of the building code and the procedures outlined for developing a manufactured home park as applicable. 
(6)  Manufactured or mobile homes placed after the date of this article shall be required to have the following improvements at the manufactured or mobile home stand per the Manufactured Home Division of the Safety Fire Commissioner of the State of Georgia: 
(a)  Tiedowns: Each manufactured or mobile home shall be secured to ground anchors or other devices securing the stability of the manufactured or mobile home as outlined in the building code. 
(b)  Foundations: Foundations shall be installed in accordance with the standards set forth in the Georgia Installation Code for Manufactured Homes. 
(c)  Steps: Steps are required to be placed within 45 days of installation for all doors into the manufactured home and shall be at least 36 inches in width. If more than three steps are required, the steps shall be equipped with a hand railing. The improvements shall comply with the provisions of the building code. 
(d)  Any manufactured or mobile home located within the county shall be skirted within 45 days of installation. 
(e)  Any manufactured home or mobile home located within the City must be placed on a masonry foundation, slab, or masonry piers with masonry curtain within 45 days of its installation. The towing tongue and wheels shall be removed. 
(7)  Any manufactured or mobile home that is damaged by fire, flood, explosion, wind or other catastrophe in any amount equal to or greater than 60 percent of its replacement value shall be removed and disposed of or repaired by the owner within 90 days after damage occurred unless a variance has been granted. 
(8)  Nonconforming manufactured or mobile home sites, parks, or subdivisions lawfully existing at the time of adoption of this regulation may be continued; but if such nonconforming use is discontinued for a period of 12 months, the manufactured or mobile home site, park, or subdivision shall be made to conform with the requirements of these regulations. 
c.  Exceptions: An exception may also be granted in an area that has been officially declared a disaster area by federal, state, or local government. In such case, an application for exception shall include a statement by the applicant that he/she is the owner of the premises; and that he/she recognizes the exception is temporary and shall last only until permanent housing can be repaired or replaced; no more than 180 days which period can be extended one time for 180 more days by Planning Department staff. 
In either case: 
(1)  Any change in the status of the occupant(s) justifying the granting of an exception, shall be reported to the City of Rome/Floyd County Building Inspection and/or Planning Office within 30 days. 
(2)  The applicant shall also state that he/she shall cause the removal of manufactured home on the termination of the exception and that upon failure to do so irrevocably grants the Governing Body the right to use equipment to remove the manufactured home from the premises at he applicant's expense. 
(3)  A manufactured home placed in this manner is not to be used as a rental property. It must be removed at the expense of the property owner, once the special medical or other need for which a variance was granted no longer exists. 
d.  Manufactured and mobile homes on individual lots. 
(1)  Manufactured and mobile home situated on individual lots in the unincorporated county shall be required to meet the same location standards as other single-family units within the same zoning district. 
(2)  Health Department approval will be required for every manufactured home and/or mobile home on a lot not connected to public sewer systems. Lot size shall be approved by the Health Department using appropriate percolation and/or soil test data. No septic tanks shall be allowed if public sewerage is available. All dwellings shall connect to the public sewer when such sewer is within 300 feet of the property being subdivided. 
(3)  All lots shall comply with the Flood Damage Prevention provisions of this Development Code. Each lot shall have thereon a viable home-site above the 100-year flood plain. 
(4)  Any manufactured home or mobile home placed on an individual lot within the City shall be compatible with single-family dwellings on surrounding lots for a distance of 100 feet or one block in any direction in terms of roof pitch, exterior wall treatment, and orientation relative to the street frontage. 
e.  Where private sewerage disposal systems are to be placed in front yard areas, setbacks shall be established by the Floyd County Health Department but shall not be less than 40 feet. 
f.  Manufactured home subdivisions. 
(1)  Manufactured home subdivisions shall be required to meet all the development standards of this Code. 
(2)  Manufactured and mobile homes situated on individual lots shall be required to meet the same standards for location as single-family dwelling units. Prior to the placement of the manufactured or mobile home on the lot, the owner shall submit a plot plan or an affidavit signed be the owner to the building inspection department that indicated the site complies with the provisions of this ordinance concerning the placement of such homes. 
(3)  Any manufactured home placed on an individual lot in a manufactured home subdivision within the City shall be compatible with single-family dwellings on surrounding lots for distance of 100 feet or one block in any direction in terms of roof pitch, exterior wall treatment, and orientation relative to the street frontage. 
g.  Manufactured home parks: 
(1)  Approval of manufactured home parks: Procedures for developing a manufactured home park shall follow the same standards as specified for site plan approval outlined in Article 2. This article relates to application submissions, approval processes, erosion and sediment control, design issues, grading, flood area management, etc. 
(2)  Site standards for manufactured home parks: 
(a)  Any park of ten units or more must be located on a road classified as an arterial as specified in the county road maintenance register or otherwise be on a state highway. Said park shall have a minimum street frontage of 300 feet. Parks with less than ten units shall be located on a major collector or higher functional street classification and have a minimum road frontage of 150 feet. 
(b)  Manufactured home parks shall front on a publicly maintained street. 
(c)  Manufactured home parks shall be served by a public water and sanitary sewer source. Any extension of public water lines shall be constructed in accordance with standards established by this Development Code for single-family dwellings. All water mains shall be at least six inches in diameter. Fire hydrants shall be readily accessible for fire department use. Hydrants shall be located so that each home or building in the park is within 500 feet of a hydrant. 
(d)  All manufactured home parks shall be served by a garbage collection system. Collection facilities may be provided for the entire community or at individual lots within the each manufactured home park. The design for these facilities must be approved at the time of development plan approval. 
(e)  Each manufactured home shall be located on a lot having an area of 5,000 square feet and minimum building line width of 40 feet. 
(f)  Manufactured homes shall be separated from each other and from other buildings and structures by at least 16 feet. Porches and decks without tops or opaque roofs shall be excluded from this requirement. 
(g)  One accessory storage building is allowed on an individual lot. The maximum size shall not exceed 120 square feet. 
(h)  All structures shall be set back from any exterior property line of the manufactured home park by 40 feet. 
(i)  One or more recreation areas shall be provided within those manufactured home parks having ten or more units. Such recreation area shall constitute a minimum of five percent of the space designated for residential lots. All such recreation areas shall be so designated on the development for the park and shall not be converted to use as a manufactured home lot. Recreation areas shall be so located as to be free of traffic and safety hazards. At least 50 percent of the recreational open space land shall be of a character suitable for active recreation, such as playgrounds or ball fields. 
(j)  All interior roadways are to be surfaced with a material such as asphalt, chert, gravel, etc., to a width of 12 feet for one-way streets or to a width of 18 feet for two-way streets and maintained by the manufactured home park owner. 
(k)  Areas not surfaced or built over shall be planted in grass or other suitable vegetative cover. 
(l)  Adequate security lighting shall be provided for the manufactured home park. 
(m)  The location of electrical cables, gas piping, and sewer lines buried underground shall be indicated by an above ground sign(s) or underground marker tapes identifying the proximity of the lines. A plot plan showing the as-built location of underground utility lines shall be provided to the Building Inspector. 
(Ord. No. 2011-007ULDC, § I, 7-26-11) 
4.1.13. - Personal care homes. 
a.  In all single-family and two-family residential districts (AR, SR, LTR, HTR, DR), the square footage of an existing dwelling shall not be enlarged by more than 25 percent of the existing dwelling to affect the use of the structure as a personal care home, rooming or boarding house, or group residence. Exterior modification of an existing dwelling and provision of the required parking shall be consistent with the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood; i.e., in design, scale, and number of vehicles allowed. 
b.  In all single-family and two-family residential districts (AR, SR, LTR, HTR, DR), new construction shall be consistent with the residential character and scale of the surrounding neighborhood. 
c.  Personal care homes, rooming or boarding houses, and group residences shall maintain all applicable federal and/or state licenses and/or permits. 
4.1.14. - Photographic studio. 
a.  No commodities may be sold other than photographs of customers made by the studio and items accessory to and sold in conjunction with those photographs. 
b.  On-site film processing and printing is solely for the studio's use. 
c.  No custom framing or other non-photography work may be performed as part of the business. 
4.1.15. - Quarrying and mining. 
a.  Quarrying and mining includes removal, extraction and/or processing of any dirt, sand, soil, clay, rock, gravel, minerals, gas, oil, or other fuels for sale or removal from the property in its extracted form, finished form, or as a component of another product. Borrow pits are permitted where less than 1.1 acres of land will be disturbed. 
b.  Prior to initiation of mining activities an application for a Special Use Permit must be submitted to the Planning Commission. Such application must provide: 
(1)  Written stipulations that the activity will not have any harmful impacts on the environment (air, water, natural landscape) neighboring residents and businesses, or to livestock. 
(2)  A specific site plan and time schedule for completion of mining operations. 
(3)  Information as to how the operation will be buffered and methods to assure that no harmful off-site impacts will occur. 
(4)  A transportation plan detailing routes to be used by vehicles serving the site, weight limits and traffic volumes. 
(5)  Information on hours of operation and procedures (on- and off-site) related to any on-site blasting that might occur. 
(6)  Adequate financial bonding for damages (to be determined by the governing body). 
c.  The removal area shall be completely enclosed with a fence not less than six feet in height. 
d.  An earthen berm shall be provided that shields all operations from ground level view along all property lines. 
e.  Drainage plans and a plan for the development of the site when the removal is completed shall be submitted with the application for a development permit. 
f.  This section shall not prohibit the removal of earth and rock and filling and grading in any district done for land development purposes, upon issuance of a development permit in accordance with this Development Code. 
g.  These uses shall be established only on a site of not less than 200 acres. 
4.1.15.1. - Quarrying, mining and soft material extraction.(The previous section 4.1.15 shall not have application with respect to property located in the unincorporated area of the county and the following section shall have application with respect to such property.) 
a.  Quarrying and mining. 
(1)  "Quarrying and mining" includes removal, extraction and/or processing of any dirt, sand, soil, clay, rock, gravel, minerals, gas, oil or other fuels for sale or removal from the property in its extracted form, finished form or as a component of another product. Quarrying and mining shall not include "soft material extraction" as hereinafter defined. Quarrying and mining and soft material extraction shall not include borrow pits that are excavated areas where naturally occurring earthen materials are to be removed for use and ordinary fill at another location. Borrow pits as defined herein are not subject to regulation by this section. Farm ponds are not subject to regulation by this section. 
(2)  Prior to initiation of quarrying and mining activities, an application for a Special Use Permit must be submitted to the Planning Commission. Such application must provide: 
(a)  Written stipulations that the activity will not have any harmful impacts on the environment (air, water, natural landscape), neighboring residents and businesses, or to livestock. 
(b)  A specific site plan and time schedule for completion of mining operations. 
(c)  Information as to how the operation will be buffered and methods to assure that no harmful off-site impacts will occur. 
(d)  A transportation plan detailing routes to be used by vehicles serving the site, weight limits and traffic volumes. 
(e)  Information on hours of operation and procedures (on- and off-site) related to any on-site blasting that might occur. 
(f)  Adequate financial bonding for damages (to be determined by the governing body). 
(3)  The following additional objective criteria shall be considered when reviewing a request for a special use permit under Subsection 2-2-4(b): 
(a)  Will the mining have an adverse impact on nearby residential property, whether through noise, light, dust, runoff or other potential nuisance? 
(b)  Will the mining have an adverse impact on any rivers, streams or other bodies of water? 
(c)  Will the mining have an adverse impact on the groundwater recharge system or underground aquifers? 
(4)  The removal area shall be completely enclosed with a fence not less than six feet in height. 
(5)  An earthen berm shall be provided that shields all operations from ground level view along all property lines. 
(6)  Drainage plans and a plan for the development of the site when the removal is completed shall be submitted with the application for a special use permit. 
(7)  This section shall not prohibit the removal of earth and rock and filling and grading in any district done for land development purposes, upon issuance of a development permit in accordance with this Development Code. 
(8)  These uses shall be established only on a site of not less than 200 acres. 
b.  Soft material extraction. 
(1)  "Soft material extraction" is the removal of soft materials wherein: 
(a)  Blasting and the use of explosives are not employed in the mining operation; 
(b)  Groundwater aquifers will not be encountered; 
(c)  Removal does not take place below the water table; and 
(d)  Such soft materials are limited to common clay and shale, ball clay, china clay, kaolin, umber, ochre, fullers earth, bentonite, barite, bauxite, sericite, sand and gravel. 
(2)  Soft material extraction shall not take place on parcels of less than one (1) acre and is permitted in H-I, L-I, A-R and H-C zoning districts with a special use permit. 
(3)  Prior to initiation of any soft material extraction activities, an application for a Special Use Permit must be submitted to the Planning Commission. Such application must provide: 
(a)  Written stipulations that the activity will not have any harmful impacts on the environment (air, water, natural landscape), neighboring residents and businesses, or to livestock. 
(b)  A specific site plan that includes: 
1)  A dimensional separation where soft material extraction shall not occur within fifty (50) feet of all property lines; 
2)  A ten-foot buffer, within the 50-foot dimensional separation, that shields all operations from ground level view on property lines that are adjacent to all zoning districts except A-R; and 
3)  A time schedule for completion of soft material extraction. 
(c)  Information to assure that no harmful off-site impacts will occur. 
(d)  A transportation plan detailing routes to be used by vehicles serving the site, weight limits and traffic volumes. 
(e)  Information on hours of operation and procedures (on- and off-site). 
(f)  Adequate financial bonding for damages (to be determined by the governing body). 
(g)  Drainage plans and a plan for the development of the site when the removal is completed shall be submitted with the application for a special use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2014-006ULDC, 11-25-14) 
4.1.16. - Recreation and entertainment. 
a.  Special outdoor entertainment or event of community interest. 
(1)  General standards: 
(a)  Such activities shall not exceed 14 days and may not occur more often than twice in any calendar year. 
(b)  Adequate parking and traffic maneuvering space must be located on the same property as the special event. 
(c)  Such activities shall not be conducted within 100 feet from any property line. 
(d)  No programs involving music or amplified sound may be presented within 200 feet of any residential zoning district or residence. 
(e)  Central loudspeakers shall be prohibited. 
(f)  Lighting shall be established so that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and shall be in accordance with Article 6-"Site Design Standards." 
(2)  Carnival, Rodeo, Horse Show, Community Fairs, Fairgrounds and Amusement Parks. 
(a)  All activities and buildings must be set back at least 200 feet from any property line. 
(b)  These uses shall not be permitted within 500 feet of the property line of an adjacent residence. 
(c)  Facilities shall be enclosed by a wall or fence not less than five feet in height. 
b.  Golf Courses and Club Houses, Private Neighborhood Recreation Centers or Swimming Pools, Noncommercial Club or Lodge, Planetarium, aquarium, botanical gardens, and other natural exhibitions. 
(1)  In addition to the requirements set forth in the section above, the following additional requirements shall apply: 
(a)  Any building or structure shall be set back 100 feet from any property line except where such property line is a street line. In such cases, the front yard set back established for the district shall apply. When a property line is on a natural waterway, a property line set back shall not be required. 
(b)  Site plans shall be approved by the Planning Commission to ensure compatibility of the facility with the neighboring in which it is to be located. 
(c)  A fence having a height of not less than six feet shall enclose a swimming pool. Swimming pools shall be permitted only upon written approval of the health department to indicate compliance with health department swimming pool regulations. 
(d)  Outdoor activity shall cease by 11:00 p.m. 
(e)  No fraternal club or lodge may be permitted in a residentially zoned district. 
4.1.17. - Repair services. 
a.  All activities shall be conducted within a building or fenced area, involving no outdoor storage of materials, equipment, or items being repaired, unless elsewhere permitted in the district. 
b.  Any outside storage shall be confined to the rear of the property and shall be visually screened in accordance with the buffer standards in Article 6 - "Site Design Standards." 
c.  Such activity shall not generate noise, odors, or fumes that can be detected beyond the walls of the building in which the use is housed. 
4.1.18. - Retirement community, convalescent, assisted living centers or nursing homes. 
(a)  In all single-family and two-family residential districts (AR, SR, LTR, HTR, DR), the square footage of an existing dwelling shall not be enlarged by more than 25 percent of the existing dwelling to affect the use of the structure as a retirement community, convalescent home, assisted living center or nursing home. Exterior modification of an existing dwelling and provision of the required parking shall be consistent with the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood; i.e. in design, scale, and number of vehicles allowed. 
(b)  In all single-family and two-family residential districts (AR, SR, LTR, HTR, DR), new construction shall be consistent with the residential character and scale of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(c)  Retirement communities, convalescent homes, assisted living centers or nursing homes of all types shall maintain all applicable federal and/or state licenses and/or permits. 
(d)  Minimum site area of two acres shall be provided for retirement communities, convalescent homes, assisted living centers or nursing homes. 
4.1.19. - Sewage treatment plants. 
a.  The directors of the county health and water and sewer departments and the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources shall approve the design and operation of such facility. 
b.  Any building or structure compromising the facility shall be set back 100 feet from any property line. 
4.1.20. - Sexually-oriented adult uses.Sexually-oriented adult uses shall comply with all requirements regarding "adult entertainment establishments" of the Code of Ordinances of the applicable Jurisdiction. 
4.1.21. - Solid waste disposal sites.The same requirements outlined under "mining" shall apply to solid waste disposal sites, however, substitution of "landfill" activities should be made for "mining" activities. 
4.1.22. - Temporary sales office for a subdivision.A temporary sales office, where otherwise allowed, shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  The temporary sales office shall be located on a lot within an area that has received Final Plat approval and has been recorded with the Clerk to the Superior Court. 
b.  Sales shall be limited to the lots and buildings within the subdivision where the temporary sales office is located. 
c.  The temporary sales office may not be a portable building that is transferred to the site as a unit. 
d.  The temporary sales office shall cease to exist within 30 days after Certificates of Occupancy have been issued on 80 percent of the lots in the subdivision. 
4.1.23. - Townhouse subdivisions.Townhouse developments in which each dwelling unit is to be located on a separate lot must comply with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Number of dwelling units per building: At least three but no more than ten. 
b.  Staggered front facades: The dwelling units in a building shall be staggered, singly or in pairs, by at least three feet. 
c.  Minimum lot width: The average width for the units in a single building shall be 20 feet, with no lot being less than 18 feet wide. 
d.  Minimum lot area: The minimum area per lot for the units in a single building shall be 2,400 square feet. 
e.  Minimum building separation: 20 feet. 
4.1.24. - Utility company substation.Such use must be approved as a Special Use and must be enclosed within a woven or solid fence at least six feet high. Buffering of this use shall be provided in accordance with Article 6 - "Site Design Standards." No storage of vehicles or portable equipment will be allowed. 
4.1.25. - Veterinary or kennels. 
a.  All structures shall be located and activities conducted at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes. 
b.  No animals shall be housed or caged outside the principal building in an O-I or a C-C District. 
c.  Noncommercial kennels (facilities accommodating three or more animals) on residentially zoned property shall be located on a site of not less than one acre. 
4.1.26. - Warehouse and storage.A buffer that meets the provisions of Article 6 - "Site Design Standards", shall screen any storage area. 
4.1.27. - Wholesale trade. 
a.  Petroleum bulk stations. Any structures or buildings shall be at least 200 feet from any property line. 
b.  Unless otherwise permitted within the district: 
(1)  No outdoor storage of goods 
(2)  No fabrication of goods 
(3)  No processing of goods handled in a manner that produces liquid or solid waste or noise, odor, fumes, or dust which can be detected beyond the walls of the building in which such wholesaling activity is housed. 
4.1.28. - Single-family attached dwellings.Single-Family Attached Dwelling in which each dwelling unit is to be located on a separate lot must comply with the following minimum requirements. 
a.  Each housing unit must comply with all current requirements of the Building Codes as adopted by the governing body and, if applicable, the Georgia Industrial Building Act for single family dwellings. 
b.  Housing units must be served by public water and sewerage. 
c.  Housing units, including Type V construction, must be separated by a common party wall. The common party wall must be a parapet wall and meet the standards adopted by the governing body and, if applicable, the Georgia Industrial Building Act. 
d.  Number of dwelling units per building: two units. 
e.  Minimum road frontage: 40 feet. 
f.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
g.  Minimum lot area: minimum area per lot will be 4,250 square feet. 
h.  Minimum front and rear yard setbacks shall be required for principle structures in the zoning district. Minimum side yard setbacks shall be those required for principle structures in the zoning district, except on the side where two dwellings units are attached, which shall have a zero foot setback. 
4.1.29. - Accessory apartment.Where otherwise permitted, an accessory apartment must comply with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  The footprint of an existing primary dwelling or an existing detached garage shall not be increased or expanded to accommodate an accessory apartment. 
b.  The principle residential building located on the lot must be occupied by the owner of that property. 
c.  Only one accessory apartment shall be permitted per lot. 
d.  An accessory apartment shall preserve the character of the single-family pattern of development of the neighborhood and remain visually subordinate to the principle residential building. 
e.  The floor area of an accessory apartment shall not exceed 750 square feet or 40 percent of the floor area of the principle building, whichever is less. 
f.  One off-street parking space on the same lot shall be provided for the accessory apartment. 
4.1.30. - Limitations. 
a.  All units shall be accessed from the interior of the building. 
b.  No outdoor storage shall be permitted. 
4.1.31. - Mobile food vehicle park.Mobile food vehicle parks shall comply with the following: 
1)  Mobile food vehicle parks are permitted within both the C-C Community Commercial and H-C Heavy Commercial Districts with a special use permit. 
2)  Mobile food vehicle parks shall be subject to all guidelines and restrictions set by the Unified Land Development Code, including, but not limited to, landscaping, buffers, stormwater management, provision of paved parking on-site, and lighting. 
3)  At least three (3) parking spaces per mobile food vehicle shall be provided on-site. Drive aisles shall be designed and constructed in such a way that all mobile food vehicles and seating areas can be accessed by emergency vehicles. 
4)  Mobile food vehicle park operators are responsible for all lessee operations and ordinance compliance and are held responsible for all infractions. A mobile food vehicle park operator must be present at all times during operation. 
5)  No special events, including but not limited to, concerts, farmers markets, flea markets, or meetings/gatherings of any sort shall be held within a mobile food vehicle park. 
6)  Electrical hook-ups must be provided for each mobile food vehicle, generators shall not be allowed unless such generators operate at less than 80 decibels as measured ten (10) feet away; and at least one accessible water tap. 
7)  Permanent restroom facilities that comply with health department standards and accessibility standards as set forth in the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1992 shall be provided on-site. 
8)  Mobile food vehicle park operators shall be responsible for properly disposing of refuse, trash, and litter generated by operation of the mobile food vehicle park, as would any business; and shall not place it in any public trash container, or in any private container without proper permission. 
(Ord. No. 2015-005ULDC, § I, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2015-006ULDC, § I, 6-23-15) 
4.2. - Accessory uses and structures. 
The following specific requirements apply to each of the following accessory structures in all zoning districts where each use is otherwise permitted. 
4.2.1. - Minimum setbacks. 
a.  Accessory buildings and structures having a floor area of 144 square feet or less must be at least five feet from any property line. 
b.  Accessory buildings and structures having a floor area greater than 144 square feet must comply with the same front, side, and rear setbacks as required for principal buildings in each zoning district; except that in single-family and duplex residential districts (H-TR, L-TR, NOC, S-R, and D-R) accessory buildings must be at least five feet from any side or rear property line; unless specific setbacks are provided under Article 4. 
4.2.2. - Relationship to principal use. 
a.  No accessory use or structure shall be allowed on any lot except in relation to an existing principal use on the lot to which it is accessory. 
b.  Accessory structures shall not be permitted in a required front or side yard setback. In a residential district, no accessory structure shall be located closer to an adjacent street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
c.  Residential accessory building shall not be rented or occupied for gain. 
d.  No accessory building shall be constructed until construction of the principal building has commenced or the principal use has been established. 
e.  On a corner lot in a residential district, no accessory building shall be located closer to either street right-of-way than the principal building. 
f.  Canopies shall conform to the minimum building setback requirements for principal buildings in each zoning district. 
g.  When an accessory building is attached to the principal building by breezeway, passageway, or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is an accessory use. 
h.  No nonresidential accessory building shall be used by other than employees of the owner, lessee, or tenant of the premises. 
4.2.3. - Customary accessory uses to a dwelling.Each of the following uses is considered to be a customary accessory use to a dwelling and may be situated on the same lot with the principal use to which it serves as an accessory. 
Customary home occupations and associated uses, including hobbies and retirement avocations, require a Special Use Permit only if within a residence or an additional structure is required on the property. Any customary accessory residential use is allowed that does not conflict with the general appearance of a residential community, with specific restrictions as follows: 
a.  Private garage not to exceed the following storage capacities; one or two-family dwelling, four automobiles; multi-family dwelling, two automobiles per dwelling unit; group dwelling, one and one-half; automobiles per sleeping room. 
b.  Outdoor parking area for motor vehicles, provided that such space does not exceed the maximum respective storage capacities listed in (a) above; and provided that such space shall not be used for more than one commercial vehicle per family residing on the premises. 
c.  Detached Home Office and/or Studio for exclusive use by the residence owner or immediate family members as occupants of the residence, provided such space is incorporated within a detached garage, guest quarters, or storage facility and can meet all rear and side setback requirements. 
d.  Shed or tool room for the storage of equipment used in grounds or building maintenance. 
e.  Children's playhouse and play equipment. 
f.  Noncommercial greenhouse. 
g.  Quarters for the keeping of pets owned by occupants for non-commercial purposes provided that such use does not generate a nuisance to adjoining properties. 
h.  Private recreational facility, such as a swimming pool and bathhouse or cabana, tennis court, deck or patio. These uses shall conform to the minimum setback requirements for principal buildings in each zoning district. Swimming pools shall be permitted only upon written approval of the health department to indicate compliance with applicable health department regulations. Pools must be enclosed by a six-foot fence of wall with a locking gate. 
i.  Accessory uses in an apartment development may include laundry facilities for the convenience of residents which are housed in a primary use structure. 
j.  Structures designed and used for purposes of shelter in the event of man-made or natural catastrophes. 
k.  Guest houses. Where otherwise permitted, a guesthouse must comply with the following: 
(1)  The guesthouse must be an accessory use to a single-family detached dwelling already existing on the lot. 
(2)  The guesthouse must meet or exceed the Standards of this Code for class A Single-Family Dwellings. 
(3)  A guesthouse shall be permitted only on a lot having at least 20,000 square feet in area. 
(4)  The guesthouse must be placed to the rear of the main house at least 20 feet away. 
(5)  No more than one guesthouse may be located on any lot. 
(6)  The building floor area of the guesthouse may not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the main house. 
l.  Residential home office. 
(1)  Permitted activities. A residential home office shall be limited to the personal conduct of a business within one's place of residence. There shall be no exterior indication that the business activity is taking place, including signage. This provision is intended to allow work to be conducted at home by individuals employed by an off-site employer. 
These provisions do not apply to dwellings that are located on properties where agricultural activities are the principal use. 
(2)  Limitations on Size and Location: 
(a)  Not more than 25 percent, not to exceed 300 square feet of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used for all of the activities devoted to the home office. 
(b)  The use shall be carried on wholly within the principal building. The attachment of an accessory building by a breezeway, roof, or similar structure shall not be deemed as sufficient for the accessory building to be considered as a portion of the primary building. 
(c)  There shall be no activity or display associated with the home office outside of any building or structure. 
(d)  There shall be no alteration of the residential character of the building or premises. 
(3)  Activity Controls. 
(a)  Sales. There shall be no exchange of merchandise of any kind on the premises. 
(b)  Transfer of goods. There shall be no goods, products or commodities received on the premises. 
(c)  Personal services. There shall be no activities on the premises that are associated with personal service occupations such as barber shop, beauty shop, hairdresser or similar activities. 
(d)  Employees. There shall be no associates or employees on the premises other than other members of the family who reside on the premises. 
(e)  Outsiders and nonresidents on the premises. There shall be no nonresident persons on the premises in conjunction with the home office. 
(4)  Parking. 
(a)  There shall be no parking spaces provided or designated specifically for the home office other than as is required for the residence. 
(b)  No equipment or business vehicles may be stored or parked on the premises except that one business vehicle (the carrying capacity of which shall not exceed one and one-half tons) used exclusively by the resident may be parked in a carport, garage, or rear or side yard. 
(5)  Signs. Signage shall comply with the sign standards for residential districts contained in Article 5 - "Sign Regulations." 
m.  Residential business. Residential businesses shall meet the requirements of "home office" above with the following additional exceptions. 
(1)  Permitted Activities. 
(a)  Approved activities may be engaged in person by who reside on the premises of the residential business and who are appropriately qualified and licensed, including business licenses are required: 
1)  Artistic. This group shall include activities such as teaching, creation and production by professional artists, sculptors, craftspeople (craft-makers), musicians, writers, and others who produce work on the premises for individual purchases, as differentiated from mass production or manufacturing. 
2)  Business. This includes commercial trade activities such as those conducted by a manufacturer's representative or telephone salesperson, but not involving the delivery of goods or services directly to customers on the premises. 
(2)  Limitations on Size and Location. 
(a)  Not more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used for all of the activities devoted to the residential business. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and structures may be used for the residential business, but in no case shall the total area of the accessory structure devoted to such use be greater than 500 square feet. 
(c)  If parts of the dwelling unit and an accessory structure are devoted to a residential business, no more than 1,000 square feet of combined gross floor area shall be used for such activity, including no more than 30 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit. 
(3)  Activity Controls. There shall be no exchange of merchandise of any kind on the premises except for those products produced on the premises as a result of the residential business. 
(4)  Personal services. There shall be no activities on the premises that are associated with personal service occupations such as a barber shop, beauty shop, hairdresser or similar activities unless specifically permitted as part of the Special Use approval. 
(5)  Outsiders and nonresidents on the premises. There shall not be more than two nonresident persons on the premises at the same time in conjunction with the residential business whether they are students, clients, or customers. 
(6)  Hours of Operation. The Residential Business shall not be operated between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day except Sunday. On Sunday, the Residential Business shall not open before 1:00 p.m. or after 7:00 p.m. 
(7)  Parking. 
(a)  One off-street paved parking space for each 150 square feet of floor area devoted to the home occupation shall be provided in addition to the required parking for the residential use of the building. 
n.  Personal Horse Stable. A personal horse stable may be permitted as an accessory use to a residence provided that at least one acre of lot area is provided for each horse stabled on the property. 
4.2.4. - Automobile, truck and trailer lease and rentals. 
a.  As an accessory use to an automobile service station: 
(1)  The lot for the primary use must be at least 20,000 square feet. 
(2)  The use shall not occupy more than ten percent of the lot area. 
(3)  Parking areas shall be located only in portions of the lot where off-street parking is permitted. This area shall not occupy spaces set aside for required off-street parking or use by cars awaiting service. 
4.2.5. - Fences and free-standing walls. 
a.  District use, materials and height limitations. 
(1)  Agricultural-Residential, Office, Commercial, Multifamily, and Industrial Districts. 
(a)  No fence or free-standing wall may exceed eight feet in height, unless approved by the Planning Commission to adequately shield objectionable materials or activities. 
(b)  Fences or free-standing walls occupying the front yard may not exceed three feet in height unless constructed parallel to the building, with the exception of agricultural and heavy industrial uses. 
(c)  Security wire may only be used in heavy commercial and industrial districts. However, barbed wire fences are permitted on properties where an agricultural activity is the principal use. 
(2)  In the Single-Family Residential zoning districts, the following shall apply: 
(a)  A fence or free-standing wall in any yard adjacent to a street may not exceed 40 inches in height. 
(b)  A fence or free-standing wall in any side or rear yard may not exceed six feet in height. 
b.  Setback limitations. There shall be no minimum setback for fences or free-standing walls, provided that any fence or free-standing wall shall not obstruct visibility at street intersections and driveway accesses. 
(Ord. No. 2010-005ULDC, § 1, 7-27-10) 
4.2.6. - Manufacturing and fabrication uses. 
a.  Must be approved as an accessory use to a retail use permitted by right. 
b.  Such manufacturing or fabrication activity may not be considered a heavy industrial use. 
c.  May occupy no more than 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
d.  All products made on the premises must be sold on the premises as a retail activity. 
4.2.7. - Night watchman residence. 
a.  A residence for a night watchman, approved as a Special Use accessory to a business or industrial operation, may be any of the following: 
(1)  Site-built single-family detached dwelling or manufactured home. 
(2)  Located within a commercial or industrial structure. 
b.  Night watchman residences shall conform to the minimum setback requirements for principal buildings in each zoning district. 
4.2.8. - Outdoor display areas. 
a.  The following merchandise or goods may be located in outdoor display areas on a permanent basis if for sale, lease, or rent (where the use is otherwise permitted): 
(1)  Motorized vehicles that are in good running condition free from exterior damage or substantial wear. 
(2)  Power boats and sailboats. 
(3)  Manufactured homes and utility buildings. 
(4)  Plant nursery items. 
(5)  Light building materials such as lumber, patio pavers, and decorative stone; yard furniture such as benches, swings, and bird baths; yard maintenance materials such as fertilizer, mulch straw, and seed. 
b.  All other outdoor display of merchandise or goods shall be conducted on a temporary basis associated with special sales promotions. Such display shall be for a period not to exceed two weeks, and shall not occur more often than three times per year. 
c.  Any area outside of a building where merchandize or goods are located but which is permanently screened by a fence or free-standing wall at least six feet in height shall not be considered an outdoor display area. 
4.2.9. - Outdoor storage.Outdoor storage, where the use is otherwise permitted, is limited as follows: 
a.  In the Community Commercial, Heavy Commercial, and Light Industrial zoning districts, outside storage of materials is only permitted in the rear yard and shall be screened from view by an opaque fence or free-standing wall no less than eight feet in height. 
b.  In the Heavy Industrial District, any storage use operated as a principal use or accessory use on a property shall be contained entirely within a building or shall be screened from view by an opaque fence or free-standing wall no less than eight feet in height. 
c.  Rear yard setbacks must be a minimum of five feet for any storage building or structure. 
4.2.10. - Private use airport or heliport.As an accessory use approved as a Special Use, a private use airport or heliport shall meet the following minimum standards: 
a.  The development of a private use airport or heliport shall be in accordance with the guidelines specified in the Federal Aviation Administration. 
b.  Private use heliports shall, as a minimum, have a takeoff and landing area one and one-half time the overall length of the largest helicopter expected to use the facility. The surface of the area shall be grassed, paved, or treated as may be required to minimize dust or blowing debris. 
c.  The owner of a private use airport or heliport shall erect a safety barrier around the peripheral area surrounding the takeoff and landing area. The safety barrier shall be a fence, wall, or hedge no less than four feet in height and fully enclosed with a self-locking gate. 
4.2.11. - Retail uses in office building.An office building may contain retail stores, so long as they occupy no more than 25 percent of the total ground floor area of the building. 
4.2.12. - Responsibility for notification on special conditions.All conditions or special requirements placed on the approval of a Special Use Permit or Conditional Use, including special exceptions for medical and/or other issues associated with granting a hardship exception, must be fully documented in the minutes of the approving body (City or County Commission or Board of Adjustments), and a certified copy transmitted to the Rome/Floyd County Building Inspections Department for enforcement. Such items shall be recorded, flagged, and monitored for enforcement of specific deadlines and/or permitted allowances by the Zoning Enforcement Inspector. 
4.2.13. - Small wind energy systems. 
a.  Small wind energy systems shall be permitted as an accessory use provided the system has a rated capacity of ten kilowatts or less in residential districts, and 60 kilowatts or less in agricultural, commercial, or industrial districts. 

b.  System height: The total system height shall not exceed 65 feet, except on property of over five acres located in agricultural, commercial or industrial zones in which the total system height shall not exceed 150 feet. (System height: The vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind turbine blade when it is at its highest point.) 
c.  Setback: No part of the system may be closer then one and one-half times the total system height to any property boundary. 
d.  Sound level: The noise level from the small wind energy system shall not exceed 55 decibels using the A scale (dBA), as measured at the site property line. 
e.  Code compliance: The small wind energy system shall comply with all applicable sections of the Building Code and Federal Aviation Administration regulations. 
f.  Clearance of blade: No portion of the small wind energy system's blade sweep shall extend within 20 feet of the ground or over parking areas, driveways, or sidewalks. 
g.  Abandonment: Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall physically remove the small wind energy system within 90 days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. This period may be extended at the request of the owner and at the discretion of the Chief Building Official. 
h.  The small wind energy systems shall not be located within 200 feet of a federal, state, or locally designated historic district. 
(Ord. No. 2009-003ULDC, § I, 1-13-09; Ord. of 7-27-10) 
4.2.14. - Production of nonpotable ethanol from agricultural products. 
a.  Production of limited quantities of fuel grade ethanol shall be permitted in conjunction with an established, conforming agricultural operation in the unincorporated areas of Floyd County and by right in the Agriculture Residential (A-R) zoning districts and by Special Use Permit in the Suburban Residential (S-R) zoning districts. 
b.  Construction and operation of equipment and storage structures shall meet all applicable local, state, and federal standards including but not limited to, fire codes, air quality standards, and water quality standards; and all applicable permits and licenses shall be obtained, including building, electrical and plumbing permits. The owner/operator shall provide proof of such compliance. 
c.  Ethanol fuel must be made from corn or other non-animal products, and in addition, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Production shall be limited to 10,000 gallons per year. 
(2)  Production and storage equipment shall be within a containment facility capable of holding the contents of the production and storage equipment. 
(3)  Production and storage equipment shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any property line. 
(4)  Production and storage equipment shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any structures inhabited by humans or primarily used for human activity. 
(5)  There shall be no retail sales of ethanol on the premises. 
(6)  All ethanol shipped from the premises shall be rendered unfit for human consumption. 
(7)  Best practices for operation and maintenance shall be utilized to ensure that noise, odors, fumes, or lighting shall not create a nuisance. 
d.  An application for a Special Use Permit shall include the following: 
(1)  A map of the property showing existing and proposed structures with setbacks and dimensions. 
(2)  Engineering specifications for the ethanol production and storage facilities. 
(3)  A statement concerning the quantity of ethanol to be produced on the premises, used on the premises, and shipped from the premises, measured in gallons per year. 
(4)  A safety plan for construction, operation, maintenance and transport that local emergency service providers have reviewed and approved. 
(5)  A statement detailing the proposed disposal of byproducts. 
(Ord. No. 2012-002ULDC, 5-8-12) 
4.2.15. - Mold poured concrete products. 
In the CC, HC, and LI districts, mold pouring of concrete products, including but not limited to, storm shelters, septic tanks, burial vaults, and lawn ornaments shall be allowed if all operations including but not limited to, mixing, pouring, drying, painting, and display are carried out within a building. 
(Ord. No. 2012-003ULDC, 5-22-12) 
4.2.16. - Distillery, winery or brewery. 
Production of limited quantities of alcohol for human consumption shall be permitted by special use permit in the AR District in conjunction with an established, conforming agricultural operation. Production of beer/malt beverages only shall be permitted as an accessory use in the CC, CBC, or UMU Districts. 
Approval shall be based on submittal of a site plan detailing building location, access, and parking. All applicable standards of the Unified Land Development Code will apply, except as noted in this article, including parking lot design, vehicle access design, signage, buffers and landscaping. The plan shall include a statement detailing waste product disposal, and a safety plan for construction, operating, maintenance and transport that has been approved by both the fire marshal and the building official. 
Construction and operation of equipment and storage structures shall meet all applicable local, state and federal standards, including but not limited to, fire codes, air quality standards, and water quality standards; and all applicable permits and licenses shall be obtained, including building, electrical and plumbing permits. The owner/operator shall provide proof of such compliance. 
The owner/operator shall also provide proof of compliance with the rules of the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
Best practices for operation and maintenance shall be utilized to ensure that traffic, noise, odors, fumes, or lighting shall not create a nuisance for adjacent and nearby property owners. 
The following standards shall also apply to a special use permit for a farm distillery or winery in the AR District: 
a.  Production and storage equipment shall be within a containment facility capable of holding the contents of the production and storage equipment. 
b.  Production and storage equipment shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any property line or from any structures inhabited by humans or primarily used for human activity. 
(Ord. No. 2013-002ULDC, § IV, 3-26-13) 
4.2.17. - Solar farms and solar panel arrays. 
Solar farms shall be setback from the property line a minimum of 50 feet in every zoning district where allowed by right or by special use permit. 
Solar panel arrays shall be setback from the property line the same distance as is required for a primary building/use in each zoning district where they are allowed. All panels shall be constructed of non-reflective materials, or shall be treated with an anti-reflective material. Solar panel arrays shall be encircled by a security fence or wall a minimum of six feet tall. Screening vegetation shall be provided outside the security fence meeting the standards of article 6.16.3. 
Solar panel installations shall be setback from the property line the same distance as is required for a primary building/use in each zoning district where they are allowed. Solar panel installations mounted on a building or structure shall be on the side or rear of the property, facing away from a public right-of-way. Solar panel installations shall be positioned and/or screened in such a way that glare does not affect adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003ULDC, § III, 8-12-14; Ord. No. 2014-004ULDC, 9-23-14) 
4.3. - Highly restricted. 
The following uses are permitted by special use permit and only within heavy industry districts. 
4.3.1. - Manufacturing that produces: 
a.  Caustic or corrosive acids. 
b.  Chlorine or other noxious gases. 
c.  Explosives. 
d.  Fertilizer or glue. 
e.  Products involving hair or fur. 
4.3.2. - Other prohibited industrial uses: 
a.  Tanning or finishing of leather of other hides, except taxidermy. 
b.  The disposal of hazardous waste. 
c.  Petroleum refining. 
d.  Processing of sauerkraut, vinegar, or yeast. 
e.  Rendering or refining of fats and oils. 
f.  Slaughterhouse. 
g.  Stockyard or animal feeding pens. 
ARTICLE 5. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

5.1. - Purpose. 
5.1.1. - Purpose of Article 5. 
This Article sets out the standards that control the number, type, and placement of signs on an individual property or building. In addition to the general purposes of this Ordinance, the purpose of these sign regulations are as follows: 
a.  To maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and support economic development of the city and county; 
b.  To maintain and improve pedestrian and traffic safety; 
c.  To minimize potential adverse effects of signs on nearby property; and, 
d.  To encourage the proper use of signs as a means of effective communication. 
5.2. - Applicability. 
5.2.1. - Regulated signs. 
a.  The regulations and requirements of this Article apply to all signs that are or are intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way or that are intended to be viewed from outdoor areas of public property. 
b.  Such signs are allowed only in conformance with these sign regulations, or as otherwise provided for nonconforming signs under Article 1 of this Ordinance. 
c.  All signs except billboards, real estate and real estate directional signs shall be considered as accessory uses and may be located only on properties where a principal use exists or is under construction. 
5.2.2. - Prohibitions. 
a.  No sign shall be erected or maintained where, by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, or color, it may obstruct the view of oncoming vehicles or impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or device. 
b.  No sign shall contain or be an imitation of an official government traffic control sign, signal, or emergency vehicle device. 
c.  No part of any sign shall be located in, over, or project into a public right-of-way except for awning signs, canopy signs, or projecting signs in the C-B-C zoning district. 
d.  No sign shall be erected, located, or maintained in such a manner as to interfere with safe and free ingress and egress of any door, emergency exit, driveway, street, or roadway. 
e.  No sign shall interfere with such utilities as water mains and hydrants, sanitary sewerage, gas, electricity, and communications equipment or lines, nor interfere with natural or manmade storm water drainage facilities. 
f.  No building sign shall extend above the top edge of the parapet or eaves of a flat or shed roof; the ridge line of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof; or the deck line of a mansard roof. 
g.  No sign shall be painted on or attached to a tree, utility pole, rock, or other natural feature. 
h.  An inflatable sign shall be allowed only in association with a special event allowed under the provisions of Article 3. 
i.  Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are not allowed: 
(1)  Animated Sign: A sign with action, motion, changing colors, flashing lights, or moving characters. Such signs may require electrical energy, but shall also include wind-activated devices including, but not limited to, spinners, aerial devices, and other attention-getting devices. This prohibition does not include rotating signs that revolve no faster than five revolutions per minute or electronic message boards that change messages no more often that 12 times per minute. 
(2)  Derelict Sign: A sign that is dilapidated or in such condition as to create a hazard or nuisance, or to be unsafe or fail to comply with the Building or Electrical codes. 
(3)  Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or similar material, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. The term "pennant" shall not include a "banner" or an "official or personal flag" as regulated herein. 
(4)  Portable Sign: A sign designed to be transported or easily relocated and not attached to the ground, such as: 
(a)  A sign designed to be temporarily placed upon the ground and not otherwise affixed to it. 
(b)  A sign mounted on a trailer, with or without wheels. 
(c)  An A-frame or sandwich board sign. 
(d)  A sign mounted or painted upon a parked vehicle that is positioned for the primary purpose of acting as a sign exposed to the public and is not in use in the ordinary course of carrying out its transportation function. 
(e)  A sign mounted or painted upon a vehicle that is operated on public streets for the primary purpose of presenting a message or symbol offering or supporting the sale, rent, lease, loan, or other availability of any property, product, or service, and is not otherwise in use in the normal course of transporting people, merchandise, or freight. 
(5)  Sound or Smoke Emitting Sign: A sign that emits or utilizes in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing; or a sign that emits smoke, vapor, particles, or odors. 
(6)  Streamer: A long narrow banner, pennant, or strip of fabric or other material. 
5.2.3. - Exemptions. 
a.  Window displays of goods available on site are not considered to be signs and are exempt from these sign regulations. 
b.  Brand names or logos on products, product containers, or dispensers that are an integral part of the product or the product's packaging are not considered to be signs and are exempt from these sign regulations. 
c.  A building design, color, or motif that is associated with a particular establishment or organization but conveys no commercial message is not considered to be a sign and is exempt from these sign regulations. 
d.  Exempt Signs. Each of the following types of signs are allowed in any zoning district and are exempt from the restrictions imposed by this Article: 
(1)  Official Signs: Signs placed by a governmental body, governmental agency, or public authority, such as traffic signs, signals, or regulatory devices or warnings; official emblems, public notices, or official instruments; signs of historical interest; signs designating special events or areas of architectural or historic significance or gateways; or other similar signs or devices. Such signs are authorized within all rights-of ways or other properties controlled by such governmental body, agency, or authority. 
(2)  Warning Signs: Signs and notices on private property that warn of dangerous conditions or restricted access to property or buildings. Includes "No Trespassing" signs, "No Hunting" notices and pennants, streamers, or other fluttering material used to increase the visibility of a wire or cable. 
(3)  Property Address Sign: A sign limited in content to the street name and address number of the building or property to which it is affixed, provided that such sign consist of lettering no larger than four inches in height on a building or two inches in height on a mail box. 
(4)  Holiday Decorations: Displays erected on a seasonal basis in observance of religious, national, or state holidays, which are not intended to be permanent in nature and that contain no advertising material. 
(5)  Agricultural Production Process Sign: A sign placed in conjunction with an agricultural activity on a property that functions solely to assist in the conduct of the activity by marking the location of agricultural products, providing a warning to employees, or indicating an activity related to the production process. Examples include signs that mark row crops, designate loading areas, indicate smoking prohibitions, or designate the content of storage structures. 
5.3. - General requirements. 
5.3.1. - Requirements applying to signs in all zoning districts. 
a.  Conformance to other codes. 
(1)  A permit shall be obtained from the Building Inspections Department prior to installation or placement of any free-standing sign having a sign structure area greater than 15 square feet or any building sign having a sign face area greater than six square feet. All signs for which a building permit is required shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with all Building and Electrical Code requirements. 
(2)  Plans required for issuance of a building permit for a sign shall be certified as to conformance with all structural and wind-load resistive standards of the Building Code by a structural engineer registered in the State of Georgia, or be prepared using standard drawings prepared by a structural engineer or other qualified professional meeting or exceeding all requirements of the Building Code. These provisions are excluded from any sign printed or affixed to a wall and/or pylon signs of less than 32 square feet or less than six feet tall. 
(3)  All signs involving internal lights or other electrical devices or circuits shall display a label certifying it as being approved by the Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc. No electric sign may be installed that is not approved by the Underwriter's Laboratory, Inc. Each sign manufacturer's UL number and the UL numbers of each individual sign must be provided as part of the sign permit application to prevent non-UL signs from being installed. 
(4)  All electrical service to a sign shall be in compliance with the Electrical Code. 
(5)  Clearance from all electrical power lines shall be incompliance with the requirements of the Electrical Code. 
b.  Sign maintenance. All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in good repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, shall be given a protective coating as necessary to maintain a clean appearance and safe condition. 
c.  Principal freestanding signs. 
(1)  Each principal freestanding sign shall be located at least 75 feet from any other freestanding sign on an adjacent property on the same side of the street. This distance may be reduced upon approval by the Chief Building Official if it cannot be met due to the location of existing signs on separate but adjoining lots. Such reduction shall be the minimum required in order to maintain the greatest separation possible from such existing signs. 
(2)  Principal freestanding sign shall be located at least 37 feet from a side lot line, or one-half the width of the lot frontage, whichever is less, except on intersecting corners of corner lots where the setback must be ten feet from each side. A site drawing must be prepared and provided to the Building Inspection Department when applying for a permit. 
(3)  A minimum of 25 square feet of landscape area, exclusive of the sign structure, shall be located at the base of each principal freestanding sign. The landscaping shall consist of shrubs, ground covers, or other plants appropriate to the setting of the sign. This requirement is the responsibility of the property owner or tenant, not the sign company. 
(4)  There shall be a minimum of ten feet between any street right-of-way line and the nearest edge of a principal freestanding sign. Monument signs over 36 inches in height must be set at least 20 feet from any street right-of-way. 
d.  Projecting, awning, and canopy signs. 
(1)  Over Private Property: Projecting, awning, and canopy signs shall provide at least eight feet of clearance above the ground when erected over pedestrian walkways on private property and 17 feet of clearance when erected over driveways or other areas used for vehicles. Suspended canopy signs shall be at lest four inches from the building face and at least eight inches from the edge of the canopy. 

(2)  Over Public Property: Projecting, awning, and canopy signs that project over public property, such as a sidewalk along a public street, shall maintain a clear height of nine feet and shall extend no closer than 18 inches to the back of the curb. 
(3)  Projecting and canopy signs shall be limited to no more than one per tenant on a property, and each tenant shall have no more than one projecting sign or canopy sign. 
(4)  These requirements exclude overhanging "Clearance Signs" over private drives used to warn drivers of low clearances under canopies, covered delivery/pickup area, etc. 
e.  Banners. Banners shall be allowed only as wall or window signage and shall be placed flush upon the wall or window to which it is attached. Banners shall not be hung as canopy signs, flown as flags, or used as any other form of sign. In addition to any other signage allowed, one banner per street frontage is allowed. Area of banner shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
f.  Conformance with state law. Any sign within 660 feet of a State or U.S. numbered highway that advertises or offers anything for sale or lease that is not located on the property where the sign is located must be zoned for commercial or industrial use, and must conform to the regulations of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
For sign clearances under conductors or high tension lines of over 600 volts, see the National Electric Safety Code, ANSI C2-1996, Part 2, Safety Rules for Overhead Lines, Article 234B1 through 234B3 which must be met. 
g.  Enforcement by permit number. With each permit issued under this Article, the Building Inspection Department shall issue a sticker bearing the same number(s) of the permit with which is authorized (in One Inch Numbers), to be affixed in the corner area of the sign nearest the street, so as to be easily seen. 
The absence of a proper sticker on a sign erected subsequent to the passage or adoption of this code, shall be prima facie evidence that the sign has been erected in violation of the provisions of this ordinance. 
5.3.2. - Computation of sign area.In order to determine compliance with the maximum allowable sign areas permitted under this Article, the area of a sign shall be considered the area of the sign structure unless otherwise stated. The area of a sign structure and a sign face shall be computed as follows: 
a.  The area of a sign face shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of a sign face, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign face module, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
b.  The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the structure, supports or uprights on which the sign face is placed on any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those portions contained within the rectangle that delimits the sign face or a sign face module. 

c.  For any sign on which the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are routinely changed or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 

d.  The area of a sign structure shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of the surface of a sign whereon the sign face or sign face modules may be placed, including all portions of a sign structure that provide a background for the sign face but are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
e.  Any open space contained within the limits of the rectangle delimiting the sign face, sign face module, or sign structure shall be included in the computation of such sign face, sign face module, or sign structure. 
f.  For multi-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel (back-to-back), or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 45 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs, the area of the sign shall be the total area on all sides that can be viewed at one time from any angle. 
5.4. - Permitted signage. 
5.4.1. - By zoning district.The following table represents the maximum number, height, and other restrictions relating to specific signage that are permitted by right in each zoning district. 
a.  The "Principal Freestanding Sign-One Use on Property" category applies to a lot where there is only one single or two-family dwelling, one multifamily complex, or one business occupant. 
b.  The "Principal Freestanding Sign-Two or More Uses on Property" category applies to a single office, commercial or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more principal businesses that are separately-owned and have no corporate relationship. 
c.  For building signs in the office, commercial, and industrial zoning districts, the following shall apply: 
(1)  For single-occupant buildings, the total sign face area for building signs on each side of a building shall be calculated on the basis of the horizontal length of the wall along that side of the building. Each side of the building shall be calculated separately. 
(2)  In addition to the total sign face as calculated from the following table, one more square foot of sign face area shall be allowed on a wall facing a public street for each foot that the building is set back beyond the minimum principal building front setback required from that street. 
(3)  For multi-tenant nonresidential developments (such as shopping centers), the total sign face area per wall for each tenant shall be distributed on the basis of the horizontal length of the wall along each tenant's occupied space. The maximum sign face area on a particular wall for each tenant shall be calculated separately. 
d.  Project entrance signs are limited to freestanding monument signs. 
e.  For signs in the PD Planned Development District, each development shall conform to the sign regulations established as part of the zoning approval for the Planned Development. If no such regulations exist, each portion of a Planned Development shall conform to the regulations of this Article for the zoning district most comparable to that portion of the Planned Development. 
Table 5-1. Permitted Signs—By Zoning District or Special Use 1 
Table 5.1a Principal Freestanding Sign—One Use on Property 

 
Note: 
1  See text for regulations relating to the P-D Planned Development District. 
2  If property has over 200' of street frontage it can have 1 sign per 200' max 3. 
Table 5.1b Principal Freestanding Sign—Two or More Uses on Property 

 
NOTE: Height of sign means, in the case of Freestanding signs, the distance in vertical feet measured from the level of an adjacent street centerline to the highest point of the sign structure. The sign measured at its base shall not extend over 40 ft. in height above the centerline of any adjacent road. 
Table 5.1c Building Sign: Wall signs and awning, canopy, projecting, incidental, roof and window signs, etc. 22 

 
Note: Street frontage is defined in this Code as being a street "from which access may be directly gained." 
21  See text for regulations to the P-D Development District. 
22  All building signs attached to a particular wall and its windows, doors, awnings, canopies, or roof, includng signs that project from the wall, shall collectively not exceed the total square footage of the sign face area allowed for the particular wall. 
(Ord. No. 2011-003ULDC, § I, 5-24-11 
5.4.2. - Additional signage.In addition to the specific signs permitted in each district, the following signs shall be allowed in all zoning districts (or in the zoning districts as indicated) under the conditions noted for each type of sign. 
a.  Project entrance signs. Two monument signs may be located at each entrance into a residential subdivision or into an office or industrial park consisting of two or more buildings. Each project entrance sign shall not exceed: 
(1)  32 square feet in sign face surface area. 
(2)  96 square feet in sign structure area. 
(3)  Two and one-half feet in height if located within a sight visibility triangle (see Section 6.8) or eight feet in height otherwise. 
b.  Miscellaneous freestanding signs. Additional freestanding signs are permitted for any multifamily, office, commercial, or industrial use if each sign complies with all of the following: 
(1)  Within the minimum front yard setback for principal buildings required for the zoning district, miscellaneous signs may be located at entrance or exit driveways to the property. There shall be no more than two such signs per driveway and each such sign shall not exceed eight square feet in sign area nor be more than two and one-half feet in height. 
(2)  Miscellaneous signs located farther from the street than the minimum required front yard setback for principal buildings shall be allowed as follows:: 
(a)  One miscellaneous sign may be located on the property for each principal building on the lot. Each such sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area nor be more than eight feet in height. 
(b)  An unlimited number of miscellaneous freestanding signs may be located on a property developed for multifamily or nonresidential use, provided that each such sign is no more than six square feet in sign area, nor more than four feet in height. 
c.  Temporary signs. 
(1)  Political signs. 
(a)  Political signs may be placed as of the date of qualification of candidates, and shall be removed upon the final results. Each political candidate or ballot question shall be considered a separate temporary special event. 
(b)  Political signs shall not exceed the following: 
Table 5-2  Political Sign Maximums 

 
(2)  Construction signs. One construction sign per street frontage, not to exceed 64 square feet (2 4' x 8' boards) in area, may be placed upon the commencement of construction and shall be removed upon issuance of a final certificate of occupancy for the construction or development project to which it refers. 
(3)  Other temporary special event signs. An additional sign other than a political sign or construction sign may be located on a property related to a temporary special event as defined and permitted in this Code, subject to the following: 
(a)  One temporary sign per street frontage announcing a temporary special event may be placed for a period of no more than 30 consecutive days. Temporary signs for the same business or organization shall not be placed on a property more often than three times per calendar year, nor within 30 days of when the last temporary sign was placed on the property. 
(b)  Each temporary special event sign shall not exceed six square feet in a residential zoning district or 32 square feet in a nonresidential zoning district. 
(c)  Temporary special event signs shall be limited to one such sign per street frontage per temporary event. 
(4)  Inflatable Signs. In addition to the temporary signs allowed under this Section, a temporary special event may utilize one inflatable sign on the property of the event under the following conditions: 
(a)  The inflatable sign may be displayed only during the 30-day period that the other temporary signage is allowed on the property. 
(b)  The inflatable sign shall be installed in accordance with all requirements of the Building Code. 
(c)  If affixed to a roof, the inflatable sign may extend above the roof line of the building. 
(d)  Whether affixed to a roof or freestanding, the inflatable sign shall comply with the maximum sign face and sign structure area associated with the principal freestanding sign otherwise permitted on the property (see Table 5-1). 
(5)  Real estate signs. One real estate sign per property or premises may be placed on a site until the property or premises to which the sign refers is sold or leased. Such signs shall be limited as follows: 
(a)  Residential districts: Six square feet in area, five feet high. 
(b)  Multifamily and nonresidential districts: 32 square feet in area, six feet high. 
(6)  Real estate directional signs. A sign that conveys directions to a specific property for sale or lease, such as a real estate development, residential subdivision, apartment or condominium project, home for sale, apartment for rent, or any other real estate property for sale or lease, is permitted if it complies with all of the following: 
(a)  Real estate directional signs may not contain any commercial message or advertisement, but may contain the name, trademark or trade symbol of the development or property to which directions are being provided and/or the real estate company offering the property. 
(b)  Real estate directional signs are allowed in all zoning districts except within 660 feet of the right-of-way of any state highway where real estate directional signs are only allowed on properties zoned for commercial or industrial use. 
(c)  Real estate directional signs shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
(d)  Real estate directional signs shall not exceed a maximum size of four square feet. 
(e)  Real estate directional signs shall not be illuminated. 
(f)  Real estate directional signs shall be removed within five days of the consummation of the sale or lease of the property to which directions are provided. 
(g)  There may be no more than four real estate directional signs providing directions to any one residential, commercial, or industrial development; and no more than two signs providing directions to any one lot. 
d.  Semi-public use directional signs. A sign that conveys directions to a specific use owned or operated by a non-profit, religious or eleemosynary institution for the purpose of providing educational, cultural, recreational, religious, or social services to the general public, is permitted if it complies with all of the following: 
(1)  Semi-public use directional signs shall be erected and maintained only with the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is erected. 
(2)  Semi-public use directional signs shall not exceed a maximum size of six square feet in area and six feet in height. 
(3)  Semi-public use directional signs shall not be lighted. 
(4)  There shall be no more than four semi-public use directional signs providing directions to any one semi-public use. 
(5)  Semi-public use directional signs shall be erected on supports provided specifically for that purpose and no more than one such support may be erected at any street corner. 
e.  Billboards. A billboard is a freestanding sign that exceeds the maximum sign face or sign structure area permitted by right on a property under the provisions of Section 5-4. A billboard may be allowed individually as a principal use or as an additional freestanding sign on a property under the following conditions: 
(1)  The sign must be located in an A-R, C-C, H-C, L-I, or H-I zoning district within 660 feet of a State or U.S. numbered highway, and shall comply with all requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  The area of the sign face shall not exceed 400 square feet, nor shall the sign exceed 40 feet in height. 
(3)  All portions of the billboard shall be located on a lot in accordance with the principal building setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(4)  The billboard shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any other billboard or within 200 feet of a zoning district where billboards are not allowed. Distance measurements shall be made horizontally in all directions from the nearest edge of the sign structure. 
(5)  The billboard may not be located on or project over any building. 
(6)  The billboard shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any major river corridor or tributary river corridor established under Section 6 of this Code. Such distance shall be measured from the top of the stream bank. 
5.4.3. - Uniform sign plan required. 
a.  A uniform sign plan is required for any multi-tenant nonresidential development, such as a shopping center, before any signs for the development or the development's tenants may be erected on the property. 
b.  The uniform plan shall govern the placement and design of all signs within the development as to their location, materials, and size. 
c.  A uniform sign plan shall be submitted and approved as follows: 
(1)  The uniform sign plan shall consist of such drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials, and size of all and every sign to be placed as freestanding and building signs within the development. 
(2)  The uniform sign plan is to be submitted to the Building Inspection Department. The uniform sign plan shall be approved upon a finding by the Chief Building Inspector that: 
(a)  The plan provides that signs of a similar type and function within the development have a consistency of size and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
(b)  The signs proposed in the uniform sign plan comply with the requirements of this Article, such as number, location, and size restrictions. 
d.  All tenants of the development, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser, or other occupant, shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. 
5.4.4. - Modifications to sign restrictions. 
a.  Modifications to the restrictions on signage established by a uniform sign plan for a specific property or development may be requested for administrative approval. 
b.  Such requests shall be submitted to the Building Inspections Department for review and handling. 
c.  A request for modification shall be supported by a revised uniform sign plan. 
(1)  The revised uniform sign plan shall consist of such drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all and every sign to be placed as freestanding and building signs within the development. 
(2)  The revised uniform sign plan shall establish design standards such that signs of a similar type and function within the development shall have a consistency of size, letter style, color scheme, and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
d.  Denial. If the Building Inspections Department denies the requested modification, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments as a special exception. See Section 2.11.4. 
e.  Approval. Following approval by the Chief Building Inspector or the Board of Appeals and Adjustments, all tenants of the property or development, whether an owner, lessee, sub-tenant, purchaser, or other occupant, shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. 
5.5. - Removal of abandoned and illegal signs. 
5.5.1. - Abandonment defined. 
a.  Any sign that provides notice of a temporary special event or any other temporary purpose that has since occurred shall be deemed to have been abandoned. 
b.  Any sign that fails to meet the maintenance requirements of this Article shall be deemed abandoned and subject to removal if such deficiencies are not corrected within 30 days after a written notice from the Chief Building Official to the owner or tenant concerning said deficiencies. The Chief Building Official shall have the discretion to grant an additional 30 days for the required improvements to be made provided substantial progress is being made to correct the deficiencies and a written request for such an extension is received at least five working days before the end of the original notice. 
5.5.2. - Sign removal. 
a.  The owner of the sign or owner of the premises shall remove signs that are deemed to be abandoned or otherwise found to be in violation of this Ordinance within 30 days from the written notice by the Chief Building Official. Any such signs not removed within 30 days from the written notice may be removed by the Jurisdiction and all costs charged to the owner of the premises upon which such sign was located, or the owner of the sign itself. 
b.  Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the Chief Building Official, the owner or person or firm maintaining the sign shall, upon written notice from the Chief Building Official, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within ten days, remove such sign or secure it in a manner approved by the Chief Building Official. Any such sign not removed or secured within ten days from the written notice may be removed by the Jurisdiction and all costs charged to the owner, agent, or person having beneficial interest of the building or premises upon which such sign was located, or in the sign itself. 
c.  If any sign is installed, erected, or constructed in violation of this Ordinance, the owner or person or firm maintaining the sign shall, upon written notice from the Chief Building Official within ten days, remove such sign or bring it into compliance with this Ordinance. Any such sign not removed or properly altered within ten days from the written notice may be removed by the Jurisdiction and all costs charged to the owner, agent, or person having beneficial interest of the building or premises upon which such sign was located, or in the sign itself. 
ARTICLE 6. - SUBDIVISION AND PROJECT STANDARDS 

6.1. - General. 
6.1.1. - Purpose of article 6.This Article sets out: 
a.  The minimum requirements and standards for construction of land development projects, including general principals of design and layout and requirements for such public facilities as streets and utilities. 
b.  The requirements that apply to carrying out the land development process, including: site grading and land disturbance activities; addressing flood hazard and environmentally sensitive areas; the installation of streets, drainage facilities and public utilities; and building construction. 
c.  The standards that control the separation between incompatible uses, landscaping and tree conservation, the provision of vehicular parking and access, and other requirements relating to a site design for an individual property. 
6.1.2. - Applicability.All persons proposing construction within the public right-of-way, or within easements dedicated to the City of Rome or Floyd County shall perform all construction in accordance with these specifications and standard design drawings. 
6.1.3. - Standards incorporated by reference. 
a.  Unless otherwise specially set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction and storm drainage construction shall conform to the latest standard specifications of the State Department of Transportation. 
b.  Design criteria and standards for streets and traffic control not specifically set forth herein shall conform to the latest edition of the ASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets and the U. S. Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as appropriate. 
c.  Construction plans for all facilities covered by these regulations shall conform to the Rome-Floyd County Standard Drawings, where applicable. 
6.1.4. - Subdivision development overview. 
a.  City-county coordination. In order to assure full coordination between all affected departments and agencies and to increase efficiency in the processing of permits, all applications for subdivision platting, shall be submitted to the Public Works Department of the respective jurisdiction for handling. 
b.  Subdivisions with public improvements. The division of land into two or more lots that will require the construction or extension of public streets, water, or sanitary sewerage (other than the direct connection of buildings to existing facilities) shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Project Approval is granted by the Public Works Department upon review and approval of a Preliminary Subdivision Plat. 
(2)  A Development Permit is issued by the Chief Building Official based on the review and approval by the Public Works Department of a Development Plan for construction of the subdivision. 
(3)  Receipt by the Public Works Department of accurate surveys of the as-built condition of public improvements is required in order to allow filing of a Final Plat. 
(4)  Approval of a Final Subdivision Plat by the Planning Commission will authorize recordation of the plat with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
(5)  After recordation of the Final Plat, the lots may be sold and building permits on the lots may be obtained. 
(6)  A maintenance period will extend for one year after acceptance of all public improvements, as described in Section 6.4.7. 
c.  Minor subdivisions. The division of land into four or fewer lots, each of which will be adequately served by existing public streets, water, and sanitary sewerage; and which meet all other requirements of the Ordinance, shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  Administrative Approval of a Final Subdivision Plat by the Planning Director will authorize recordation of the plat with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
(2)  After recordation of the Final Plat, the lots may be sold and building permits on the lots may be obtained. 
d.  Private subdivisions. The procedures for approval of private subdivisions are the same as those for subdivisions with public improvements. 
e.  Multi-family and Non-residential projects are approved for development in accordance with the procedures described in Article 2. 
6.2. - Preliminary plat and development plan approval for subdivisions. 
The Public Works Department must first approve the preliminary plat prior to either public or private subdivision activity, prior to the issuance of a development permit and prior to the initiation of any land disturbing or construction activities. 
6.2.1. - Responsibility. 
a.  The Director of Public Works is responsible for administering the review and approval for preliminary subdivision plats. The Director of Public Works shall forward a copy of the project approval application to appropriate City or County Departments, the Georgia Department of Transportation, or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. The Director of Public Works shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, who shall work with each City or County Department or other agency as necessary to resolve all issues. 
b.  A preliminary plat may be prepared by a professional engineer, a land surveyor, or a landscape architect registered to practice in the State of Georgia. 
6.2.2. - Procedure for project approval. 
a.  An application for subdivision approval may be processed independently or in conjunction with an application for issuance of a development permit. 
b.  An application for project approval shall be submitted to the Public Works Department by the property owner or their authorized representative. The application shall include: 
(1)  A properly completed application form, as furnished by the Public Works Department, requesting review for project approval. 
(2)  Copies of the preliminary subdivision plat showing the entire ownership drawn to the specifications of this Section, in a number as required by the Public Works Department. 
(3)  Copies of the development plans prepared in accordance with the requirements of this code, in a number as required by the Public Works Department. 
(4)  Payment of all applicable application and review fees, as established by the Governing Body from time to time. 
c.  The Public Works Department shall review the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
d.  Within two weeks following receipt of the application, the Public Works Department shall return to the applicant, on the drawing or in writing, all comments related to compliance with this Development Code. 
e.  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments. 
f.  The Public Works Department may not approve any preliminary subdivision plat whereon is shown a lot or situation that would clearly require a variance to order to be reasonably useable, whether due to the presence of flood plain, unusual configuration, zoning compliance, lack of public utilities, or for any other reason. 
g.  When the Public Works Department has determined that the preliminary subdivision plat is in compliance with the requirements, purpose, and intent of this Development Code, it shall be approved. The Director or his designee shall sign and date the CERTIFICATE OF PROJECT APPROVAL stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the preliminary subdivision plat. One copy of the approved drawing shall be transmitted to the applicant and one copy shall be retained by the Public Works Department. 
h.  The Certificate of Project Approval shall remain in effect for a period of 12 consecutive months after which time it shall become null and void and a new Certificate may be required if either no permit has been issued or a permit has been issued but no development activity has begun. 
6.2.3. - General standards. 
a.  The proposed name of the development and proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other street in the city or county. If shown to the contrary, the Public Works Department may refuse to accept such development or street names. The development may use letter designations in place of proposed street names at the option of the applicant. 
b.  The preliminary plat shall be prepared on a boundary survey of the entire tract to be subdivided or developed showing the location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract to be developed. 
c.  The preliminary subdivision plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of 100 feet or less to one inch. The recommended maximum dimensions of the sheet size is 36 inches by 48 inches and the minimum dimensions of 17 inches by 22 inches; however, the Director of Public Works may approve other sheet sizes and scales as appropriate. 
d.  For property of over 100 acres, a smaller scale may be used where, in the judgment of the Director of Public Works, presentation of detailed data is not necessary to evaluate the entire project. It is the intent of this provision that in all cases sufficient information shall be provided for an adequate evaluation of the public and private improvements. 
6.2.4. - Preliminary plat requirements. 
a.  Proposed name of development. If the proposed development is a private subdivision, "Private Subdivision" shall be included in the title. 
b.  Name and address of the property owner and developer. 
c.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
d.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scales, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
e.  Proposed use of the property. 
f.  Location (Land District and Land Lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
g.  Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well known landmarks such as arterial streets, railroads, or others. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
h.  Name and boundary of former approved subdivision if any or all of the land in the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan has been previously subdivided, showing boundaries of the lots to be re-subdivided. 
i.  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
j.  Delineation of required buffers, landscape areas, tree protection areas, and river corridor buffers, as possible. 
k.  Rezoning or conditional use application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. Variances obtained on the property by application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. 
l.  Recorded deed names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
m.  Natural features within, affecting, or affected by the property, including wetlands, drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas, and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all water courses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year flood plain and wetlands, if any, shall be outlined. The location of the site within a protected groundwater recharge area shall be noted if applicable. 
n.  Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including street right-of-way and pavement widths, names of existing streets, all easements, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location and dimensions of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features. 
o.  The proposed projected layout including: 
(1)  For subdivisions, lot lines and street right-of way lines, with proposed street names or letter designations and right-of-way widths, along with the front building setback line and the dimension of its length on each lot (i.e., the lot width). 
(2)  For multi-family and nonresidential development site plans, the outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas, driveways, curb cuts, and designated fire lanes. 
p.  The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
q.  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
r.  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. For those properties that will not be served by a public sanitary sewerage system, written approval by the Floyd County Health Department shall be submitted. 
s.  The approximate location of proposed storm water detention facilities. 
t.  Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate evaluation of the development activity proposed in the application. 
6.2.5. - Development plan requirements. 
a.  General requirements. 
(1)  Persons seeking to undertake development activity shall not commence or proceed until development plans are approved and a Development Permit is issued by the Chief Building Official. The process for approval of a development permit is presented in Article 2.5. 
(2)  The development plans for a project shall conform in all respects with the requirements of this Development Code, and shall contain each of the plans in this Section as appropriate to the project, including: 
(a)  Erosion and Sediment Control Plan. 
(b)  Grading Plan. 
(c)  Stormwater Management Plan. 
(d)  Street Improvement Plan. 
(e)  Buffer Plan. 
(f)  Public Utility Plan. 
(3)  All development plans and supporting studies shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a professional engineer registered in Georgia. 
b.  Provide the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan, Grading Plan, Stormwater Management Plan, and Buffer/Landscaping/Tree Conservation Plan in accordance with all requirements in this Section, as well as, Article 2 of this Development Code. 
c.  Street improvement plan. 
(1)  Centerline profiles and typical street sections of all proposed streets shall be required. Profiles shall be drawn on the standard plan and profile sheet with plan section showing street layout, and pavement and right-of-way width, curvature, and required drainage facilities. Typical street sections shall be provided for street widenings. 
(2)  Where sanitary sewer or storm water sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade, size, location and bedding class of pipe, and the location and invert elevation of manholes shall be indicated on the road profile. 
(3)  Centerline profiles covering streets shall include elevations at 50 foot intervals or such distance as may be adequate to provide continuity consistent with the standards required by this Development Code for street improvements, but no less than 200 feet. 
(4)  All plan elevations shall be coordinated and sited into U. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey or Georgia Department of Transportation bench marks where feasible or into reference monuments established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(5)  A street striping plan, showing striping in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition as published by the Federal Highway Administration, shall be prepared for any street newly constructed or widened to four or more lanes. 
d.  Public utility plan. 
(1)  Sewage Disposal Plan 
(a)  If connection to a public system is proposed, sewage disposal plans are to include: 
1)  Sanitary sewerage plans, including profiles of all mains and outfalls, lift station and force main details, typical manhole construction details, and other information as may be required by the Director of Public Utilities. 
(b)  For projects approved by the Governing Body to be served by on-site sewage disposal systems, location of septic tank, extent of drain field and attendant structures, location of percolation tests or soil data test locations, and other information shall be shown as required by the County Health Department. 
(2)  Domestic Water Supply Plan. For projects to be served by public water, the domestic water supply plan shall depict all water system improvements, water mains, fire hydrants, valves and other appurtenances, and other information as may be required by the Director of Public Utilities. 
6.2.6. - Evidence of project approval.Each preliminary subdivision plat shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped on the plat. 
a.  Signed approval from the County Health Department (if septic tanks will be allowed by the Governing Body). 
b.  Certificate of Project Approval, to read as follows: 

 
6.2.7. - Issuance of development permit. 
a.  Upon approval of the Preliminary Plat and Development Plans, the Chief Building Official shall issue a Development Permit authorizing development activities to begin based on the approved documents and in accordance with Article 2 of this Development Code. 
b.  Development permits for subdivisions shall expire if the development activity described in the permit is not begun within 12 months of the date of issuance. Renewal of the permit after expiration shall be in accordance with the requirements of Article 2 of this Development Code. 
c.  If the subdivision is located outside of the city, certification is required by the Community Development Department that the proposed subdivision has applied for installation of street lighting in accordance with the County street lighting ordinance. 
6.3. - Final subdivision plat approval. 
6.3.1. - Responsibility. 
a.  The Director of Public Works shall be responsible for coordination of the approval process for all final subdivision plats for public and private subdivisions. 
b.  The final subdivision plat shall be certified and sealed by a registered land surveyor. 
c.  The owner is responsible for compliance with all code requirements of this Development Code. Approval of a final subdivision plat and acceptance of the public improvements and dedications therein shall not relieve the owner of this responsibility. 
6.3.2. - Procedures for final plat approval. 
a.  Prior to submission of an application for final subdivision plat approval, one of the following conditions must be met: 
(1)  For minor subdivisions, the Public Works Director shall have certified that all lots are adequately served by existing streets and public utilities; or, 
(2)  All public improvements shall have been properly installed and completed in accordance with all requirements and standards of this Development Code; or 
(3)  A guarantee in lieu of completed improvements shall have been received by the Public Works Department and approved by the Governing Body as provided under Article 6.4.6. of this Development Code. 
b.  Prior to submission, the applicant shall provide to the Public Works Department: 
(1)  As-built surveys for all public improvements as required by this Article if the installation of said improvements varies from the approved development plans. 
(2)  Payment for materials and installation of traffic signs and street name signs. Payment of the cost of street striping or signalization, if required and not completed by the owner, shall also be included in the application. 
(3)  A maintenance bond providing adequate surety for the maintenance of all public improvements required by this Development Code in the subdivision for a period of 12 months following the date of final acceptance of said improvements. 
c.  Application for a final subdivision plat approval shall be made to the Public Works Department. The application shall include: 
(1)  A properly completed application form, as furnished by the Public Works Department, requesting final subdivision plat review. 
(2)  The original, two reproducible copies, and nine prints of the final subdivision plat drawing prepared in conformance with the specifications in this Section. 
(3)  Payment of all applicable final subdivision plat application and review fees, as established by the Governing Body from time to time. 
(4)  Evidence of payment for traffic and street name signs, and maintenance bond, to the Public Works Department. 
d.  The Public Works Department shall review the application for completeness within five business days of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
e.  Within two weeks following receipt of the application, the Public Works Department shall indicate on the drawing or in writing all comments related to compliance with this Development Code. The Director of Public Works shall have sole authority to determine the applicability of any provisions of this Development Code to the final plat. 
f.  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements, and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments of the Public Works Department. Resubmission of all revised drawings shall be made to the Public Works Department. 
g.  When all of the requirements of this Development Code, and any conditions of zoning approval, have been met, the Director of Public Works shall certify approval with signature and date on the plat. 
h.  Once the final subdivision plat has been so certified, it shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for approval after which the Director of Planning shall sign and date the CERTIFICATE OF FINAL PLAT APPROVAL stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the final subdivision plat. The plat shall then be recorded by the Planning Department, or by the applicant with the Planning Director's approval, with the Clerk of the Superior Court. An executed original of the approved drawing shall be transmitted to the applicant. 
i.  The final subdivision plat shall be submitted in digital form in a file format compatible with the Planning Department's GIS mapping system. 
6.3.3. - General standards. 
a.  The final subdivision plat shall be drawn on an appropriate material and sheet size, and using minimum line weights and letter heights as required by Georgia law for the recordation of maps and plats (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, as amended), and as acceptable to the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
b.  The final subdivision plat shall substantially conform to the preliminary subdivision plat and may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary subdivision plat that the owner proposes to record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of this Development Code. 
6.3.4. - Final plat requirements.The final subdivision plat shall contain the following information: 
a.  All data required by Georgia law pertaining to the recordation of maps and plats (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, as amended). 
b.  Name of the subdivision. If the development is a private subdivision, "Private Subdivision" shall be included in the title. 
c.  Street names including both the name and the suffix such as "Street," "Avenue," etc. 
d.  Name of the former subdivision if any or all of the property has been previously subdivided. 
e.  Location sketch. 
f.  Lot lines with dimensions to the 1/100 (0.01) foot; necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords; and tangent or radii of rounded corners. 
g.  Building front setback lines with dimensions as to length across each lot and distance from the street right-of-way. 
h.  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
i.  Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements, if required, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use. 
j.  A listing of the private covenants recorded with each lot or a statement of the location of such covenants recorded with each lot or a statement of the location of such covenants, if applicable. 
k.  The extent of any area of special flood hazard, as defined in this Development Code. 
l.  The street address number of each lot, as assigned by the local government. 
m.  All maps or plats shall show the width and the former widths, if pertinent, of all rights-of-way adjacent to any point of reference. 
n.  Curve data shall be required for all curves of greater than ten degrees on new roads. Pertinent data including radius, central angle, and tangent distance must be given for regular curves on pre-existing roads. 
o.  All land lot lines, land district lines, land section lines, and city and county boundaries intersecting or adjacent to the surveyed property shall be indicated by lines drawn upon the plat with appropriate words and figures. 
p.  All plats shall show the state plane coordinates of at least two permanent monuments thereon, when a United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey monument is within 500 feet of any point on the property platted, or any point of reference shown thereon. 
6.3.5. - Private subdivision requirements.In addition to all other requirements of this Section, private subdivisions shall comply with the following: 
a.  As part of any final subdivision plat submission, the following documents must be filed for approval with the Public Works Department as a part of the development plan. 
(1)  The form of all agreements between the developer and property owners relative to development standards and property ownership and common area ownership and maintenance with a written statement by the City or County Attorney that this document has been reviewed by that office. 
(2)  The form of all agreements between and among individual property owners relative to the ownership and maintenance of privately owned properties and common areas with a written statement by the City or County Attorney that this document has been reviewed by that office. 
(3)  Certification by the Director of Public Works that all improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of this Code. 
b.  The following language shall appear on the plats, deeds, and covenants to be recorded which concern the subdivision: "Required notice to all subsequent property owners: The grantee herein recognizes that any and all means of ingress and egress to the property conveyed hereby, and any water or sewer utilities servicing the property which are provided by the grantor or his successors or assigns are considered to be private facilities not maintainable by any local government. Therefore, the property owner herby agrees that he or she will be responsible for his or her share of the upkeep and maintenance of said private facilities, holding Floyd County and the City of Rome completely harmless of any necessity for such upkeep and maintenance." A copy of the covenants as recorded must be provided to the Building Inspections Department prior to issuance of any building permits. 
6.3.6. - Surveyor and owner certificates.Each Final Subdivision Plat shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped the plat and signed and dated in black ink. 
a.  Surveyor's Certificate, to read and be completed as follows: 

 
b.  Surveyor's seal. The original final subdivision plat drawing shall bear the original signature, in black ink, of the registered land surveyor placed across the surveyor's seal in order to be valid and recordable. 
c.  Owner's Certificate, to read and be completed as follows, and signed in black ink on the original drawing: 

 
6.3.7. - Certification by health department.Certification by the Health Department that the water supply or sewerage systems installed or proposed to be installed fully meet the requirements of the Health Department's regulations. (These certifications may be submitted on a separate form as specified by the Planning Department.) The Health Department certification statement shall include written notice that each lot not on public sewer must have a septic tank permit prior to the start of construction. For developments with public sewerage and public water systems this certification may be omitted. 
6.3.8. - Certificate of final subdivision plat approval.The following shall be stamped or printed on the final subdivision plat for execution upon its approval by the Planning Commission. 

 
6.4. - Required improvements in subdivisions. 
6.4.1. - Exemptions.The subdivision of land in the A-R district into four or fewer lots, all of which have the minimum required frontage on a public street and meet all other minimum requirements of this Ordinance, shall be exempt from the improvement requirements of this section, except that a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet shall be provided on all adjacent streets. 
6.4.2. - Minimum requirements.The following improvements shall be provided by the developer or at the developer's expense in every subdivision or development. 
a.  Survey monumentation of the public streets and lot lines in a subdivision. 
b.  Streets providing access to a development and to all lots in a subdivision, including the extension of streets required to provide access to adjoining properties. 
(1)  Streets contained wholly within a subdivision shall be improved to the full standards contained in this Article. Existing streets that adjoin a subdivision shall be improved to the minimum standards provided in this Article from the centerline of the street along the subdivision's frontage as a project improvement. Right-of-way shall be dedicated to provide for street improvement, as prescribed in Article 6.6.1 of this Development Code. 
(2)  Streets within or adjacent nonresidential subdivisions, or serving residential subdivisions with 200 dwelling units or more shall be improved to collector street standards; however, adjacent streets that are classified as arterials shall be improved to arterial standards. All other streets shall be improved to local street standards. 
(3)  The Jurisdiction may participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that improvements are needed to bring the street to a higher level of classification than required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
(4)  Curb and gutter or swale ditches along all roadways, as applicable. 
c.  Storm water drainage and detention facilities. 
d.  Sidewalks along each side of any curb and gutter street within or adjacent to a subdivision, or adjacent any development, if inside the City of Rome. Sidewalks are not required for developments located within the unincorporated areas of Floyd County. 
e.  Street name signs, stop bars, and traffic control signs shall be installed by the Jurisdiction at the developer's expense. 
f.  Where public water is available at the property being subdivided, public water service shall be provided to every lot in a subdivision and to every development for both domestic use and fire protection. Water mains shall be connected to the existing public water system and extended past each lot. When the water main is located in the street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the adjacent lot, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. Water mains and fire hydrants shall be installed according to plans and specifications approved by the Public Works Director, the County Board of Health, and the State Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division. Fire protection systems shall be installed to current Insurance Services Office (ISO) specifications and requirements. A contractor approved by the Jurisdiction shall install all elements of the water system, including mains, valves, and hydrants at the developer's expense. The Jurisdiction may participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that pipe sizes are needed in excess of that size required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
g.  Fire hydrants shall be located along the streets in every subdivision and within every development project. 
h.  Every lot in a subdivision and every development shall be connected to a public sanitary sewerage system unless on-site disposal is allowed by the Floyd County Health Department. Sewer lines shall be connected to the existing sanitary sewerage system and extended past each lot. Every element of the sanitary sewer system, including mains, lift stations, outfalls, and laterals shall be installed at the developer's expense by a contractor approved by the Public Utilities Department. The Jurisdiction may participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that sewer mains or related improvements are needed in excess of the facilities required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
i.  Street lights in a subdivision in the unincorporated portion of the county, in accordance with County Ordinances. 
6.4.3. - Private subdivisions.Private subdivisions shall meet all requirements and standards that apply to public subdivisions. 
6.4.4. - Survey monuments.Concrete monuments with aluminum or brass marking shall be placed at all corners of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision being developed and shall be set flush or up to six inches above the finished grade. Existing permanent monuments, which in the professional opinion of a registered land surveyor, or the city or county engineer are of sufficiently durable construction may be maintained in lieu of a new concrete monument as described above. All other street or lot corners or angle points and points of curve in each street shall be marked with an iron pipe or surveyor's marker at least 24 inches long and driven no less than one inch or up to six inches above the finished grade. All such monuments shall be properly set in the ground and shall be approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time of a final plat approval by the Planning Commission. 
6.4.5. - Streets. 
a.  A publicly approved street, that has been opened and accepted for maintenance; that has been designated by the city or county as a public street; or whose construction has been guaranteed, as provided under Article 6.4.6 of this Development Code, and meeting the requirements of this Article, shall serve every development and every lot within a subdivision. 
b.  Every subdivision shall have access to the public street system via a paved roadway. Subdivision projects containing more than 200 lots must have at least two points of access. 
c.  When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
d.  No subdivision or development shall be designed in a way that would completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
e.  Where, in the opinion of the Public Works Department, it is necessary to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication of right-of-way to the boundary of such property through the development. 
f.  Where an arterial street adjoins or is included in a residential subdivision, the responsible city and/or county engineer may limit access to the arterial street. Lots that abut the arterial shall be provided with another means of access, such as (1) platting reverse frontage lots, (2) platting a separate street parallel to the arterial, or (3) platting a loop street or cul-de-sac. 
6.4.6. - Guarantee in lieu of completed improvements.No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the Rome/Floyd County Planning Commission or accepted for recordation by the Clerk of the Superior Court until one of the following conditions has been met: 
a.  All required improvement have been constructed or funded in a satisfactory manner and approved by the Director of Public Works, or 
b.  The Governing Body has received in escrow 110% of the estimated cost of installation of the required improvements, and has approved an executed contract for installation of the improvements by a qualified contractor. The executed contractor shall call for completion of the improvements within one year of approval of the final subdivision plat. 
6.4.7. - Acceptance of public improvements. 
a.  If construction of any required public improvements was deferred at the time of final plat approval, said work must be completed during the one-year maintenance period for the subdivision. 
b.  Prior to end of the maintenance period, a final acceptance inspection of the public improvements shall be conducted by the Public Works Department. 
c.  The owner must correct all defects or deficiencies in materials or workmanship and make such repairs as necessary to approximate the as-built condition of the improvements. 
d.  Upon certification by the Public Works Director that the public improvements depicted on the as-built surveys are in conformance with the specifications of this Development Code and are in good repair, the Governing Body shall accept the public improvements into perpetual maintenance. 
6.5. - Subdivision design standards. 
6.5.1. - Suitability of the land.Land physically unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding, poor drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, or other such features that may endanger health, life or property, aggravate erosion, increase flood hazard, or necessitate excessive expenditures of public funds for supply and maintenance of services shall not be approved for subdivision or development unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer for solving the problems. Such land shall be set aside for such uses as shall not involve such a danger. 
6.5.2. - Conformance to the comprehensive plan. 
a.  All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission to the Public Works Department. 
b.  All highways, streets, and other features of the Comprehensive Plan shall be platted by the developer in the location and the dimension indicated on the Comprehensive Plan. 
c.  In subdivisions or developments related to or affecting any State or U.S. numbered highway, the Public Works Department shall require the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation and Public Works Department. 
6.5.3. - Name of subdivision.The name of each subdivision must have the approval of the Public Works Department. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision. 
6.5.4. - Blocks. 
a.  Length: 
(1)  Residential blocks. 
(a)  Blocks shall be at least 600 feet but not more than 1,800 feet in length, except as the Building Inspection Department considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street pattern. 
(b)  In blocks greater than 1,000 feet in length, the Building Inspection Department may require one or more public easements of not less than 20 feet in width to extend entirely across the block for pedestrian crosswalks, fire protection, or utilities. 
(2)  Nonresidential blocks. 
(a)  Blocks for other than residential use shall be of such length and width as may be suitable for the prospective use, including adequate provisions for off-street parking and service. 
b.  Width: Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two rows of lots, except where reverse frontage lots on arterial streets are provided, or when prevented by topographic conditions or size of the property, or for lots along the periphery of the subdivision, in which case the Building Inspection Department may approve a single row of lots. 
6.5.5. - Lots. 
a.  Authority of health department. Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing the Health Department, after study of the conditions existing in a proposed subdivision, from requiring that all or any portion of the area of such subdivision shall not be built upon or that the minimum lot sizes set forth in this Ordinance are inadequate and must be increased to ensure the protection of the public health. The developer is encouraged to consult with the Health Department regarding lot size requirements prior to submitting a development plan. 
b.  Adequate building sites. Each lot shall contain a site large enough for a normal building that will meet all building setback requirements and not be subject to flood or periodic inundation. 
c.  Street frontage. Each lot must abut a street that has been opened and accepted for public maintenance; that has been designated by the City or County as a private street; or whose construction has been guaranteed, as provided under Article 6.4.6 of this Development Code, for a distance of no less than 60 continuous feet, except lots abutting cul-de-sac turnarounds which must have no less than 25 feet, and townhouse lots as provided in Section 4.1.23. 
d.  Arrangement. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
e.  Minimum lot dimensions and areas. All lots proposed in a subdivision shall meet or exceed the area and dimensional requirements of the Development Code for the zoning district in which the lots are located. 
f.  Residential lots shall not be platted to front directly on the right-of-way of a major arterial, unless adequate provisions for access have been established. 
g.  City limits and lot lines. Corporate boundary lines shall not divide lots. 
h.  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently large to permit the location of buildings so as to conform to the front building lines on both streets. 
i.  Double and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots should be avoided except where specifically required to provide separation of residential development from an arterial street or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation of property. An easement of at least 10 feet across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided where required by the Building Inspection Department along the line of lots abutting such arterial streets, or to overcome the disadvantageous orientation of property. 
j.  Each lot shall have a viable home-site above the 100-year floodplain. 
6.5.6. - Streets. 
a.  The street pattern within a subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of the existing street pattern at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width in the section of the community involved, unless the Building Inspection Department deems such extension undesirable. 
b.  Existing streets that adjoin a development or subdivision boundary shall be deemed a part of the subdivision. The proposed street system within a subdivision shall have the right-of-way of existing streets extended no less than the required minimum width. Subdivisions that adjoin only one side of an existing street shall dedicate one-half of the additional right-of-way needed to meet the minimum width requirement for the street. If any part of subdivision includes both sides of an existing street, all of the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated. 
c.  Subdivision streets that intersect an arterial street shall do so at intervals of not less than 800 feet, or as required by the Georgia Department of Transportation, whichever is greater. 
d.  Reserve strips that prohibit access to streets from adjoining property shall be prohibited. 
e.  Design standards for all subdivision streets shall meet all requirements for street construction in accordance with Article 6.6. 
6.6. - Common project design standards. 
6.6.1. - Street access and right-of-way. 
a.  Every development shall have access to the public street system via a publicly maintained roadway. 
b.  Existing streets that adjoin a development shall be deemed a part of the development. Developments that adjoin only one side of an existing street shall dedicate one-half of the additional right-of-way needed to meet the minimum right-of-way requirement for the street. If any part of the development includes both sides of an existing street, all of the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated. 
(1)  New developments on existing lots of record that adjoin only one side of an existing street shall dedicate one-half of the additional right-of-way width of 50 feet, which is the minimum right-of-way width for public streets under current city and county standards. If any part of the development includes both sides of an existing street, all of the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated. In addition, if a deceleration is required, sufficient additional right-of-way shall be dedicated provide for the lane. 
(2)  New development on an existing lot of record that adjoins an existing street listed in the Floyd-Rome Urban Transportation Study (FRUTS), Long Range Transportation plan (LRTP), and/or Transportation Improvement Program (TIP) shall dedicate the additional right-of-way necessary to provide for the planned improvement, except that only one-half of the additional right-of-way shall be dedicated if the development adjoins only one side of the street. 
6.6.2. - Turning lanes.Turning lanes shall be required at all entrances to subdivisions and multi-family, industrial, office and commercial developments that front on arterial streets and may be required on collector streets. Turning lanes shall be 11.5 feet in width plus curb and gutter for a minimum distance of 200 feet measured from the intersection of the right-of-way lines or the edge of the driveway. 
6.6.3. - Sidewalks. 
a.  Sidewalks shall be provided along arterial and collector streets to provide a safe and convenient means for pedestrian movements if inside the City of Rome. Sidewalks are not required for developments located within the unincorporated areas of Floyd County. 
b.  Where provided, sidewalks shall be located not less than one foot from the property line to prevent interference or encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges, or other plantings or structures placed on the property line at a later date. In single-family residential areas sidewalks shall be no less than four feet in width, constructed of concrete no less than four inches in depth, and located no less than three feet from the back of the curb. In commercial areas sidewalks shall be no less than five feet in width, and constructed of concrete no less than four inches in depth. 
c.  Concrete shall be 2,000 PSI at 28 days strength. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be backfilled and grassed. 
6.6.4. - Curb and gutter. 
a.  In the unincorporated area of the county curb and gutter are required on new roads in residential subdivisions where the average width of lots are less than 200 feet and the average lot size does not exceed one and one-half acres, and along all multi-family and nonresidential uses. 
b.  Curb and gutter shall be required on all streets in the City, except where the road serves only as a collector for the development of property, and where access and public services to more than one parcel are provided from other streets. 
c.  Where required, curb and gutter shall be provided as specified in the Design Standards for Streets. No variance of the requirement to provide curb and gutter shall be available unless specific approval is given by the Public Works Director, if inside the City of Rome. Due to unique circumstances created by topography within unincorporated Floyd County, alternatives to providing curb and gutter may be available, subject to approval by the Public Works Director. 
6.6.5. - Easements.Easements shall be required in connection with subdivisions or developments for the following purposes, among others: 
a.  Utility easements. Whenever it is necessary or desirable to locate a public utility line outside of the street right-of-way, the line shall be located in an easement dedicated to the Jurisdiction for such purpose. Easements for water and sanitary sewers shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide, and may be required to be wider depending on the depth of the cut. 
b.  Water course and drainage easements. 
(1)  A publicly dedicated storm water right-of-access or drainage easement is to be provided along any drainage channel, stream or water impoundment within a development. The easement shall to be substantially centered on the watercourse or shall surround the high water line of the impoundment, and shall be of such width as the Public Works Director deems necessary for adequate access by maintenance equipment. All easements shall be no less than 20 feet wide when used as an open 
ditch. Piped storm drainage shall have a minimum easement width of 15 feet wide. 
(2)  Drainage easements shall be opened at the time of development to control surface water runoff. 
(3)  Drainage easements off the street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the plat and deed of the individual property owner, and such property owner shall keep the easement free of obstructions and maintain that part of the easement within the property owner's boundary line so that free and maximum flow is maintained at all times. 
c.  Overlapping easements. Easements for water and sanitary and drainage purposes shall not overlap unless approved by the Public Works Department. 
6.6.6. - Utilities. 
a.  Sanitary sewerage. 
(1)  Each developer shall be required to pay for the installation of a sanitary sewerage collection system connected to the public system serving his subdivision or development, if it is available in a timely manner. All dwellings shall connect to public sewer when such sewer is within 300 feet of the property being subdivided. No septic tanks shall be allowed if public sewerage is available. The layout and specifications of the system shall be in accordance with specifications approved by the Public Utilities Director, and shall be installed by a contractor certified by the State of Georgia for utility installation. 
(2)  When the sewer is located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street to serve the abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. 
(3)  Where connection to the sanitary sewerage system is not feasible in the view of the Public Utilities Director, the lot shall contain adequate area for the installation and safe operation of a specific tank and disposal field, as approved by the county health officer. 
(4)  Prior to the construction of any private community sewerage disposal system, the location, size, plans and specifications of such a facility shall be approved by the appropriate city and/or county official, the health department and the State Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
b.  Public water. 
(1)  Each subdivision or development shall connect to the Jurisdiction's public water system where available, and shall provide service to each lot or the development as a whole, as appropriate, at the expense of the developer. 
(2)  The layout and specifications of the system shall be in accordance with Jurisdiction specifications, as approved by the Public Utilities Director, and shall be installed by a contractor certified by the State of Georgia for utility installation. 
(3)  Fire hydrants in subdivisions shall be installed and spaced no more than 1,000 feet apart, and meet the requirements of the Fire Department. 
(4)  When the water main is located in the street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the abutting lot, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line and a meter box installed to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. Alternatively, lines may be bored at the builder's expense. 
c.  Location of utilities in streets. 
(1)  Above-Ground Utilities. Telephone poles, street light poles, telephone junction boxes, and other public or private utility structures placed above ground within a street right-of-way must meet the Utilities Protection Standardized Street Profile. 
(2)  Underground Utilities. Utilities placed underground shall be placed within the right-of-way as shown in Figure 6.1 at the end of this Article or in accordance with County standards for roads with swale ditches. 
(a)  All utilities beneath pavement shall be installed and the ditch backfilled and thoroughly compacted before any pavement or base is installed, or the pipes shall be bored if installed after street construction. 
(b)  All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought to the finished grade within the roadway section. 
(c)  All utility locations shall correspond to the typical layout shown by Standard Drawings. 
(d)  All private utilities that will cross under pavement shall be installed completely throughout the subdivision prior to any roadway base being applied. Installation of approved utility sleeves shall be considered as an alternate. 
6.6.7. - Pavement cuts. 
a.  All utility street cuts within public rights-of-way shall be reviewed and approved by the appropriate engineering department before construction begins. 
b.  Pavement cuts for the installation of utilities shall be avoided whenever possible. Utility crossing shall be bored across any arterial, subject to the approval of the Georgia DOT, and across any collector unless a pavement cut is approved by the Director of Public Works. 
c.  Pavement cuts across local streets shall be permitted, provided the road is repaired with at least six inches of 3,000 psi Portland cement and topped with at least two inches of E or F hot plant mix asphaltic cement. The top of the concrete pad shall not exceed the elevation of the aggregate base course of the original road construction. 
d.  Pavement cuts across local streets shall conform to Figure 6.2 at the end of this Article. 
6.6.8. - Lighting.To reduce light trespass, obtrusive light, and light pollution; to conserve energy and resources; to reduce extreme variations of illumination, to which elderly drivers are particularly sensitive; and enhance enjoyment of the night sky, the following standards shall apply to all exterior lighting with an illumination level above 230 lumens in residential zones and 500 lumens (600 lumens for fluorescent) in nonresidential zones: 
a.  All new or replacement lighting shall be of such a design, type, location, direction and shielding as to protect adjacent properties from excessive light. The level of lighting generated by a property shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candles beyond any property line shared with a residential use or 1.0 foot-candles beyond any property line shared with a nonresidential or public use. 
b.  No direct light shall be allowed onto adjacent residential property or public way. 
c.  All permanent area lights shall be full cut-off fixtures, downward directed, and shielded so that the angle of luminance does not result in light projecting beyond the area being lit. Except for outdoor recreation attractions, lights may be mounted at a height of no more than 25 feet from grade. 
d.  Accent lighting of structures and architectural features, such as steeples, monuments, or flagpoles, should be downward directed if feasible; however, upward directed lighting may be allowed provided light projecting above or beyond the feature is minimized. 
e.  Light fixtures illuminating signs shall be downward directed and shielded so that the angle of luminance does not result in light projecting above or beyond the sign being lit. Upward-directed sign lighting is prohibited except for monument signs of less than six (6) feet overall height. 
f.  Lighting which presents a clear hazard to pilots, motorists, cyclists or pedestrians is prohibited. 
g.  High intensity, laser, and any similar lighting is prohibited. 
h.  Definitions: 
Cutoff Fixture: An outdoor light fixture shielded or constructed in such a manner that no more than two and one half (2½) percent of the total light emitted by the fixture is projected above the horizontal plane of the fixture. 
Direct Light: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a light fixture. 
Foot-candles: A unit of measure of the intensity of light falling on a surface, equal to one lumen per square foot and originally defined with reference to a standardized candle burning at one foot from a given surface. 
Indirect Light: Direct light that has been reflected or has scattered off of other surfaces. 
Light Trespass: The shining of light produced by a fixture beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
6.6.9. - Cemeteries and burial grounds.Georgia law (O.C.G.A. 27-3-133; and 12-6-176) prohibits disturbance of any known burial place for human remains for development or for change of land use unless a permit is obtained from the governing body (City or County) or from the superior court. No such permit will be issued by the governing body without approved reinternment. 
(Ord. No. 2009-002ULDC, § I, 1-13-09; Ord. No. 2009-004ULDC, § I, 1-13-09) 
6.7. - Design standards for streets. 
6.7.1. - General. 
a.  Arterial streets. All major and minor arterial streets shall meet all design requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
b.  Local and collector streets. All local and collector streets shall comply with the design and construction requirements of this Ordinance. 
c.  Street names. 
(1)  Proposed streets that are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the name for a proposed street duplicate existing street names in the city or county, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, road, pike, drive, way, place, court, or other derivatives. 
(2)  The entire county is divided into four street number quadrants designated "N.E.," "N.W.," "S.E.," and "S.W." All streets shall bear the proper quadrant suffix. 
(3)  All streets names are subject to the approval of the respective Public Works Department. 
(4)  Property address numbers shall be provided by the Public Works Department. 
d.  Street name and traffic control signs. Street name signs of a type approved by the Jurisdiction are to be placed at all intersections. Traffic control signs shall be placed by the Jurisdiction and conform to the U.S. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. 
6.7.2. - Minimum width of right-of-way.Minimum width of right-of-way measured from lot line to lot line shall be as follows: 

 
6.7.3. - Vertical and horizontal alignment of streets. 
a.  Vertical alignment of streets. 
(1)  The maximum grade and vertical curve allowed for a street are shown on the following Table, except that the grade across a cul-de-sac in all directions shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5) percent. All streets shall have a minimum grade of one percent. 
Table 6-2  Vertical Alignment 

 
(2)  All changes in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve so constructed as to afford a minimum sight distance, said sight distance being measured from the driver's eyes, which are assumed to be three and one-half (3.5) feet in height above the pavement surface, to an object six inches high on the pavement. 
The minimum sight distance shall be as follows: 
Table 6-3  Minimum Sight Distance 

 
b.  Horizontal alignment of streets. 
(1)  Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, the radius of curvature of the center line of said street shall not be less than as follows: 
Table 6-4  Horizontal Alignment 

 
(2)  Curved streets shall have a minimum tangent of 100 feet at intersections as measured from the centerline of cross streets. A tangent of at least 200 feet in length shall be introduced between reverse curves on collector streets, and 100 feet on local streets. 
(3)  Adjoining street intersections shall be spaced at least 200 feet apart measured from edge of right-of-way to edge of opposing right-of-way. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be allowed. 
(4)  Intersections. The centerline of no more than two streets shall intersect at any one point. All streets shall intersect at no less than 60 degrees, and as neat a right angle as possible. The angle of intersection is to be measured at the intersection of the street centerlines. Such intersecting streets shall provide an uninterrupted line of sight from the center point of the intersection for not less than the minimum sight distance required in accordance with this Development Code. 
(5)  Islands at intersections shall be subject to individual approval by the appropriate engineer of the city and/or county. In no case shall anything extend more than three feet above the back of the curb within the right-of-way of the intersecting street. 
(6)  Curb lines at street intersections shall have a radius of curvature of not less than 25 feet. 
(7)  Intersecting street right-of-way lines shall be rounded with a radius no less than 25 feet. 
c.  Design speed. Horizontal curves and super elevation shall be designed in accordance with the following minimum design speeds: 
Table 6-5  Design Speeds 

 
6.7.4. - Dead-end streets. 
a.  A cul-de-sac shall be no more than 1,600 feet long unless necessitated by topographic or other conditions and approved by the Building Inspection Department. 
b.  Cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way of at least 100 feet in diameter and a paved turnaround with a minimum diameter of 80 feet to the edge of the pavement. 
c.  A reverse curve joining a cul-de-sac turnaround to a street section is to have a right-of-way radius of 29 feet and a radius to the back of curb of 40 feet (42 feet to edge of pavement). 
d.  A dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac shall not be allowed except as a temporary stage of construction of a street that is intended to be extended in a later stage of construction. Such temporary dead-end street shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a diameter of 80 feet, within the right-of-way if: 
(1)  One or more lots front exclusively on the street; and, 
(2)  Extension of the street is not under construction when the Final Plat is submitted for recording. 
e.  Temporary turnarounds shall consist of a tack coat and one inch of asphalt. 
6.7.5. - Alleys and service drives.Alleys may be provided in residential blocks where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the Planning Commission of the need for alleys. Where an alley has been specifically authorized or required by the Building Inspection Department, it shall comply with the following minimum design standards: 
a.  The roadbed width shall be no less than 20 feet, containing a paved roadway of no less than 16 feet exclusive of gutters. 
b.  Dead-end alleys shall be provided with a turnaround having a radius of at least 40 feet. 
6.7.6. - Half streets.Half streets are prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
a.  Split Level Streets and One-way Streets. Streets which are constructed so as to have two traffic-ways, each at a different level within the same right-of-way, shall provide a paved traffic surface of at least 20 feet on each level and a slope between the two traffic-ways of not less than three to one. One-way streets and split streets will be allowed when: 
(1)  Topographic conditions are such that alternatives to the typical street construction would be more desirable. 
(2)  The shape and size of the parcel could be more efficiently developed. 
In either case, approval must be obtained from the Building Inspection Department and the appropriate Public Works Department. 
6.7.7. - Pavement design. 
a.  Minimum width of pavement. The minimum pavement width, measured from curb edge of gutter to edge of gutter (or edge of pavement to edge of pavement for swale ditch section) required for collectors and local streets shall be as follows: 
Table 6-6  Minimum Pavement Width 

 
b.  Street base. 
(1)  Street base material shall conform to the following specifications: 
Table 6-7  Street Base 

 
(2)  For streets without curbs, the base shall extend at least 12 inches beyond the edge of pavement. 
c.  Asphaltic concrete pavement. 
(1)  Streets shall be paved with asphaltic concrete meeting the following standards: 
Table 6-8  Pavement Topping 

 
6.7.8. - Curb and gutter. 
a.  Where required, curb and gutter shall be of vertical, roll back or "Rome" type and shall conform to D.O.T. standard Class B Curb Mix. 
b.  Whenever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property line at such street corner shall be round or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. 
c.  Where curb and gutter are not required, a 60 foot street right-of-way with approved drainage facilities will be required. The appropriate city or county official shall, according to plans and specifications, approve installation of curb and gutter or alternative facilities. 
d.  Curbing along streets shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Developer's engineer or surveyor shall set line and grade. 
(2)  One-half inch expansion joints of pre-molded bitumastic expansion joint material shall be provided at all radius points and at intervals not to exceed 50 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 
(3)  The appropriate engineer shall individually approve special curbing design (center islands, etc.). 
(4)  Curb and gutter shall be set true to line and grade and finished by skilled workers to the section shown on the plans. 
(5)  Inferior workmanship or construction methods resulting in unsightly curb and gutter will be cause for rejection of the finished work. 
(6)  All curbing shall be backfilled and grassed. 
(7)  Adequate storm drainage structures shall be provided. The curb and gutter shall be constructed so as to present a smooth, even line both horizontally and vertically. 
e.  Valley gutters shall not be allowed across streets at street intersections. 
6.7.9. - Storm drainage. 
a.  Street cross drains or culverts. 
(1)  Pipe size for culverts under streets (street cross drains) shall be determined by design runoff and hydraulic capacity. The minimum allowable street cross drain diameter shall be 18 inches, with a minimum slope of one percent. 
(2)  Street cross drains shall be constructed of Class III reinforced concrete. 
(3)  Street cross drains shall be sized to handle the runoff of a 25-year, 24-hour storm. Cross drains shall be designed to handle the peak rate of discharge associated with a 100-year storm with at least 1-foot of freeboard from the top of the roadway shoulder. 
(4)  Velocity at design flow shall be sloped so as to maintain a minimum velocity of at least three feet per second but not more than the velocity that would cause erosion damage to the conduit. 
(5)  Street cross drain design shall be in accordance with the methods contained in the State Highway Standard 1030D, latest edition. 
(6)  Street cross drains carrying live streams shall extend to where the crown of the pipe intersects the street embankment slope and shall have flared end sections with a one foot wide collar of six inch thick concrete. 
(7)  Maintain full shoulder width across all cross drains as the minimum length. 
(8)  Street water shall be limited to a maximum distance as follows: 400 feet on grades up to seven percent; 300 feet on grades from seven to ten percent; 250 feet on grades over ten percent. 
(9)  Bridges shall be designed to span a 100-year storm frequency. 
(10)  Junction boxes having access to the pipe shall be constructed to meet the requirements of the Georgia DOT Standard 1030D (or most current). 
b.  Traffic and erosion. Before any traffic over a storm drain is allowed the developer shall provide an adequate depth and width of compacted backfill to protect the structure from damage or displacement. The developer shall remove any debris or silt that constricts the flow through a pipe as often as necessary to maintain drainage. All pipe structures shall be cleaned before the work is accepted. Any damage or displacement that may occur due to traffic or erosion shall be repaired or corrected at the developer's expense. The developer's obligation to clean and repair pipes ceases after acceptance of the system by the proper authority. 
c.  Inlets and catch basins. 
(1)  Inlets and catch basins shall be designed in accordance with the Georgia Department of Transportation's Drainage Manual for Highways, latest edition, and in accordance with the Standard Drawings. 
(2)  Frames and grates shall be as selected by the Public Works Director based upon site conditions. 
(3)  Storm water catch basins shall be spaced as approved by the Public Works Department. 
(4)  Catch basins shall be located at all low points of streets and as approved by the Public Works Department. 
d.  Piped systems. 
(1)  Design runoff and hydraulic capacity shall determine pipe size. The minimum allowable pipe diameter shall be 18 inches under a street and 15 inches under a driveway. 
(2)  Minimum Clearance. Minimum clearances are: one foot between the bottom of the roadway base and the exterior crown of the culvert, and a minimum of six inches between underground utilities and exterior crown of culverts. 
(3)  Trench Construction. Trench construction for storm drainage pipe shall be in accordance with standard drawings. 
(4)  Storm drainpipes shall be constructed of Class III reinforced concrete pipe, if within the right-of way. Outside of the right-of-way, storm drainpipes may be constructed of aluminized Type II or steel corrugated pipe; or of smooth wall-corrugated PVC or HDPE plastic pipe. 
(a)  Concrete Pipe. 
1)  Concrete pipe shall be reinforced within the right-of-way but may be plain pipe outside of the right-of-way. 
2)  Flat bottom and circular pipe sections shall be laid in a prepared trench with the socket ends pointing upstream. Sections shall be joined in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
(b)  Corrugated Aluminum or Steel Pipe. 
1)  Metal pipe shall be fully bituminous coated. 
2)  Corrugated aluminum or steel pipe and pipe arches sections shall be laid in a prepared trench with outside laps of circumferential joints pointing upstream and with longitudinal joints at the sides. Coupling bands, fastened by two or more bolts, shall join the sections. The space between adjoining sections shall be not more than the width of one corrugation. 
3)  All damaged spots in galvanized coating that expose the base metal shall be repaired before the structure is backfilled. All damaged spots in bituminous coating that expose the base metal shall be re-coated with asphalt before the structure is backfilled. 
(c)  PVC or HDPE Plastic Pipe. 
1)  PVC and HDPE plastic pipe shall be seamless with a smooth inner wall and corrugated outer wall. PVC pipe shall meet the requirements of ASTM F949. HDPE pipe shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M252 or M294, Type S. The pipe shall be manufactured as a single extrusion with annular corrugations. Joints shall be bell and spigot type with elastomeric gasket seals. 
2)  Plastic pipe shall be laid in a prepared trench and adjusted to grade in accordance with ASTM D2321. Connections to manholes or other structures shall be made with a flexible connector secured with stainless steel bands, grouted in place according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(d)  Elongation. Elongation of metal pipes shall be as shown on the plans. The contractor shall order the elongation of the vertical axis of the pipe to be done in the shop. Corrugated metal pipe shall be shipped with wire-tie in the pipe ends. Wire-ties shall be removed as soon as possible after the fill is completed. 
(5)  The design of piped storm water collection systems shall be based upon conveyance of the peak rate of discharge associated with a 25-year, 24-hour storm. 
(6)  Storm water pipes that do not carry live streams shall extend at least 50 feet beyond the front building setback lines, and may be required to extend farther where necessary to provide an adequately protected building site on the property. 
(7)  Any storm drainage pipe dedicated to the public that extends outside of the street right-of-way shall be located within a 20 foot wide easement. 
(8)  All storm drainage pipes shall be at least 18 inches below the surface and shall have a slope of at least one percent. Sub-drainage will be installed to control the surplus ground water by intercepting sidehill seepage or by lowering or regulating the ground water level where such conditions exist. 
(9)  Pipe bedding shall be provided as specified in Design and Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers, prepared by the American Society of Civil Engineers (Manuals and Reports on Engineering Practice No. 37), latest edition. 
(10)  Development storm drain outlet systems shall connect to a public storm water conveyance system or to a free-flowing stream. The developer shall be required to provide evidence of acceptable capacity to receive additional flow. 
(11)  Under no circumstances shall structures be constructed over an existing or proposed storm drain, whether public or private. 
(12)  Maximum continuous length of pipe shall be 300 feet. 
e.  Headwalls. 
(1)  Headwalls or flared end sections with concrete collars are required at the inlet and outlet on all street cross drains and storm drain pipes. 
(2)  Headwalls are to be pre-cast concrete, stone masonry with reinforced concrete footings, or poured-in-place, reinforced concrete with reinforced concrete footings. 
(3)  Flared end sections shall be constructed of the same material as the drainage pipe to which they are being concreted. 
(4)  High water elevation contour is to be based on a 25-year storm at the entrance of each head wall. 
(5)  Energy dissipation devices, such as splash pads, rip-rap, stilling basins, etc., shall be provided at the outlet of every street cross drain and storm drainpipe. 
f.  Open channels. 
(1)  All storm water channels shall be designed to carry at least the 25-year frequency storm with one foot of freeboard. 
(2)  Velocity at design flow shall be not less than six inches per second but not greater than four feet per second. A higher velocity may be allowed if actions are taken that would avoid erosion or scouring of the channel. 
(3)  All storm water channels must be designed to convey flows that prevent dwelling flooding, property damage, or public access and/or utility interruption. 
(4)  The Public Works Director may determine that the expected long-term maintenance of a surface drainage system could prove impractical, and storm water pipe collection system may be required. 
(5)  Any storm drainage channel that extends outside of the street right-of-way shall be located within a 20-foot wide easement. 
(6)  In cases in which a subdivision or development is traversed by a stream, there shall be provided an easement extending ten feet from each side of the stream bank. 
(7)  All drainage easements, natural ditches, and drainage areas shall be grassed and/or rip-rapped as necessary to control erosion. 
(8)  Cross drains under driveways shall meet the standards for street cross drains. 
6.8. - Off-street parking. 
At the time of the establishment of any use, or erection of any building, or at the time that any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area, there shall be provided permanent off-street parking spaces improved with an asphalt or concrete surface in accordance with the following requirements: 
6.8.1. - Central business district parking and urban mixed use parking. 
a.  Nonresidential uses. Due to the availability of on-street parking in the downtown and urbanized areas that are devoted to customer use, off-street parking shall not be required for any nonresidential use in the C-B-C and U-M-U zoning districts. 
b.  Residential uses. In the C-B-C and U-M-U districts, no off-street parking shall be required for three or fewer dwelling units on a property. For more than three dwelling units, off-street parking shall be provided for the property at the rate of 1.25 spaces per dwelling unit (rounded up to the nearest whole number of spaces). 
6.8.2. - Dedicated to parking use.Areas provided to meet the minimum requirements of this Section as to handicapped and other parking spaces, along with the aisles and driveways necessary to provide access to those spaces, shall not be used for any other purpose than the temporary parking of vehicles. Specifically, no such parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies. 
6.8.3. - Combination of required parking spaces.The required parking spaces for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot by the required spaces assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except as follows: 
a.  One-half of the parking spaces required for a church, theater, or assembly hall whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
b.  Parking spaces may be shared by more than one use if the Chief Building Inspector finds the total number of spaces will be adequate at the peak hours of the uses they serve. 
6.8.4. - Proximity of off-street parking spaces to use. 
a.  All required parking for all uses shall be either on the same lot or within a walking distance of 500 feet of the main entrance to the building or use it is to serve, provided, however, that no required parking spaces may be located across any State or U.S. highway or arterial street from the use they are intended to serve. 
b.  Where provision of the required parking spaces is not on the lot on which the principal use is located, the developer shall submit with his application for a development permit or building permit an instrument that subjects the parking spaces to the principal use they serve. The developer shall pay all necessary recording fees and the Building Inspection Department shall have the instrument recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court. Such parking spaces shall be within 300 feet of an entrance to the principal use. 
6.8.5. - Requirements for design of parking lots. 
a.  Backing into streets. 
(1)  Except for parcels of land devoted to one-family, two-family, or townhouse residential uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain access. 
(2)  In all cases, including parcels of land devoted to one-family, two-family, or townhouse residential uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and of such size that no vehicle is required to back into an arterial or collector street. 
b.  Off-street parking lots. 
(1)  No parking spaces may be located within the sight triangle required under Section 6.16. 
(2)  No parking spaces shall be accessible from an access driveway within the first 20 feet of the driveway back from the street right-of-way line. 
(3)  Every parking space shall provide a usable rectangular area at least nine feet wide by 18 feet long. Access aisles shall not encroach into this minimum rectangular area. Every parking space shall be clearly demarcated. 
(4)  Access aisles in parking lots must be at least 26 feet wide for two-way traffic, and 18 feet wide for one-way traffic. One-way traffic aisles must be clearly marked with directional arrows on the pavement at each intersection with another aisle. 
c.  Handicapped parking spaces. 
(1)  Handicapped parking spaces shall have an adjacent aisle five feet wide, and one in every eight handicapped spaces shall be adjacent to an aisle eight feet wide and the space shall be signed "van accessible." Handicapped parking space aisles shall be clearly demarcated. 

(2)  Handicapped spaces shall be provided in each parking lot in the following ratio to the total number of spaces required for the use: 
Table 6-9  Handicapped Spaces Required 

 
(3)  In addition to the requirements of this subsection, all handicapped parking shall comply with the requirements of the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
6.8.6. - Off-street parking requirements by use.In all zoning districts other than the C-B-C zoning district, the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for each type of land use shall be determined by the following, in addition to the number of spaces required for handicapped parking. 
a.  Residential uses: 
(1)  Single-family and two-family dwellings (including patio homes, manufactured, and mobile home): Two spaces per dwelling. 
(2)  Multifamily dwellings (townhouses and garden apartments): Two spaces for each dwelling. 
(3)  Retirement Community: One and one-half (1.5) space per unit. 
(4)  Group residences, nursing homes, convalescent homes, personal care home: In residential districts (A-R, S-R, HT-R, LT-R, D-R): one (1) space for each four (4) beds plus two (2) spaces for staff and visitors. In all other districts where personal care homes are allowed, the parking requirement shall be two (2) spaces for each five (5) beds or fraction thereof. 
b.  Office uses: 
(1)  General and professional offices, studios, insurance and real estate offices: Three spaces for 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)  Medical and dental clinics: Five spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
c.  Retail services and sales uses: 
(1)  Amusement parlor, recreational attraction, roller skating or ice skating rink: Five spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(2)  Automobile service station, automotive service business, auto and truck repairs or maintenance: Three (3) spaces for each service bay, plus one (1) space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to retail sales or showroom. 
(3)  Automobile, truck, manufactured home, recreational vehicle, and utility structure sales: One space for each 600 square feet of gross floor area of indoor sales and showroom space, plus one space for each 2,500 square feet of outdoor display area, plus three spaces for each service bay devoted to vehicle repairs or maintenance. 
(4)  Banks and other financial service establishments: Four and one-half (4.5) spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(5)  Bar or nightclub: One space for each three seats. 
(6)  Bowling center: Four spaces for each bowling lane. 
(7)  Daycare center: One space for each 400 square feet of gross floor area. 
(8)  Funeral home: 35 spaces for each viewing room. 
(9)  Furniture and carpet sales: One and one-half (1.5) spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(10)  Health club or fitness center: Four and one-half (4.5) spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(11)  Hospital: One and three-quarters (1.75) spaces for each bed licensed for patients' use, exclusive of basinets. 
(12)  Motels, hotels, and bed and breakfast inns, rooming houses and boarding houses: One space for each room to be rented, plus spaces as required under this Section for meeting space or restaurants open to the public. 
(13)  Motion picture and other theaters: One space for each three seats. 
(14)  Restaurant with seating (indoor or outdoor): One space for each three seats. 
(15)  Restaurant without seating (indoor or outdoor): One space per 100 square feet of gross floor area, minimum ten spaces. 
(16)  Shopping center: 
(a)  Gross floor area of 25,000 to 100,000 square feet: Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of total, plus three spaces per 100 seats in a movie theater, plus ten spaces per 1,000 square feet of food service area. 
(b)  Gross floor area of 100,000 to 200,000 square feet: Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of total, plus three spaces per 100 seats above the initial 450 in a movie theater, plus six spaces per 1,000 square feet of food service area. 
(c)  Gross floor area of 200,000 to 400,000 square feet: Four spaces per 1,000 square feet of total, plus three spaces per 100 seats above the initial 750 in a movie theater. 
(d)  Gross floor area of 400,000 to 600,000 square feet: Four and one-half (4.5) spaces per 1,000 square feet of total, plus three spaces per 100 seats above the initial 750 in a movie theater. 
(e)  Gross floor area of more than 600,000 square feet: Five spaces per 1,000 square feet of total, plus three spaces per 100 seats above the initial 750 in a movie theater. 
(17)  Supermarket: Four spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(18)  Retail sales and services businesses not listed above: One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area and permanent outdoor sales area. 
(19)  Mini-warehouses: One space for every 25 units, plus one for every 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to office use. 
(20)  Indoor athletic training or fitness facility: Three (3) spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
d.  Semi-public uses: 
(1)  Auditoriums, places of worship, stadiums, and similar places of public assembly: One space for each three seats, or for each 12 feet of benches, or for each 25 square feet of usable floor area in the public assembly room (which ever is greater). 
(2)  Civic clubs, private clubs, lodges, libraries, museums, and fraternal lodges: One space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
(3)  Schools: 
(a)  Elementary and Middle School: Two spaces for each classroom. 
(b)  High School: Five spaces for each classroom. 
(c)  Two-year college, Business or Vocational School: 20 spaces for each classroom. 
(d)  Four-year Colleges or Universities: Ten spaces per classroom. 
(e)  Other schools: as determined by the Director of Building Inspection. 
e.  Industrial and manufacturing uses: 
(1)  Wholesale and office-warehouse uses: One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to sales or office use, plus one space for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor devoted to storage. 
(2)  Warehouse, transfer, and storage uses: One space for each 2,000 square feet of gross floor area and outdoor storage area. 
(3)  Manufacturing uses: Two and one-half (2.5) for each 1,000 square feet gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. 2011-004ULDC, § I, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 2012-004ULDC, § III, 10-23-12; Ord. No. 2014-002ULDC, § II, 8-12-14) 
6.9. - Inter-parcel access requirements. 
6.9.1. - Internal access easements required.For any office or retail sales or services use, the property owner shall grant an access easement as described in this Section to each adjoining property that is zoned or used for an office or retail sales or services use. The purpose of the easement is to facilitate movement of customers from business to business without generating additional turning movements on the public street. 
6.9.2. - Access easement provisions. 
a.  The easement shall permit automobile access from the adjoining property to driveways and parking areas intended for customer or tenant use; but parking spaces may be restricted to use by the owner's customers and tenants only. 
b.  The granting of such easement shall be effective upon the granting of a reciprocal easement by the adjoining property owner. 
c.  Upon the availability of access to driveways and parking areas of the adjoining lot, pavement or other surfacing of the owner's driveways and parking areas shall be extended to the point of access on the property line. 
6.9.3. - Relief.The Governing Body's Manager or Director of Public Works or their designee may grant an exception to the requirements of this article upon a determination that the proposed land use is such that adverse impact of the required easement on use of the property would outweigh the reduced impact on the public street provided by the reciprocal easements; or that changes in grade of other physical obstacles make interparcel connection unreasonable. 
6.10. - Street access control. 
6.10.1. - Approval required.No curbs or medians on public streets or rights-of-way shall be cut or altered for access without a curb cut permit issued by Public Works Department. 
6.10.2. - Driveway connections. 
a.  Vehicular access from properties to streets shall comply with the following dimensional requirements, measured at the right-of-way line. 
Table 6-10  Driveway Width Requirements 

 
* Includes divided entrances with center islands. 
_____
b.  Driveway aprons. Driveway connections shall be provided between the edge of the pavement or back of curb to the right-of-way line. No property may be afforded access from a public street except as follows: 
(1)  Curb and gutter streets shall be provided with a driveway apron constructed of 3,000 psi concrete at least six inches thick. Sidewalks, where provided, shall be warped to the driveway apron and are to be identified across the driveway apron by construction joints or control joints. 
(2)  Swale ditch section streets shall be provided with a driveway apron constructed of 3,000 psi concrete at least six inches thick, or asphaltic concrete of the same thickness and type as the paving course(s) for the street. 
(3)  All driveway aprons shall have a radius connecting the driveway to the curb line or pavement edge as follows: 
Table 6-11  Driveway Apron Radii 

 
(4)  All driveway aprons shall slope away from the roadway to the right-of-way line (for curb and gutter streets) and to the centerline of the drainage ditch (for swale ditch sections). 
6.10.3. - Limitations on access. 

a.  Requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation shall apply whenever more restrictive than the standards in this code. 
b.  No point of access shall be allowed within 35 feet of the right-of-way line of any street intersections for single-family and two-family residential lots and within 50 feet for multi-family and nonresidential properties. 
c.  In office, commercial and industrial zoning districts, no curb cut shall be less than 40 feet from another curb cut, measured along the right-of-way line, nor less than 20 feet from any property line. In cases of practical difficulty, these distances may be reduced upon approval of the Director of Public Works if adequate traffic safety conditions can be maintained. 
d.  Along State or U.S. highways, no more than one point of vehicular access from a property shall be permitted for each 300 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof. 
e.  Along major streets other than State or U.S. highways, no more than two points of vehicular access from a property to each abutting public street shall be permitted for each 200 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof; provided however, that lots with less than 100 feet of frontage shall have no more than one point of access to any one public street. The Public Works Department shall determine whether the points of access may be unrestricted or will have to be designed for right-in, right-out traffic flow. 
6.10.4. - Swale ditches within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
a.  In addition to the aforementioned requirements of Section 6.10 Street Access Control, these standards are herby enacted to supplement driveway access within unincorporated areas of the county. Before the grading, paving, construction, and repair of any driveway, the Chief Building Official must be notified and must make, or cause to be made, an inspection thereof; and the proposed improvements must receive approval of Floyd County Public Works. 
b.  All work shall conform to the following specifications and standards. These standards are implemented by Floyd County for the purpose of ensuring proper driveway installation and avoiding future problems with the county road system. 
(1)  Driveway standards: 
a)  Maximum driveway width shall comply with Section 6.10.2 Driveway Connections, table 6-10. 
b)  Angle of driveway into the county road right-of-way must be between 60 and 90 degrees. 
c)  Maximum grade, which shall be permitted, is 15 percent with the right-of-way. 
d)  The driveway surface connecting the county road must have a minimum five percent slope down and away from the edge of pavement for the lesser of a distance of six feet, or to the centerline of a roadside ditch, to prevent surface water drainage fro the driveway flowing into the county road surface. 
e)  The driveway shall not obstruct or impair drainage in roadside ditches or roadside areas. The driveway piping shall be adequate for surface water drainage along the roadway and in no case less than fifteen-inch-diameter pipe. 
f)  Driveway pipe, if required, shall be Class III reinforced concrete and shall have a minimum installed length of 24 feet. 
g)  No landscaping, fences, terraces, or other natural or artificial features adjacent to the driveway shall impair visibility from approaching vehicular traffic where that visibility is a threat to safety. 
h)  The driveway shall be located on the property so as to provide proper sight distance. Minimum sight distance requirements must comply with Section 6.7.3. Vertical Alignment of Streets, table 6-3. 
(2)  Application for permit. 
(a)  The Office of the Floyd County Engineer shall be responsible for issuance of driveway permits separate from other building permits. 
(b)  Upon application for a driveway permit, the Applicant will be given two stakes to mark the proposed driveway location at the site. 
(c)  Floyd County Public Works will inspect the location and the state the required pipe size and other special notes on the location of the driveway. 
(d)  Any property with an existing driveway that requires a building permit for a new construction shall comply with these requirements herein. 
(3)  Driveway connection installation. With the exception of State Routes, all driveway connection installations within unincorporated Floyd County will be inspected by Floyd County Public Works. 
(a)  At the request of the Applicant, Floyd County Public Works will install driveway connections on the road right-of-way. A fee schedule for materials and installation shall be set by the Floyd County Board of Commissioners for any driveway with pipe up to 36 inches in diameter. All fees shall be paid in full at the Office of the Floyd County Engineer. 
(b)  The Applicant may elect to install their own driveway connection; however, Floyd County Public Works must inspect and approve any driveway connection not installed by them. Any development that fails to comply with the driveway standards herein shall not receive a final electrical inspection until such time that the driveway has been inspected and approved by Floyd County Public Works. 
(4)  Maintenance of driveway. 
(a)  The Public Works Department will be responsible for the maintenance of the drainage pipe under the driveway and will also be responsible for providing a smooth transition from the county road to the driveway with the road right-of-way. 
(b)  The property owner is responsible for maintaining the surface of the driveway and any associated improvements to the property, which has encroached upon the county right-of-way such as landscaping, fences, etc. 
(c)  If any improvements encroaching on the county right-of-way are found to be in violation of this section or are a safety hazard, the property owner will be notified in writing to remove such improvement. If the property owner does not comply within a reasonable period of time, the Floyd County Public Works will remove such improvement. 
(5)  Variances. 
(a)  A variance may be requested in cases where these requirements might create an undue hardship. 
(b)  Before a variance can be considered, a letter must be submitted to the Public Works Director stating the reasons for requesting a variance. 
(c)  Within five working days, a decision on granting the variance will be made by the Public Works Director. The party requesting the variance will be notified by letter if the variance is to be granted or not. Any special conditions attached to the variance will also be stated in this letter. 
(d)  The decision of the Public Works Director may be appealed to the County Manager, who shall have the authority to reverse the decision. An appeal to the County Manager shall be decided in a timely manner. 
(e)  If the decision of the Public Works Director is upheld by the County Manager, the applicant may further appeal to the Board of Commissioners by submitting a written notice of appeal. An appeal submitted to the Board of Commissioners shall be considered and decided within 30 days. 
6.11. - Sight triangle. 
a.  A sight triangle (typical) shall be defined at every street intersection with another street. 
(1)  At public street intersections, the sight triangle is delineated by the two intersecting street right-of-way lines and a line connecting the right-of-way lines at the points indicated in the Sight Triangle Table. The connecting points shall be measured from the right-of-way lines extended to their point of intersection. 
Table 6-12  Sight Triangle Table  (See Drawing) 

 
b.  Within the sight triangle, the planting of trees or other vegetation or the location of structures exceeding 30 inches in height that would obstruct the clear sight across the area of the easement shall be prohibited. 
6.12. - Construction activities and sequencing. 
6.12.1. - General. 
a.  Clearing and grading shall not proceed until issuance of an approved development permit by the Building Inspection Department. 
b.  Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades drawn on the approved grading plan. 
6.12.2. - Erosion and sedimentation control measures (see section 6.13).Required erosion and sedimentation control measures must be installed in accordance with the most recent locally adopted erosion and sedimentation control ordinance and the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan prior to any major development activity and as development progresses. 
6.12.3. - Installation of storm drain facilities.Construction of the storm drain facilities shall be initiated as part of the grading of the site and in accordance with the approved storm water management plan. Storm water detention facilities shall be constructed prior to the installation of any other site improvements, and may be utilized under proper design as sedimentation basins during development. Installation of all other storm drainage pipes, culverts, headwalls, and ditches, shall be coordinated with the construction of streets and other site improvements, as appropriate. 
6.12.4. - Earthen embankments.Earthen embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed a compacted thickness of six inches per layer and shall be compacted to a density of 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99 in a areas where structures, parking lots and drives, streets, and utilities are to be placed. All other embankments are to be compacted to at least 90 percent. Proofrolling shall be accomplished prior to placement of embankments to detect soft spots. 
6.12.5. - Slopes and shoulder improvements. 
a.  The maximum slope for all fill or cut slopes shall be 2:1. 
b.  The depth of cut shall be construed to be the maximum cut or fill occurring in any one section of cut or fill. The slope on cut or fill shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or fill. When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, slope may be changed to vertical slope upon the written approval of the appropriate City or County Engineer. 
6.12.6. - Street construction and utilities. 
a.  Basic requirements for all streets. 
(1)  Grading. 
(e)[a.]  All streets, roads, and alleys shall be graded to their full width by the developer so that pavement extensions or sidewalks, where required or if installed, can be constructed on the same level plane. 
(f)[b.]  Preparation of roadway: Before grading is started the entire area to be paved shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush, and other objectionable materials. In all areas to be graded or filled, the developer shall stockpile the topsoil later to be spread in all disturbed areas. 
(g)[c.]  Grading shall be accurately done to the lines and grades shown on the plans. Embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed six inches and compacted to a density of 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by an approved method. Proofrolling shall be accomplished prior to placement of embankments to detect soft spots. 
(2)  Slopes and shoulder improvements. 
(a)  The minimum width for all shoulders from back edge of the curb shall be eight feet. All shoulders shall slope one-fourth (.25) inch to the foot toward the roadway. 
(b)  On streets with swale ditch drainage, the shoulders shall slope three-quarters (.75) inch to the foot away from the roadway for at least five feet to the drainage channel. 
(c)  When all construction is completed, all slopes and shoulders shall be cleared of all rubbish and shall have a stand of grass to prevent undue erosion, either by sprigging or seeding. 
(d)  If any sections of the subgrade are composed of unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the appropriate Public Works Department and replaced with suitable, thoroughly compacted material. 
(e)  When the street is to be used for construction traffic before paving work is completed, a layer of No. 5 stone can be laid as a traffic surface if the developer so desires. 
(1)  This material shall not be used as part of the base material. 
(2)  If may be worked into the subgrade; or it shall be removed before the base course is set up for paving. 
(3)  Provision shall be made to drain low points in road construction when the final paving surface is delayed. 
(f)  Abutting property shall be suitably sloped to the right-of-way line. 
(3)  Protection of cut or fill slopes. Immediately after grading and filling and re-spreading of topsoil, all areas of disturbed soil shall be fertilized and seeded (or in steep areas sodded or otherwise appropriately treated) with suitable vegetative cover to retard erosion. 
(4)  Installation of utilities. 
(a)  After grading is completed and approved, the curb lines or edge of pavement lines, as applicable, shall be staked by the developer's Registered Land Surveyor. Before any base is applied, all of the underground utilities-water mains, sewer mains, gas mains, or any other underground utilities, and all service connections related thereto-shall be installed completely and provided throughout the length of the street and across the flat section. Service connections for sanitary sewer and water shall be extended to the right-of-way lines. 
(b)  No private improvements, such as private lawn sprinkler systems, yard lighting, and the like, shall be installed within a public right-of-way except by authorization of the Public Works Director. Such authorization, if issued, shall require the owner to assume all repair costs of the owner's facilities should they become damaged. 
(5)  Preparation of subgrade. Prior to placement of the street base, the subgrade shall be compacted to 95 percent density. 
(6)  Street base, curbing, and paving. Street base, curbing, and paving shall be installed by the developer in accordance with the requirements and standards of this Development Code. 
b.  Testing requirements. It is the responsibility of the developer to insure that all required tests are made and reported to the Public Works Department. The cost of all testing and quality control shall be performed at the expense of the developer by qualified testing laboratories. 
Table 6-13  Testing Requirements 

 
6.12.7. - Traffic control devices and street lights. 
a.  Streets signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization, shall be provided through payment of fees to the Public Works Department. Traffic control devices may also be installed by the developer after receiving written approval from the Director of Public Works. 
b.  The installation of all street lighting fixtures within the City right-of-way must be approved by the Public Works Director prior to such installation. 
c.  Outside of the City, street lights are to be installed by the developer in accordance with the County's requirements regarding street lighting. 
6.13. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
6.13.1. - Exemptions. 
a.  This Section shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as same as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72. 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying. 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities, which result in minor soil erosion. 
(4)  Single-family detached dwellings, as follows: 
(a)  The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy; or 
(b)  The construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two lots and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in this Section. 
For single-family detached dwelling construction covered by the provisions of this subparagraph, there shall be a greenway zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such greenway zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the greenway zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller greenway shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the greenway zone shall be 50 horizontal feet, but the EPD Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the greenway shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller greenway shall be granted. 
b.  Where this Section requires compliance with the minimum requirements of this Development Code and the most recently adopted local Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance, issuing authorities shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a development permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by development permit holders. 
6.13.2. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control. 
a.  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this Section shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sediment control measures. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sediment control plan. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall conform to the requirements of this Section. The application of measures shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sediment pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
b.  Best Management Practices. 
(1)  Best managements practices as set forth in this Section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action of the EPD Director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a development permit for the discharge of storm water. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any development permit for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout streams. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines issued by the EPD Director. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any development for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The EPD Director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board of Natural Resources, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges form land-disturbing activities occur. 
c.  Minimum requirements. Land-disturbing activities shall, at a minimum, be undertaken using best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia in effect at the time the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented. 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practical minimum. 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practical. 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practical. 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed areas is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this Section. 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible and provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in Subsection 6.13.2.b(2). 
(15)  Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within the 100-year flood plain except in compliance with Section 6-14 of this Development Code. 
d.  Greenways. 
(1)  Along State Waters: Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 100 feet of the banks of a major river tributary as established under Section 6.19 of this Code, or within 25 feet of the banks of any other state waters, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except: 
(a)  Where the EPD Director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment; or 
(b)  Where otherwise allowed by the EPD Director; or 
(c)  Where a drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; provided however, that greenways of at least 25 feet established pursuant to the Metropolitan River Protection Act shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the EPD. 
(2)  Along Trout Streams: Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 100 horizontal feet, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, of the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" unless a variance for such activity is granted by the EPD Director, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
e.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a development permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Development Code or the terms of the development permit. 
6.14. - Flood damage prevention. 
6.14.1. - Findings of fact.The flood hazard areas of the jurisdiction are subject to periodic inundation which can result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
6.14.2. - Statement of purpose.It is the purpose of this Section to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
a.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
b.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
c.  Control the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
d.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; and 
e.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which naturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
6.14.3. - Objectives.The objectives of this Section are to: 
a.  Protect human life and health; 
b.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
c.  Minimize the need for the rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
d.  Minimize prolonged business interruption; 
e.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, and streets and bridges located in flood plains; 
f.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; and 
g.  Insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
6.14.4. - General provisions. 
a.  Lands to which this section applies. This Section shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction. 
b.  Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and all locally adopted flood ordinances referenced as follows, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Development Code: 
(1)  For the City of Rome, the Flood Insurance Study dated August 9, 2000, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto. 
(2)  For Floyd County, the Flood Insurance Study dated August 9, 2000, with accompanying maps and other supporting data, and any revision thereto. 
c.  Establishment of flood area permit. A Flood Area Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this Section prior to the commencement of any development activities within an area of special flood hazard. See Section 2.6. 
d.  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this Section, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statues. 
e.  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this Section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Section does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Section shall not create liability on the part of the City or County or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Section or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
6.14.5. - Administration. 
a.  Chief building official. Designated as administrator. The Chief Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Section. 
b.  Chief building official. Duties and responsibilities. The duties of the Chief Building Official regarding any land within an area of special flood hazard shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all Flood Area Permits to assure that the permit requirements of this Section have been satisfied. 
(2)  Advise permittee that additional federal or state permits may be required, and, if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities and the EPD prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  Submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the Federal Emergency Management Agency for any altered or relocated watercourse, to ensure accuracy of community flood map. 
(5)  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of a watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(6)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved buildings, in accordance with Section 2.6 of this Development Code and the most recently adopted flood hazard local ordinance as attached by reference. 
(7)  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level, to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been flood-proofed, in accordance with Section 2 of this Development Code. 
(8)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular building, the Chief Building Official shall obtain certification from a Professional Engineer or architect. 
(9)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the Chief Building Inspector shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this ordinance. 
(10)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with this Section, then the Chief Building Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this Section. 
(11)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this Section shall be maintained in the office of the Building Inspection Department and shall be open for public inspection. 
6.14.6. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
a.  Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as Floodways. Since the Floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris and potential projectiles and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply; 
(1)  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments, are prohibited, unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection a(1) is satisfied, all new construction shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this Section. 
b.  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
(2)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or a lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchor. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(4)  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(5)  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  New and replacement water systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate filtration of floodwaters into the system. 
(7)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the system into the floodwaters. 
(8)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(9)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a building that is in compliance with the provisions of this Section shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as defined in this Section. 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement to a building which is not in compliance with the provisions of this Section shall be undertaken only if such non-conformity is not furthered, extended, or replaced. 
c.  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data have been provided, new construction or substantial improvement of any buildings shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Residential Construction. 
(a)  Any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. 
(b)  Sufficient fill shall be placed, if necessary, to provide at least 15 feet of clearance at the ground surface between all faces of any building, containing a dwelling unit, and the base flood limits. 
(2)  Nonresidential Construction. 
(a)  Any commercial, industrial, or nonresidential building or manufactured building shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all "A" zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in Section 2.6 of this Development Code. 
(b)  Sufficient fill shall be placed, if necessary, to provide at least 30 feet of clearance at the ground surface from the face of the building, at its principal entrance, and the base flood limits. 
d.  Flood storage capacity and impediments. Any cut or fill within the floodplain must be graded to provide positive drainage to the main watercourse. Fill placed within the floodplain must be limited such that at no point is the cross-sectional area of the floodplain outside the floodway, and below the base flood elevation, as measured perpendicular to the direction of the watercourse, reduced by more than 60 percent. 
e.  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by the foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. 
(a)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other covering or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
(b)  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
(c)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be portioned or finished into separate rooms. 
f.  Standards for Streams without Established Base Flood Elevation and/or Floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data has been provided or no floodways have been provided, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material or structures, shall be located with areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood at any point within the jurisdiction. The engineering certification shall be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in this Section. 
g.  Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for all subdivision proposals and other proposed development (including manufactured home parks and subdivisions). 
(5)  All subdivision proposals within a residential zone shall have lots with no less than 70 percent of the minimum lot size, as established in Section 3.5, above the base flood elevation. 
(6)  All subdivision proposals within a non-residential zone shall have lots with no less than 40 percent of the minimum lot size, as established in Section 3.5, above the base flood elevation. 
h.  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AH and AO Zones). Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate. The following provisions apply in these areas: 
(1)  Residential Buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of residential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including, basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at three feet above the high adjacent grade. 
(2)  Nonresidential Buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential buildings shall: 
(a)  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, in feet, above the highest adjacent grade. If no depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(b)  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, the building shall be completely flood-proofed to or above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effects of buoyancy. 
i.  As-constructed certification required. Upon completion of the grading and/or construction for any development within or affecting an area of special flood hazard, it shall be the duty of the development permit holder to submit to the Chief Building Official the following As-Constructed Certification: 
(1)  If no grading or construction occurred within the floodplain, an As-Constructed Certification shall so state; or 
(2)  An As-Constructed site plan showing the location of all structures, fill, and above ground facilities, as well as elevation and topography in relation to mean sea level. The site plan shall include the certification statement. "All floodplain encroachments, including fill, new construction, and substantial improvements comply with the Provisions of Flood Hazard Reduction of the Unified Land Development Code of Floyd County and the City of Rome, Georgia." 
(3)  Certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by such registered land surveyor or professional engineer. 
6.15. - Stormwater management. 
6.15.1. - Applicability and exemptions. 
a.  All persons proposing development or construction in the jurisdiction shall prepare a Stormwater Management Plan. No final subdivision plat shall be approved and no development or building permit shall be issued until and unless the Stormwater Management Plan had been reviewed and approved by the Director of Public Works, except as exempt below. 
b.  The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this Section and the requirement of providing a stormwater management plan: 
(1)  Agricultural land management. 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family detached dwellings. 
(3)  Developments with a total land area of 0.4 (four-tenths) of an acre or less. 
(4)  Residential development consisting of single-family houses, each on a lot of three acres or greater. 
(5)  Residential development consisting of single-family houses, each on a lot of one to three acres and where it is demonstrated that each lot will have no more than ten percent impervious surface. 
(6)  Single-family residential construction on a lot platted prior to March 26, 1991. 
6.15.2. - Variances.Requests for variances from the requirements of this section shall be made in accordance with Article 2.11. 
6.15.3. - Stormwater management plan. 
a.  The Stormwater Management Plan shall be prepared under the supervision of, and certified by, a professional engineer registered in the state and consistent with all provisions of the most currently adopted local stormwater management ordinance. 
b.  The Stormwater Management Plan shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed development on water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff. The developer shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, construction, and development shall be conducted in strict accordance with the plan. 
c.  The minimum information submitted for support of a Stormwater Management Plan shall be as follows: 
(1)  Site plan. Provide a site plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet with the following characteristics and information: 
(a)  Graphic scale, north arrow, and date. The north arrow shall be identified as magnetic, true, or grid north. 
(b)  Vicinity map showing the site location relative to surrounding landmarks, highway intersections, rivers, and streams. 
(c)  Topography showing existing and proposed elevations in accordance with the following: 
1)  For sites smaller than one acre in size, show the direction of drainage and spot elevations at all breaks in grade and along drainage channels or swales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
2)  For sites of one acre and larger with slopes of less than approximately two percent, show contours at intervals of not more than two feet and spot elevations at all breaks in grade along drainage channels or swales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
3)  For sites of one acre and larger with slopes of more than two percent, show contours with an interval of not more than five feet. 
4)  Elevations shall be based on the datum plane established by the United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey. 
(d)  Delineation of property lines and deed record names of adjacent property owners. 
(e)  Locations and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads and utility lines, either on or adjacent to the property to be developed. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or rights-of-way and show the location of towers and poles. 
(f)  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown. 
(g)  Location of existing buildings and other improvements. 
(h)  Proposed conditions: 
1)  Layout of proposed streets, roads, alleys, drives, paved areas and public crosswalks, with widths and road names or designations. 
2)  Preliminary plans of storm sewer system with grade, pipe size and location of outlet. 
3)  Location of proposed buildings and other improvements. 
4)  Certification by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer attesting that the site plan has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards of this Section. 
(2)  An adequate drainage system for the property or development, including necessary ditches, pipes, culverts, drains, inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. The location and size of all proposed drainage improvements shall be designed in accordance with and meet all standards relating to Stormwater Drainage under Article 6 of this Development Code. The Stormwater Management plan shall include: 
(a)  Location and profiles of all storm drainage pipes and slopes of receiving channels. Hydraulic grade lines to be shown on all pipes that cross streets and on all detention basin outfalls. 
(b)  Stormwater detention facility design and construction details. 
(c)  Location and typical construction details of all inlets and catch basins, headwalls and other drainage structures. 
(d)  The 100-year ponding limits above each street cross drain. 
(e)  The hydrologic and hydraulic analysis required for the system design under Article 6.15.4. 
(f)  When required by the Director of Public Works, provides a soils investigation for all sites proposed as ponds or impoundments or for stormwater detention. Locate all soil borings on the site plan required in section 6.15.3a(1) above. 
(g)  Provide a reconstruction schedule for both temporary and permanent facilities. Reference the schedule to other development activities such as clearing, rough grading, construction, final grading, and vegetation establishment. 
(h)  Provide a plan for maintenance of the stormwater facilities. Describe specific actions and a recommended schedule of maintenance required to maintain the facilities at a satisfactory level of service. 
(i)  Provide a cost estimate for construction of the stormwater management facilities. Provide a separate estimate of the annual cost for maintenance of the proposed facilities. 
6.15.4. - Hydrologic and hydraulic analysis. 
a.  Analyses shall be performed in accordance with the publication entitled Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
b.  In order to obtain a Development Permit, a hydrology report shall be prepared that includes appropriate calculations for the two-year, ten-year, 25-year, and 100-year design frequency storms. The report shall show detailed calculations indicating the formula used, along with co-efficient of run-off, the time of concentration, the rainfall intensity, the discharge velocity, and the source of all data used. 
c.  The hydrology report shall include a map outlining the areas and showing the acreage of all on-site and off-site drainage basins contributing flow through the project for both the pre- and post- development conditions. 
d.  Runoff peak rate of discharge for drainage areas up to 50 acres in size may be calculated using the Rational Method. Flows from drainage areas larger that 50 acres in size shall be calculated using the SCS Method. 
e.  Rainfall intensities used in hydrologic analyses shall not be less than those shown by applicable rainfall curves published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for the city and county area. Those curves are on file and available for inspection in the Department of Engineering Services. 
f.  Runoff coefficients used for pre- and post- development activity conditions for the Rational Method shall be consistent with local conditions. For the SCS method, the runoff curve numbers found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia shall be used. 
g.  Hydraulic capacity for open channel flow, pipes, and ditches shall be determined using the Manning Equation. 
h.  The controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required for all developments or construction in order to prevent any increase in excess of ten percent of one cubic foot per second of the predevelopment rate of runoff for a ten-year frequency storm. Where controlled release is required, such releases shall prevent any increase in the predevelopment rate of runoff of less frequent storms up to and including the 100-year storm event. 
6.15.5. - Stormwater detention facilities. 
a.  Reservoir routing methods shall be used for all detention facility design. 
b.  The drainage system being developed shall have adequate capacity to bypass through the development the flow from all upstream areas for a storm of 25-year design frequency for the land off site and upstream under existing development. The 25-year flow rate of record or computed using a runoff coefficient of not less than 0.50. 
c.  The Public Works Department may permit several developers to construct joint facilities. The Public Works Department shall approve or disapprove the waiver of on-site drainage or detention facilities on the basis of the engineering feasibility of a combined facility. No use of land or occupancy of buildings within the properties served by these facilities shall be permitted until completion of the retention and drainage structures, except upon specific approval. 
d.  The Public Works Department shall be authorized to approve of alternative methods of stormwater detention based on appropriate engineering studies that do demonstrate equal or better performance in accordance with the jurisdiction's stormwater management practices. Approved alternatives may include well maintained and landscaped lakes that may be provided to act jointly as detention reservoirs and recreation facilities or aesthetic focal points within forest preserve areas, public or private parks, housing developments, shopping centers, and industrial parks. Other control methods to regulate the rate of stormwater discharge which may be acceptable include, but not limited to, detention on flat roofs, parking lots, streets, lawns, underground storage, and oversized storm drains with restricted outlets. 
e.  Detention facilities and drainage structures shall, where possible, use natural topography and natural vegetation. In lieu thereof these shall have planted trees and vegetation such as shrubs and permanent ground cover on their borders. All on-site facilities shall be properly maintained by the owner in such a way that they do not become nuisances. Nuisance conditions shall include: improper storage resulting in uncontrolled runoff and overflow; stagnate water with concomitant algae growth, insect breeding, and odors; discarded debris, and safety hazards created by the facility's operation. 
f.  Principal outlets such as weirs shall be constructed of concrete block or reinforced concrete with watertight joints. Outlet pipes shall be at least six inches in diameter. Riser pipes, if used, shall be at least eight inches in diameter. 
g.  No portion of any detention facility shall be located in any required buffer, street right-of-way, or within a flood hazard. 
h.  The 100-year ponding limits of a detention facility shall not encroach upon a public street. 
i.  Stormwater Detention Facilities in the County. Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed on a separate lot from all buildings in the development, and shall be dedicated to the County as a public improvement for maintenance. 
j.  Stormwater Detention Facilities in the City. 
(1)  An easement at least 25 feet in width shall be required to provide access to the detention facility from a street. 
(2)  Facilities shall be located on tracts of land designated on the recorded plat, with sufficient area around the perimeter to provide access for maintenance purposes and shall be immediately adjacent to, or provide an access easement to a public street. The access easement shall provide at least ten feet of width clearance from above-ground obstructions including trees, headwalls, weirs, or other structures. Easements shall be provided for detention facilities serving single-family residential subdivisions and subject to City maintenance as provided in Article 6.15.8. 
(3)  Facilities that do not exclusively serve single-family residential subdivisions are the perpetual responsibility of the land owner. 
k.  Detention facilities shall be enclosed with a minimum four-foot high permanent fence around all facilities having a maximum water or undercut depth of more than four feet or a bank slope greater than 1.5 to one and shall be equipped with a gate of sufficient width to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities. Fencing may be waived by the Director of Public Works in areas zoned other than residential and where the pond is more than 500 feet from a residential district or single or multi-family residence. 
l.  Construction of the stormwater management facilities shall be initiated as part of the grading of the site. Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed prior to the installation of any other site improvements, and may be utilized under proper design as sedimentation basins during development. Installation of all other storm drainage pipes, culverts, headwalls, and ditches shall be coordinated with the construction of streets and/or other site improvements, as appropriate. 
6.15.6. - Maintenance responsibilities. 
a.  It shall be the responsibility of the developer to maintain all facilities required by the stormwater management plan during construction. The developer shall be responsible for removing temporary structures or facilities on the completion of the construction. The developer and all subsequent owners shall also be responsible for maintaining the permanent facilities identified by the stormwater management plan to remain after construction is complete except as provided in Section 6-15.8 for single-family residential subdivisions. 
b.  Should an owner fail to maintain the stormwater management facilities in a state of service intended by the stormwater management plan, then the Director of Public Works shall notify the owner in writing of the deficiencies and specific minimum maintenance requirements to remedy such deficiencies. 
c.  If the owner fails to perform the required maintenance work within a reasonable period of time (30 days maximum) the owner shall be in violation of the provisions of this Code. 
6.15.7. - Stormwater performance surety. 
a.  Upon approval of the Stormwater Management Plan, but before the issuance of a building permit or subdivision plat approval, the applicant shall be required to post a performance bond, cash escrow, certified check, or other acceptable form of performance. 
b.  The amount of the surety shall not be less than the total estimated construction cost of the facilities required by the Stormwater Management Plan. 
c.  The performance bond or other securities shall not be released until the following requirements have been met. The Director of Public Works shall: 
(1)  Perform a final inspection of the facilities and determine that they have been constructed in compliance with the Stormwater Management Plan. 
(2)  Determine that all provisions of the Stormwater Management Plan have been faithfully executed. 
d.  A provision may be made for partial release of the amount of the bond pro rata upon completion and acceptance of various stages of development as specifically delineated, described and scheduled in the Stormwater Management Plan. The applicant shall notify the Public Works Department upon completion of each stage that is ready for inspection. 
6.15.8. - Acceptance of facilities. 
a.  Developments and properties inside the City of Rome: 
(1)  In the case of single-family residential subdivisions approved after December 2, 1985, the City shall assume responsibility for the functional maintenance of facilities one year after the release of the performance bond required by this Development Code. At the end of the developer's maintenance period all detention structures shall have a positive slope to the outlet in order to facilitate complete drainage. 
(2)  Detention facilities in single-family residential subdivisions constructed prior to December 2, 1985, will not be accepted for maintenance, as provided in Subsection a.(1), unless individually approved by and at the discretion of the City Commission and unless suitable access easements are provided. 
(3)  Prior to acceptance of a detention facility for functional maintenance, an access easement shall be provided to the City in accordance with Article 6.15.5. 
b.  Developments and properties in Unincorporated Floyd County: 
(1)  In the case of single-family residential subdivisions approved after March 26, 1991, the County shall assume responsibility for the functional maintenance of facilities one year after the release of the performance bond required by this Development Code. At the end of the developer's maintenance period all detention structures shall have a positive slope to the outlet in order to facilitate complete drainage. 
(2)  Detention facilities in single-family residential subdivisions constructed prior to March 26, 1991, will not be accepted for maintenance, as provided in Subsection b.(1), unless individually approved by and at the discretion of the County Commission and unless suitable access easements are provided. 
6.15.9. - Inspection and enforcement.The Chief Building Official shall have the power and authority to perform any inspection necessary to insure conformance with this section and to employ Stop Work and/or Cease and Desist Orders until compliance with this section has been satisfied. Such inspection and enforcement shall be conducted in accordance with Article 7.5 of this Code. 
6.15.10. - Violations and penalties.Any person or developer who fails to comply with the requirements of this section is subject to the penalties described in Article 7.5 of this Code, including but not limited to revocation of permits and forfeiture of performance surety. 
6.15.11. - NPDES requirements.All construction of off-site or on-site improvements shall adhere to National Pollution Discharge Elimination system (NPDES) best management practices to prevent deleterious material or pollutants from entering the City or County storm drain systems. 
6.16. - Buffers. 
6.16.1. - Buffers required.A buffer shall be required in any multi-family or nonresidential development project along a side or rear lot line that abuts a less intense land zoning district, as follows: 
Table 6-14  Situations Where Buffer Required 
Provide a buffer on the lot of this use ✓ 

 
□ = buffer required 
6.16.2. - Buffer design standards. 
a.  General. Buffer areas shall contain no driveways, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities, or any other structures or accessory uses except for a fence, wall, or earthen berm constructed to provide the visual screening required to meet the standards of this Ordinance. Underground utilities may be permitted to cross a buffer if the screening standards of this Ordinance will be subsequently achieved. Required vehicular access through a buffer may be allowed as a condition of a zoning, Special Use, or Planned Development approval by the Governing Body. 
b.  Natural buffers. Natural buffers may contain deciduous or perennial vegetation, but shall contain evergreen shrubs and trees suitable to local growing conditions that will provide an opaque visual screen during all seasons of the year. 
c.  Structural buffers. Structural buffers shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Structural buffers shall be vegetated throughout the minimum area required for the buffer around in fences or walls and upon any earthen berms, which may include grass, ground covers, shrubs, and trees. 
(2)  All earthen berms shall have a maximum side slope of two horizontal to one vertical. Earthen berms shall not be constructed within the drip line of any existing trees that will remain on the property. 
(3)  Trees shall be located or planted within any structural buffer at a density of no less than one tree for each 20 feet of buffer length or portion thereof. New trees shall have a caliper of no less than two inches upon planting, and may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
(4)  Fences and freestanding walls shall present a finished and decorative appearance to the abutting property, and shall be located no closer to the property line than two feet. Shrubs, ground covers, or other vegetation shall be provided between the fence or wall and the property line so as to provide a decorative effect, following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
(5)  Fences used in buffers must be made of rot-resistant material or protected from deterioration with water-proofing material. 
d.  Examples of buffers. The following illustration provides examples of natural and structural buffers. Other solutions meeting the minimum requirements of this Section are also acceptable, if approved by the Building Official. 


6.16.3. - Minimum buffer requirements.A buffer required by this Ordinance shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Width of buffer. 
(1)  Side Lot Line. Buffer required along any side lot line shall be no less than the minimum required width of the side principal building setback, or ten feet, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Rear Lot Line. Buffers required along any rear lot line shall be no less than the minimum required width of the rear principal building setback, or ten feet, whichever is greater. 
b.  Minimum required screening. Minimum required screening shall consist of a natural buffer utilizing existing vegetation or a natural structural buffer, whichever provides an opaque visual screen to a height of six feet, or any combination of existing and replanted vegetation which can be reasonably be expected to create an opaque visual screen six feet high with two growing seasons. 
c.  Maintenance. Every buffer required by this Ordinance shall be maintained by the owner of the property where the buffer is located, so as to provide an opaque visual screen to the height of six feet on a continuous, year-round basis. 
6.16.4. - Buffer modifications. 
a.  The Board of Adjustment having jurisdiction may reduce the width of the buffer to no less than 15 feet if the buffer includes the combination of fence, vegetation, and berm that will provide effective separation and adequate visual and audial screening. 
b.  Buffers may be located on the site to best achieve the screening required. 
c.  The Board of Adjustment having jurisdiction may waive a buffer requirement if the Comprehensive Plan anticipates future development on the adjoining property in a land use category such that a buffer would not be required by this Ordinance. 
6.17. - Landscaping. 
6.17.1. - Landscaping strips. 
a.  Frontage landscape strips. A minimum 20 foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along the full length of any street frontage of a multi-family or nonresidential development (except in the C-B-C zoning district). 
(1)  Frontage landscape strips shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities, or any other accessory uses except for the following: 
(a)  Retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design. 
(b)  Pedestrian-oriented facilities such as sidewalks and bus stops. 
(c)  Underground utilities. 
(d)  Driveways required in order to access the property. 
(e)  Signs otherwise permitted by this Code. 
(2)  One tree shall be provided within the frontage landscape strip for every 40 feet of length of street frontage, or portion thereof. Such trees may be deciduous or evergreen, but must be of a type that is suitable to local growing conditions and that will normally reach at least 12 inches at diameter breast height upon maturity. The trees may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
(3)  All portions of a frontage landscape strip shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass, or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched or covered by permitted structures. 
(4)  Upon planting, new trees shall have a caliper of no less than two inches, and may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
(5)  Plant materials in the frontage landscape strip are not to extend into the street right-of-way unless specifically allowed by the Public Works Department. 
b.  Side yard landscape strips. A minimum of five foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along any side lot of a nonresidential development (except in the C-B-C zoning district). The landscape strip is to extend from the front principal building setback line to the rear of the property (unless a buffer is required along the side lot line). 
(1)  Side yard landscape strips shall contain no structures, parking area, patios, stormwater detention facilities, or any other uses except for the following: 
(a)  Retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design. 
(b)  Underground utilities. 
(c)  Driveways required to access neighboring property. 
(2)  All portions of a side yard landscape strip shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass, or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched or covered by permitted structures. 
(3)  The side yard landscape strip shall contain at least one tree for every 40 feet of length, or be planted in a continuous hedge or junipers (except for approved access drives and utility easements). 
6.17.2. - Parking lot trees.Deciduous shade trees shall be provided within any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate five cars or more, in accordance with the requirements of this Section. 
a.  One deciduous shall tree shall be provided within the parking lot for every 20 parking spaces, or portion thereof. There shall be a maximum distance of 100 feet between any parking space and shade tree. Trees provided to meet the minimum requirements of any landscape strip or buffer may not be counted toward this requirement. 
b.  A landscaping island shall be located at the end of every parking bay between the last parking space and an adjacent travel aisle or driveway. The island shall be no less than eight feet wide for at lest one-half the length of the adjacent parking space. The island shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass, or ground cover except those areas that are mulched. 
c.  Tree planting areas shall be no less than eight feet in width and shall provide at least 100 square feet of planting area per tree. No tree shall be located less than two and one-half feet from the back of the curb. All parking lot landscape islands shall be curbed with minimum six-inch high vertical curbs. The barrier may contain breaks to help manage stormwater runoff, if approved by the Public Works Manager or Director, or their designee. 
d.  Landscaping islands and tree planting areas shall be well drained and contain suitable soil and natural irrigation and characteristics for the planting materials they contain. 
e.  Sustainable design features, such as the creation of stormwater swales, are encouraged for all landscaping islands. Such features that are designed to function as infilitration cells that are approved by the Governing Body's Public Works Manager or Director, or their designee, may credit towards stormwater detention requirements. 
6.17.3. - Landscaping plan.For each multi-family residential and non-residential development where front yard or side yard landscaping is required a landscaping plan shall be approved as part of the permitting process. The landscaping plan shall show all existing and proposed features, including trees, buffer, and other relevant features of the landscape that will be part of the final landscaping design. Native plant materials, protection of existing trees and vegetation, and retention of existing natural features should be integrated into the landscaping plan to the maximum extent possible. 
a.  Landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the approved landscape plan. 
b.  Landscaping shall be maintained as needed. Plants that have died shall be replaced in kind. 
6.18. - Tree conservation. 
6.18.1. - Applicability. 
a.  Tree conservation zone. The tree conservation zone applies to the entirety of a tract of land for which no tree conservation plan has been approved. After such approval, the tree conservation zone shall correspond to that part of a tract of land designated on said approved plan. 
b.  Exemptions. Any construction, paving, or other activity on a property that will damage trees in a public right-of-way is subject to the restrictions under "Protection of existing trees," below. 
Otherwise, the tree conservation zone shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A lot on which a single-family or two-family dwelling is being constructed. 
(2)  A lot on which this Code imposes no yard requirements and permits 100% coverage of the lot by the buildings. 
(3)  Property already occupied by an owner-occupied single-family or two-family dwelling, unless nonresidential uses or additional dwelling units are proposed for such property. 
(4)  Public utility companies conducting operations on public and utility rights-of-way and easements or on site for electric power substations and similar facilities, which operations are for the purpose of assuring uninterrupted utility service. 
(5)  Property in use for the following: 
(a)  Tree farming: The planting, cultivating, and harvesting of trees in a continuous cycle as a regular practice on a tract of land; not including the removal of trees for purposes of development. 
(b)  Agricultural activities: 
1)  Good-faith commercial production of agricultural products, including horticultural, floricultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, and apiarian products; and 
2)  Clearing trees for the purpose of planting crops, providing pasture for livestock, or constructing buildings accessory to production of agricultural products. 
6.18.2. - Measurement standard: "Tree units." 
a.  The diameter of a tree's trunk will be measured and a value assigned in "tree units" in accordance with Tables 6-15 and 6-16. The values assigned to trees of the same size will be different for existing and new trees, as indicated in the two Tables. 
b.  One "unit" is not the same as one "tree." For existing trees, the "units" assigned is the cross-sectional area of the trunk at DBH in square feet. For new trees, credit is given reflecting a size that will be achieved after several years of growth. 
Table 6-15  Table of Values for Existing Trees 23 

 
23 An increase in unit value of 15 percent will be allowed for significant trees, as defined in this Section. 
Table 6-16  Table of Values for New (Replacement) Trees 

 
24 A "large species" is one that will have a height at maturity of 40 feet or more. 
6.18.3. - Significant tree: defined. 
a.  A significant tree is a tree in fair or better condition which has been determined to be of a high value by a knowledgeable person because of its species, size, age, or other professional criteria. A tree is considered in fair or better condition if: 
(1)  Its life expectancy is greater than 15 years; 
(2)  It has a relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or hollow with less than 29 percent radial tip die-back; and 
(3)  It has no major insect or pathological problems. 
b.  Hardwood trees such as oaks and hickories and soft-wood trees such as pines and cedars whose diameters are 18 inches DBH or more and small hardwoods such dogwoods, redbuds, or sourwoods, whose diameter are eight inches DBH or more shall be considered significant trees due to size. A tree of lesser size than the preceding shall be significant if it is a rare or unusual species or is of historical significance or is specifically used by design as a landscape focal point of the project. 
6.18.4. - Number of trees upon completion of development. 
a.  Upon completion of development, all properties shall have a number of trees equivalent to 15 units per acre of development site (not including land areas covered by buildings). 
b.  Existing significant trees or any other trees 10 inches + DBH or larger that are in excess of the required 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings) but outside the construction area (buildings, accessory uses, parking area) shall not be removed unless adjacent development would cause irreparable damage to the critical root zones. 
c.  Where the proposed construction area (the buildings, accessory uses, parking area) is so large that the number of trees equivalent to 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings) can't be accommodated, the tree conservation area shall be established by removing parking spaces in excess of the minimum number required, placing additional planting islands within the development area, or reducing the area to be occupied by buildings. 
d.  Counting Parking Lot and Buffer Trees. Trees required by this Code in relation to parking lot landscaping or the provision of a structural buffer may be included in calculating the required 15 units per acre. However, trees existing or planted in a natural buffer required under this Article are not to be counted as part of the minimum 15 units per acre requirement. 
6.18.5. - Criteria for replacement trees. 
a.  Spacing and the potential size of species chosen shall be compatible with spatial limitations of the site. 
b.  The species must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing site. 
c.  The trees must have the potential for size and quality comparable to those removed. 
d.  The trees must be compatible in extent of crown and root systems at maturity with nearby utilities. 
e.  Planting preference shall be given to specimens no more than three inches DBH. 
f.  Where trees must be added to achieve the required 15 units per acre of development site (not including land area covered by buildings), pines may not comprise 50 percent or more of the required units. Where existing pines already compromise 50 percent or more of the required units, no more pines may be credited toward the required units. 
g.  Authority for questions of tree characteristics shall be publications of the Georgia Forestry Commission, publications of the Cooperative Extension Service of the University of Georgia College of Agriculture, or other authority acceptable to the Planning Director. 
6.19. - Protection of natural waters. 
6.19.1. - Watershed protection. 
a.  Protected water supply watersheds; defined. The Oostanaula River, Etowah River, Armuchee Creek, and Woodward Creek watersheds are recognized above their respective City of Rome and Floyd County municipal water supply intakes. All lands within the Oostanaula River, Etowah River, Armuchee Creek, and Woodward Creek watersheds located within a seven-mile radius upstream of the City of Rome and Floyd County municipal water supply intakes are established as protected watershed areas. 
b.  Protected watershed areas; restrictions. 
(1)  Within a protected watershed area: Any new facility that handles hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more of on any one day, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by DNR. 
(2)  For Large Water Supply Watersheds, the corridors of all perennial streams within a seven-mile radius of the reservoir boundary shall be protected as follows; 
(a)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(b)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(c)  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the 150-foot setback. 
(3)  Small Water Supply Watersheds are protected as follows: 
(a)  The corridors of all perennial streams within a seven-mile radius upstream from a public water supply intake of a reservoir: 
1)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3)  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the 150-foot setback. 
(b)  The corridors of all perennial streams beyond a seven-mile radius upstream from a public water supply intake of a reservoir are protected as follows: 
1)  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
2)  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
3)  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the 75-foot setback. 
(c)  No new sanitary landfills are allowed unless they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(d)  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
6.19.2. - River corridor buffer. 
a.  Major river corridors recognized. The portions of the Coosa, Etowah, and Oostanaula Rivers, flowing through Floyd County, are hereby recognized as natural and cultural resources requiring conservation under Section 12-2-8, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
b.  River tributary corridors recognized. All portions of Horseleg Creek, Silver Creek, Armuchee Creek, Little Dry Creek, Big Dry Creek, Big Cedar Creek, Johns Creek, Dykes Creek, and Woodward Creek flowing through Floyd County, are hereby recognized as natural and cultural resources requiring conservation under Section 12-2-8, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
c.  River corridor greenway established. In order to preserve the quality of the water and viability of the rivers as animal habitats and important recreation resources to the region, a natural vegetative greenway is established as follows: 
(1)  The greenway shall include all lands within 100 feet of each major river and 40 feet of each river tributary, inclusive of any islands, as measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the river bank. 
(2)  No land may be used, and no vegetation shall be disturbed, within the greenway by building construction, development activity, septic tanks or septic tank drainage fields, the handling of hazardous wastes, or for any other purpose except for the following permitted uses: 
(a)  Land uses existing prior to the adoption of this Code. 
(b)  A single-family dwelling, provided that: 
1)  Each dwelling shall be located on a lot having an area of at least two acres, not including any area that lies between the banks of the protected area. 
2)  Only one dwelling is located on the lot. 
3)  No septic tank drain field may be located within the River Corridor Greenway. 
(c)  Timber production and harvesting subject to the following conditions: 
1)  Forestry activity shall be consistent with Best Management Practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
2)  Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(d)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of Section 12-2-8, as amended, of Article 1, Chapter 2, Title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 
(e)  Public road and utility crossings meet all requirements of the Georgia Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act. 
(f)  Recreational usage consistent with either the maintenance of a natural vegetative greenway or with river dependent recreation such as a boat ramp. 
(g)  Agricultural production and management, provided that: the activity is consistent with Best Management Practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission; will not impair the drinking quality of the river water; will be consistent with all State and Federal laws; and will be consistent with all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(h)  Public wastewater treatment and natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(i)  Utilities, other than public water or sewerage facilities, provided that: 
1)  The utilities shall be located as far from the riverbank as reasonably possible. 
2)  Installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the greenway as is reasonably possible. 
3)  Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(j)  Other uses permitted by the zoning district and by DNR under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(3)  The natural vegetative greenway shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity within the River Corridor Greenway. 
6.19.3. - Wetlands protection. 
a.  Protected wetlands; defined. 
(1)  "Wetlands" are freshwater areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar freshwater areas. 
(2)  Protected wetlands are those wetlands identified and mapped in the Comprehensive Plan, based on criteria defined, identified and mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR), or based on other credible data provided by a qualified Professional Engineer. 
b.  Protected wetlands; restrictions. Within any protected wetlands area, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Alteration or degradation of a protected wetland requires prior approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers under Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(2)  Hazardous or toxic waste receiving, treatment, or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(3)  Sanitary landfills are prohibited. 
(4)  Land uses that may be allowed if permitted by the zoning district and by the Section 404 permit include: 
(a)  Timber production and harvesting. 
(b)  Wildlife and fisheries management. 
(c)  Camping, hiking, hunting, and fishing recreation facilities. 
(d)  Public wastewater treatment and natural water quality treatment or purification facilities. 
(5)  Other uses permitted under Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
6.19.4. - Groundwater recharge area protection. 
a.  Protected groundwater recharge areas; defined. 
(1)  Significant recharge areas. Significant recharge areas are defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) using criteria developed by them, and have been mapped on DNR's Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition, or as may be amended by DNR from time to time). 
(2)  Pollution susceptibility category. Categories of relative vulnerability of an aquifer to pollution (classified as "higher," "average," or "lower") are defined by the DNR using criteria developed bythem, and have been mapped on DNR's Hydrologic Atlas 20 along with the most significant recharge areas. 
b.  Protected groundwater recharge area restrictions; general. Within any significant recharge area, as defined and delineated by the DNR, the following shall apply: 
(1)  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
(2)  New sanitary landfills, if permitted, shall have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(3)  Any new facility that involves the treatment, storage, or disposal of hazardous waste, if permitted by DNR and the zoning district, shall perform such operations on an impermeable surface having a spill and leak collection system. 
(4)  Any new facility that handles hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by DNR. 
(5)  A new above ground chemical or petroleum tank must have secondary containment of 110 percent of the volume of the tank or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. This requirement does not apply to: 
(a)  Any tank having a maximum capacity of less than 660 gallons; and, 
(b)  Any tank used for agricultural purposes, provided in complies with all Federal requirements. 
c.  Protected groundwater recharge area restrictions; by classification. 
(1)  Lower Pollution Susceptibility Areas. Within a significant recharge area classified as having "lower" susceptibility to pollution, the following applies: 
(a)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites larger than 50 acre-feet must be lined. The liner must be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10.7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. National Resource Conservation Service. 
(b)  A new home served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot or space that is at least 110 percent of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(c)  A new manufactured home park served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County and must have a lot or space that is at least 110 percent of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(2)  Average Pollution Susceptibility Areas. Within a significant recharge area classified as having "average" susceptibility to pollution, the following applies: 
(a)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites larger than 15 acre-feet must be lined. The liner must be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10.7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Natural Resource Conservation Service. 
(b)  A new home served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot or space that is at least 125% of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(c)  A new manufactured home park served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County and must have a lot or space that is at least 125 percent of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(3)  Higher Pollution Susceptibility Areas. Within a significant recharge area classified as having "higher" susceptibility to pollution, the following applies: 
(a)  All new agricultural waste impoundment sites must be lined. The liner must be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10.7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Natural Resource Conservation Service. 
(b)  A new home served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County Health Department and must have a lot or space that is at least 150 percent of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-1 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(c)  A new manufactured home park served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the County and must have a lot or space that is at least 150 percent of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resource's Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(d)  Spray irrigation of wastewater or the land spreading of wastewater sludges must be approved by DNR. 
(e)  Permanent storm water infiltration basins are prohibited. 
(f)  New wastewater treatment basins (except for mining settling basins) must have an impermeable liner and be approved by DNR. 



6.20. - Residential cluster subdivision option. 
6.20.1. - Purpose and intent.It is the purpose and intent of Article 6.20 to encourage the preservation of open space within residential development; to protect culturally and environmentally critical resources; to provide flexibility to allow creative developments; to provide for a permanent, interconnected open space network; to encourage efficient development that minimizes removal of vegetation, disturbance of soil, and encroachment into environmentally sensitive areas while reducing the need for infrastructure construction; to encourage street design that decreases traffic speed; to encourage neighborhood interaction; and to promote construction of convenient and accessible trails and sidewalks within a subdivision and connecting to adjacent communities, businesses and other facilities in order to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
6.20.2. - Applicability.The Residential Cluster Subdivision Option is available for the following zoning districts: 
a.  H-TR High-density Traditional Residential, 
b.  L-TR Low-density Traditional Residential, 
c.  NOC Neighborhood Office Commercial (where small scale, low activity, neighborhood oriented businesses may be permitted in a residential setting), 
d.  S-R Suburban Residential (where public water is available), and 
e.  A-R Agricultural Residential (where public water is available) zoning districts. 
6.20.3. - Compliance with applicable ordinances.Compliance with all applicable City of Rome and Floyd County ordinances, regulations, or codes is required; however, when in conflict, this Article shall prevail. Final plat and Cluster Development Plan approval shall be by the Planning Commission. 
6.20.4. - Land reserve area requirement. 
a.  Each subdivision developed under this option shall include Land Reserve Area equal to no less than 40 percent of the gross acreage of the parcel. The Land Reserve Area shall be designated on the Cluster Option Plan and recorded on the final plat. 
b.  Definition: The Land Reserve Area is defined as the portion of the subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within Land Reserve Areas are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
c.  Land Reserve Area Configuration: The minimum standards for Land Reserve Areas are: 
(1)  The minimum dimension at any point shall be 50 feet (measured along the chord if on an arced boundary) and at least 75 percent of the Land Reserve Area shall be in a contiguous tract. 
(2)  All lots within the subdivision shall be provided with safe, convenient pedestrian access to the Land Reserve Area. 
(3)  The Land Reserve Area shall provide connectivity with any adjacent Land Reserve Areas. 
(4)  Where trails and sidewalks connecting the Land Reserve Area cross internal subdivision streets or public streets, access points shall be directly across from each other. Crossings and access points shall be clearly identified to pedestrians and motorists and may include traffic control devices, bridges, and tunnels. 
(5)  Natural vegetation and soils within the Land Reserve Areas shall be protected from disturbance during development activities, except as permitted in Article 6.20. 
(6)  Development in the Land Reserve Area designated as Primary and Secondary Critical areas shall be limited to passive recreation facilities such as trails/sidewalks, picnic areas, benches, fishing and non-power boat launching platforms, or playgrounds. 
(7)  Non-critical areas approved for Land Reserve Area protection by the Planning Department staff may also be used as community gardens, playing fields, landscaped storm water management areas (ponds, swales, rain gardens, etc.), drain or drip field for a community sewage treatment system, crop growing, or pastures. 
(8)  In no case shall more than ten percent of the Land Reserve Area so used be covered with impervious surface. 
(9)  Improvements must be constructed and maintained using methods and materials designed to be low impact and to have little or no adverse impact on the environment. 
(10)  Mature trees within the Land Reserve Area shall not be harvested or removed, unless such harvesting or removal is recommended by a Certified Forester or by the Georgia Forestry Commission in order to control disease or insect infestation, or to eliminate danger to persons or property. 
(11)  No motorized vehicles, including, but not limited to, motor bikes, four wheelers, and motorcycles, shall be allowed within the Land Reserve Area, except that maintenance vehicles shall be permitted to carry out activities approved by the owner; and electrically powered scooters, wheelchairs, and golf carts shall be permitted to use hard surfaced trails and facilities within the Land Reserve Area. 
d.  Form of land reserve area: The Land Reserve Area shall consist of Primary Critical Preservation Areas, Secondary Critical Preservation Areas, and Other Preservation Areas (as approved by the Planning Department Staff). 
Primary Critical Preservation Areas: Primary Critical Preservation Areas form the core of the Land Reserve Areas and are required, if present, to be included within the Land Reserve Area. These include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Cemeteries, historic sites, archaeological sites, and other culturally important areas. 
(2)  Habitat for rare, threatened or endangered species as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(3)  Wetlands as identified by the National Wetlands inventory maps prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the County Soil Survey maps prepared by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Natural Resources Conservation Service, or by means of a certified wetlands delineation using data from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  Alluvial soils and 100-year floodplains as identified by the federal Emergency Management Agency; however, floodway areas shall not count toward the Land Reserve Area minimum because development is not allowed. 
(5)  Existing lakes, rivers, streams, ponds, as approved by the governing body; however, such areas shall not count toward the Land Reserve Area minimum because development is not practical. 
(6)  Riparian and watershed protection buffers as required by Article 6.19 of this Code. 
(7)  Existing slopes that exceed 25 percent over a contiguous areas of at least 5,000 square feet. 
Secondary Critical Preservation Areas: Secondary Critical Preservation areas shall also be counted as part of the Land Reserve Area to the maximum extent possible. Secondary Critical Preservation Areas include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(8)  Stands of significant trees as defined by Article 6.18.3 of this Code. At least 50 percent of the trees in the stand must meet the definition of "significant tree". 
(9)  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line. 
(10)  Other significant natural features and scenic view sheds, with the approval of Planning Department Staff. 
Other Preservation Areas: With Planning Department Staff approval, land that does not meet the definition of "Primary Critical Preservation Area" or "Secondary Critical Preservation Area" may be set aside as part of the Land Reserve Area. 
e.  Land reserve area protection: The required Land Reserve Area shall be protected in perpetuity from further development or unauthorized use by a conservation easement held by a qualified conservation organization as defined in the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. 44-10-1 et seq.; or by the local government. The easement documentation shall include photos and maps to record the status and condition of the Land Reserve Area. 
f.  The City of Rome and Floyd County reserve the right to enforce all instruments and conservation easements, and to charge the cost of enforcement or corrective activities to the responsible party. Such costs shall become a lien on any properties titled in the name of the owner of the Land Reserve Area. 
g.  Ownership of Land Reserve Areas: All Land Reserve Areas shall be permanently protected and held in fee simple interest by: 
(1)  A qualified conservation organization as defined in The Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. 44-10-1 et seq.; 
(2)  A homeowners association established in accordance with the Georgia Property Owners Association Act, O.C.G.A. 44-3-220 et seq.; or 
(3)  A land trust. 
6.20.5. - Development standards. 
a.  Housing density: The maximum number of lots in the subdivision shall be determined by either one of the following two methods: 
(1)  Calculation: The maximum number of building lots shall be determined by dividing the area of the parcel, minus property located within the floodway, required river and tributary greenway buffers, bodies of open water that exceed 5,000 square feet of contiguous area, wetlands as defined by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act, or existing utility easements, by the minimum lot size specified by the zoning district. 
(2)  Yield Plan: The maximum number of building lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the area of the parcel, minus property located within the floodway, required river and tributary greenway buffers, bodies of open water that exceed 5,000 square feet of contiguous area, wetlands as defined by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act, or existing utility easements, is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet all of the formal requirements of a subdivision plan, but must show a plan capable of actual construction. 
Density Bonus: Regardless of which of the above density determination methods is used, up to 10 percent more lots may be created under the cluster option, provided that lot width, frontage, and setback requirements are met. 
b.  Lots: All building lots created under this subdivision option shall front on an open, publicly maintained interior road that is classified as a "local" or a "collector" road. 
c.  Lot area: No minimum building lot area shall apply, as long as lot width, lot frontage, and building setback requirements are provided; except that lot sizes are subject to approval by the Floyd County Health Department if private sewer systems are used. 
d.  Lot dimensions: The minimum building lot width shall be 50 feet, the minimum frontage requirement shall be 25 feet. 
e.  Setbacks: Front building setbacks shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the property line along local roads, 15 feet from the property line along collector roads, and 25 feet from the property line along arterial roads. Rear building setbacks shall be a minimum of ten feet from the property line. 
Side yard setbacks shall be a minimum of five feet from the property line; however, at the discretion of the developer, side yard setbacks may be reduced below five feet if a minimum separation of ten feet between structures is provided. If side yard setbacks are reduced below five feet, the final plat shall delineate the buildable area of each building lot that will accommodate ten feet of separation between structures. 
All structures shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from the outer boundary line of the subdivision. 
f.  Sidewalks: If sidewalks are provided on both sides of all streets adjacent residential lots, the width of the paved street may be reduced to 20 feet for local streets, and 25 feet for collectors. Subdivision sidewalk systems shall connect with existing, adjacent sidewalks. Provision shall be made for sidewalk connection with future, adjacent development if practical. 
g.  Multi-use trails: If a Multi-Use Trail at least ten feet wide, with separation from driving lanes, is provided on one side of all streets adjacent residential lots, with safe and convenient, marked crossing points; the width of the paved street may be reduced to 20 feet for local streets, and 25 feet for collectors. Where sidewalks would otherwise be required, a Multi-Use Trail at least ten feet wide on one side with safe and convenient, marked crossing points may be provided in lieu of sidewalks. 
h.  Streets: New streets shall follow a rectilinear or curvilinear pattern to ensure interconnectivity and walkability. New streets shall align with existing, adjacent streets. Street segments ending in cul-de-sacs shall serve no more than eight buildings lots. Provision shall be made for street connection with future, adjacent development if practical. 
Excepting specific design standards listed in Article 6.20, streets and sidewalks shall be constructed in conformance with the standards listed in Article 6.6 and 6.7. 
i.  Within the area of the subdivision that is designated for building lots, all reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve mature vegetation and other natural features. 
6.20.6. - Required documents.An application for Planning Commission approval of the cluster option subdivision shall include the following documents. Planning Department Staff shall ensure the completeness of the submitted documents. 
a.  Cluster development plan: A Cluster Development Plan shall be created by the Developer and shall include the following elements: 
(1)  Property Boundaries. 
(2)  Streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands as described elsewhere in this Article, and all other hydrologic features. 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than ten feet intervals. 
(4)  All Primary and Secondary Critical Preservation Areas labeled by type, as described elsewhere in this Article; photographed and described. 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics. 
(6)  General soil types. 
(7)  Planned location of Land Reserve Areas, with dimensions and areas. 
(8)  Existing and proposed roads, sidewalks, trails, and transit stops. 
(9)  Locations and dimensions of any developed areas within Land Reserve Areas. 
(10)  Connections with existing streets, green space, trails, public areas, commercial areas, recreation areas, or Land Reserve Areas within adjacent developments. 
(11)  Location, size, and number of proposed lots with buildable area delineated. 
(12)  Proposed utility sites and corridors if outside of ROW area. 
The Cluster Development Plan, as amended and approved by the Planning Commission, shall be binding on the developer. 
b.  Land reserve area maintenance, management, ownership and protection plan (MMOPP): The MMOPP shall include the following elements and shall be recorded as a permanent instrument following approval of the Cluster Option Subdivision by the Planning Commission. 
(1)  Clearly delineated Land Reserve Areas with clear description of the property boundary by survey with a written legal description. 
(2)  Description of features to be permanently protected. 
(3)  Legal name and address of owner. 
(4)  Legal name and address of easement holder. 
(5)  List of parties with rights to enforce the easement (owner of the property, holder of the easement (if any), and the governing body). 
(6)  Method of transferring the easement if necessary. 
(7)  Proposed uses, with restrictions as applicable. 
(8)  Provision for inspections of the property by the owner, the holder of the easement (if any), and the governing body. 
(9)  Provision for maintenance of the Land Reserve Area including responsible party and projected budget. 
(10)  Provision for amendment only with the express written permission of the property owner, the holder of the easement (if any), and the governing body. 
(11)  Provision for transfer of the Land Reserve Area ownership if necessary. 
The MMOPP shall be approved by the Planning Department staff prior to final approval by the Planning Commission. 
c.  Homeowners association requirements: If the Land Reserve Area will be held, protected and managed by a Homeowners' Association, the developer shall include in the MMOPP a Description of the Homeowners' Association that includes: 
(1)  By-laws. 
(2)  Method and plan for maintenance of the Land Reserve Areas. 
(3)  Mandatory membership of each landowner. 
(4)  Responsibility for maintenance, insurance and taxes on the Land Reserve Area. 
(5)  Provision for transfer of ownership of the Land Reserve Area in case of dissolution of the association. The Description of the Homeowners' Association shall be approved by the Planning Department Staff prior to final approval by the Planning Commission. 
6.20.7. - Approval of final plat.Approval of the final plat and subdivision by the Planning Commission shall be conditioned on the acceptance of the conservation easement by a qualified conservation organization, as described in Article 6.20.4. 
6.20.8. - Tax assessment of land reserve areas.Once an approved, legal instrument for permanent protection of Land Reserve Areas is in place, and the final plat and subdivision have been approved by the Planning Commission, the Floyd County Tax Assessor shall reassess the value of the open space. 
6.20.9. - Variances and special exceptions.Not withstanding the provisions of Article 2.11, variances, special exceptions, or appeals from any of the requirements, standards, and conditions of this article must be approved by the Planning Commission. 
ARTICLE 7. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

7.1. - Purpose of article 7. 
This Article sets out the structure for administering and enforcing this Development Code, including the creation, powers, and duties of the Planning Commission, and the responsibilities and procedures of the Chief Building Official in carrying out enforcement activities. 
7.2. - Schedules and fees. 
From time to time, the City Commission and the County Board of Commissioners may adopt fees for the issuance of permits, the submission of applications, and such other activities and authorizations as regulated by this Development Code, and may adopt schedules of dates, times, and places appropriate and necessary to regulate the application, review, and hearing processes required by this Development Code, as applicable within each jurisdiction. 
7.3. - Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission. 
7.3.1. - Creation.The Rome-Floyd-County Planning Commission is hereby created and established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, of the 1983 state constitution. The planning commission shall be organized and empowered as set out in this article. 
7.3.2. - Membership of the planning commission. 
a.  The planning commission shall consist of ten voting members, none of whom is a member of either City Commission or the County Board of Commissioners, and two nonvoting ex officio members, one of whom shall be a member of the City Commission, appointed by that body, and the other shall be a member of the County Board of Commissioners, appointed by that body. Five of the voting members shall be appointed by the City Commission, and five of the voting members shall be appointed by the County Board of Commissioners. 
b.  The members shall serve five-year staggered terms and until their successors are appointed as provided for in this section. 
c.  Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing body that originally appointed that member. The appointing body shall also have the authority to remove its appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
7.3.3. - Organization of the planning commission. 
a.  The planning commission shall elect its chair, first vice-chair, and second vice-chair from among its appointed members. The term of the officers shall be one year, or until they are re-elected or their successors are elected. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the city, the county, or the planning commission. The planning commission shall determine its time of meetings and shall make its own rules of procedure, including any rule providing for termination of membership by reason of nonattendance at meetings. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the planning commission shall be of public record. 
b.  The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for such work and may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, or local, public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations; may expend such funds. And may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts and contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing bodies of the city and the county. 
7.3.4. - Proceedings of the planning commission. 
a.  The Planning Commission may adopt such by-laws, rules, or procedures as appropriate and not in conflict with this Development Code. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall meet each month in accordance with its schedule of meeting dates, times, and places. Other meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman if there is business to be brought before it, or at such other times as the Planning Commission may determine. All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be open to the public. 
c.  All Planning Commission members attending a meeting shall vote on each matter placed before it. A member may abstain from voting only in the instance of a conflict of interest, the nature of which must be stated for the record. 
d.  A majority of the entire Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum. 
e.  The Director of Planning shall serve as secretary to the Planning Commission. The secretary shall cause minutes of its proceeding to be kept, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall cause records of its examinations and other official actions to be kept, all of which shall be of public record. 
f.  The results of each Planning Commission meeting as to their actions and recommendations shall be forwarded by the Director of Planning to the City Commission or County Board of Commissioners, as appropriate, and posted in a public place at the Planning Department's office. 
7.3.5. - Powers and duties of the planning commission. 
a.  The Planning Commission shall have the duty and responsibility to conduct a public hearing on each application for rezoning or special use approval, to review the application in accordance with the standards and procedures set for elsewhere in this Development Code, and make such recommendations to the City Commission or the County Board of Commissioners as it deems appropriate on each application. 
b.  The Planning Commission shall also have the duty and responsibility to conduct a public hearing on any proposed amendment to the text of this Development Code, to review such proposed amendment in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth elsewhere in this Development Code, and to make such recommendation to the City Commission or the County Board of Commissioners as it deems necessary. 
c.  The Planning Commission shall also have the authority to initiate on its own motion a zoning change, or an amendment to the text of this Development Code when, in its determination, such changes are appropriate for consideration. 
d.  The Planning Commission shall also have the authority and responsibility to review the provisions of the City's Comprehensive Plan from time to time, and to make such recommendations to the City or County as it deems appropriate. 
e.  The Planning Commission shall also have such other powers, duties, or responsibilities as assigned to it by the City Commission or the County Board of Commissioners 
7.4. - Board of adjustments. 
7.4.1. - Establishment. 
a.  A Board of Adjustments for the City of Rome and for Floyd County is hereby created. The Board of Adjustments shall consist of seven members, who shall be residents of the jurisdiction they serve. 
b.  Each Governing Body shall appoint three members. The seventh member will be alternately appointed by the City or County Commissions with each successive term beginning with the County. Each member shall serve for terms of three years. The Board of Adjustments shall elect a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. 
c.  A member of the Board of Adjustments may be appointed to successive terms, and shall continue to serve if their term expires until a successor is appointed. 
d.  A member may be removed from the Board Adjustments by a majority vote of the Governing Body for cause, for absenteeism at three successive called meetings, or for other reasons, the Governing Body may deem appropriate upon written charges and after public hearing. 
e.  A chairperson shall be appointed every other one year in alternate terms by the City and then by the County, such that each jurisdiction has its respective appointment in the Chairperson's position every other one year. 
f.  When a position becomes vacant before the end of a term, the Governing Body shall appoint a new member for the duration of the term remaining consistent with the original appointment. 
7.4.2. - Proceedings of the board of adjustments. 
a.  Each Board of Adjustments shall elect a Vice-Chairperson from its members, who shall serve for one year or until re-elected or until their successor is elected. The Vice-Chairperson shall preside at meetings in the absence of the Chairperson. 
b.  The Vice-Chairperson shall be from among those appointments of the jurisdiction opposite the Chairperson's appointment and may be expected to succeed the Chairperson for the full term appointment as Chair. 
c.  The Chairperson or, in their absence, the Vice-Chairperson or other member designated to conduct an official meeting, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
d.  Each Board of Adjustments may adopt such bylaws, rules, or procedures as appropriate and not in conflict with this Development Code. 
e.  Each Board of Adjustments shall meet each month in accordance with its schedule of meeting dates, times, and places. Other meetings of the Board of Adjustments shall be held at the call of the Chairman if there is business to be brought before it, or at such other times as the Board of Adjustments may determine. All meetings of the Board of Adjustments shall be open to the public. 
f.  All Board of Adjustments members attending a meeting shall vote on each matter placed before it. A member may abstain from voting only in the instance of a conflict of interest, the nature of which must be stated for the record. 
g.  A majority of the entire Board of Adjustments shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of at least three members of the Board of Adjustments shall be necessary to approve any decision or recommendation. 
h.  The Director of Planning shall serve as secretary to the Board of Adjustments. The secretary shall cause minutes of its proceedings to be kept, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall cause records of its examinations and other official actions to be kept, all of which shall be of public record. 
i.  The results of each Board of Adjustments meeting as to their actions and determinations shall be posted in a public place at the Planning Department's office. 
7.4.3. - Powers and duties of the board of adjustments. 
a.  Each Board of Appeals and Adjustments shall have the duty and responsibility to conduct a public hearing and to make a final decision in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this Development Code on each application for an appeal from an administrative decision, a special exception, a hardship variance, a flood protection variance, or an interpretation. 
b.  Each Board of Adjustments shall also have such other powers, duties, or responsibilities as assigned to it by the Governing Body. 
c.  In exercising its powers regarding an appeal of an administrative decision, the Board of Adjustments may, in conformity with the provisions of this Development Code, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order requirements, decisions, or determination of the administrative official, and to that end shall have the power to direct issuance of a permit. 
7.5. - Inspection and enforcement. 
7.5.1. - Enforcement officer. 
a.  The Chief Building Inspector shall have the power to conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to assure or compel compliance with the requirements and provisions of this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property for the purpose of investigation and inspection. 
b.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the City, the County, the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District, or the Georgia Environmental Protection Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
7.5.2. - Land development activities. 
a.  Periodic inspections. The Chief Building Inspector will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the erosion and sedimentation control plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, with development permit conditions, or with the provisions of this Development Code, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this Development Code. 
b.  Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the Chief Building Inspector, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this Development Code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where in the opinion of the Chief Building Inspector an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
7.5.3. - Land use and site design standards. 
a.  Inspection. If the Chief Building Inspector finds that a provision of this Development Code relating to the use of occupancy of land or buildings, or relating to the site design standards of this Development Code, or relating to a condition of approval established in connection with a grant of variance of zoning change is being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Upon continuing noncompliance, or initially in the case of an immediate threat to the public health or safety, the Chief Building Inspector shall have the authority to issue citations before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
b.  Cease and desist orders. The Chief Building Inspector shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal or relocation of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of illegal work being done; or shall take any other appropriate or necessary action to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions of this Development Code. 
7.6. - Violation and penalties. 
7.6.1. - Penalties for land development violations. 
a.  Failure to obtain a development permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a development permit as prescribed in this Development Code without first obtaining said development permit, the person is subject to revocation of his business license, work permit, or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of both the City and the County. 
b.  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved erosion control and sediment control plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this Development Code and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of this Development Code. The Public Works Director may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
c.  Fine or imprisonment. Any person violating any provisions of an approved erosion and sediment control plan, development permit authorization, or stop-work order shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both, or sentenced to community service, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
7.6.2. - Penalties for violation of land use provisions or site design standards. 
a.  Violation of any provision of this Development Code relating to the use of land or applicable site design standards, including violation of conditions of approval established in connection with grants of variance or zoning changes, or any other provisions of this Code, shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
b.  Any person found guilty of violating such land use provisions or site design standards of this Development Code shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both, or sentenced to community service, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense 
c.  Additional remedies. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the City or County, as appropriate, from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, such as injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action. 
ARTICLE 8. - DEFINITIONS. 
The following is a list of all definitions of terms included within the text of this Unified Land Development Code. Refer to Section 1.5. regarding the interpretation of figures, words and phrases as used in this Code. Any word or phrase not herein defined but defined elsewhere in this Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Academic school: See under "School." 
Access: A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
Accessory apartment: A second dwelling unit incorporated within either a single-family detached dwelling or a private garage for use as a complete, independent living unit with facilities within the accessory apartment for cooking eating, sanitation, and sleeping, separate from such facilities within the primary residence. 
Accessory farm structure: Any building or other structure commonly used for agricultural purposes in relation to an active farming operation, such as a barn or stable, poultry house, silo, water tank, farm equipment storage shed, or irrigation system. 
Accessory structure setback line: A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between a property line or the right-of-way line of an abutting street and an accessory structure. 
Accessory use or structure: A use or structure that is permitted on a property in conjunction with a principal use. An accessory use is incidental to the principal use and would not exist independent of the principal use. 
Addition (to an existing building): Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter, load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Agricultural operations: The raising, harvesting, marketing, or storing products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock (including but not limited to cattle, swine, equine, goats, sheep, and rabbits) or poultry (including but not limited to chickens, ducks, turkeys, and ratites); producing and/or storing feed for use in the production of livestock or poultry; the production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products; forestry land management practices including harvesting trees; and constructing farm buildings and farm ponds. These activities may also involve the application of pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, and animal wastes and irrigation, tillage of the soil and harvesting of crops. Execution of these activities may create noise, odors, and dust at any time of any day of the week. 
Amusement or recreational attraction: A business establishment offering leisure time activities such a billiard or pool hall, bingo parlor, go-cart track, miniature golf, golf driving range, judo or karate instruction, softball field, batting cage, or skating rink. 
Amusement park: A business establishment that groups together a number of leisure time activities such as mechanical rides, amusement devices, refreshment stands, and picnic grounds. 
Amusement parlor: A business establishment providing leisure entertainment utilizing video games, pinball machines, or other coin-operated amusement devices. 
Animal feeding operation: A lot or facility where animals are stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period. Growth or post-harvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility. 
Animal unit: As determined by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and periodically revised. Currently, one animal unit consists of: 
One slaughter or feeder cattle. 
0.7 mature dairy cows (milked or dry). 
2.5 swine each weighing over 55 pounds. 
0.5 horses. 
Ten sheep or lambs. 
55 turkeys. 
100 laying hens or boilers in facility with continuous watering. 
30 laying hens or broilers in facility with liquid manure system. 
Five ducks. 
Note: Dry litter poultry houses not included. 
Applicant: A property owner or their authorized representative who has petitioned the City or County for approval of a zoning change, development permit, building permit, hardship variance, special exception or appeal, or any other authorization for the use or development of their property under the requirements of this Development Code. 
Application: A petition for approval of a zoning change, development permit, building permit, hardship variance, special exception or appeal, or any other authorization use or development of a property under the requirements of this Development Code. 
Aquifer: Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Area of shallow flooding: A designated AO or VO zone of the City's flood insurance map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly deemed channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard: The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Artisans or crafts studio: A facility for: 
(1)  Creation or production of unique, hand-made, or one of a kind works or products for individual retail or special order purchase by professional painters, drawers, sketchers, sculpters, costumers, jewelers, musicians, dancers, potters, carpenters, or other artists or craftspeople, as differentiated from mass production; where the production of such goods employs six or fewer full-time individuals; and where the production process is characterized by no emissions of noxious odors, dust, fumes, gas, noise or vibration outside of any building. 
(2)  Teaching of artistic or craft process by professional artists or craftspeople. 
Automobile parking lot, commercial: An area or structure dedicated to the temporary storage of automobiles or other vehicles, for periods of less than 24 hours for a fee, operated as the principal use of the property or structure. 
Automotive repair shop: The use of a building or premises for repair of automobiles or other motorized vehicles, or the installation or repair of equipment or parts on motorized vehicles such as mufflers, brakes, tires, radios, transmissions, glass, and engines, or engine parts. Automotive Repair Shops also include: 
(1)  Automotive Paint or Body Shop: The use of a building or premises for the repair of automotive bodies and/or major mechanical works, straightening of body parts, painting welding, or storage of automobiles not in operable condition. 
(2)  Tire Re-treading or Repair Shop: The use of a building or premises for the repairing or re-treading of automotive tires. 
Automobile sales and service: The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used automobiles, panel trucks, vans, or busses, and which may include any repair service conducted as an accessory use. See also "Boat Dealers," Motorcycle Sales and Service," and "Recreational Vehicle Dealer." 
Automotive service business (excluding repair): The use of a building or premises for the servicing of automobiles, including sales, installation, and servicing of minor parts such as lights, belts, hoses, wipers, tires, batteries, air or oil filters, spark plugs, fuses, brakes, glass, radios, and air conditioners; diagnostic and emissions testing; and replacement of fluids such as oil, water, brake fluid, transmission fluid, freon, wiper fluid, etc. 
Automobile service station: Buildings and premises where gasoline or diesel fuel is dispensed at retail for automobiles, recreation vehicles, and motorcycles, and where in addition at least one of the following services is rendered: 
(1)  Sale, replacement, or servicing of spark plugs, oil, water hoses, brake fluids, batteries, distributors, tires, carburetors, brakes, fuel pumps, or automotive parts or accessories, etc. 
(2)  Uses permissible at an automobile service station shall not include major mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or storage of automobiles not in mechanically operable condition. See "Automobile Repair Shop" where major mechanical and body work activities are allowed. 
Awning: A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, walkway, or window from the elements. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame, and may be retracted into the face of the building. 
Awning or canopy sign: See "Building Sign." 
Bank, savings and loan, or credit union: A financial depository institution or related banking facility that accepts money for deposit into accounts from the general public or other financial institutions, and may include personal or business loans, wire transfers, and safe deposit boxes as accessory uses. 
Banner: A sign other than an official flag, made of paper, cloth, thin plastic, or similar lightweight material and usually containing a message or logo. 
Bar or tavern: An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic drinks, such as beer, ale, wine, and liquor, for consumption on the premises, and which may also serve food as a substantial portion of its business. 
Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement: That portion of a building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Bed and breakfast inn: A business establishment operated within a dwelling by the owner-occupant, offering one to ten units for temporary lodging and one or more meals to the traveling public while away from their normal places or residence. See also "Hotel or Motel." 
Berm: A mound of earth, or the act of pushing earth into a mound. 
Best Management Practices (BMP's): A collection of structural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed, and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sediment control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Block: An area of land bounded by such features as streets, rivers, railroads, or the development project boundary. 
Boarder: An individual who lives in part of a dwelling unit at the behest of the resident family and is provided lodging or lodging and meals for pay or other consideration on a temporary basis. 
Board of appeals and adjustments: The duly appointed Board of Appeals and Adjustments of the City of Rome or the duly appointed Board of Appeals and Adjustments of Floyd County, as appropriate to the jurisdiction within which an appeal is taken. 
Boarding house: See "Rooming or Boarding House." 
Boat dealer: The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used motorboats or other watercraft, and which may include the sale of marine supplies or outboard motors and repair service conducted as accessory uses. 
Breakaway wall: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended to through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
Brewpub: As defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to production limits - 10,000 barrels per year for on-site consumption, 5,000 barrels per year for sale to a licensed wholesale dealer - for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. As used in this paragraph, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food; provided, however, that barrels of beer sold to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution to retailers and retail consumption dealers, as authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36(c)(2), shall not be used when determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales. 
Buffer: An area of natural vegetation or man-made construction, which is intended to provide a visual and dimensional separation between dissimilar land uses. 
(1)  Natural buffer: A visual screen created by vegetation of such density so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year. 
(2)  Structural buffer: A visual screen created through construction of a solid wooden fence, decorative masonry wall, earthen berm, or combination of fence or wall with an earthen berm, which may be supplemented with vegetation, so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one to the other throughout the year. 
Buildable area of lot: That portion of a lot bounded by and interior to the required rear, side and front building setback lines. 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods or materials of any kind. 
Building code: The technical codes approved for enforcement under the Georgia Uniform Codes Act (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq.) by the respective Governing Bodies. 
Building floor area: The total floor area of all heated spaces within a building as measured within the outside of the exterior walls, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and unheated stairwells, storage areas, garages, and loading docks. 
Building height: The vertical distance measured to the highest point of a building from the average finished grade across those sides of a building that face the street. 
Building inspections department: References to action by the "Building Inspections Department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Building Inspections Department of the City of Rome to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Chief Building Inspector also known as the Chief Building Official. 
Building materials sales: An establishment offering lumber or other construction materials used in buildings for sale to contractors or the general public. 
Building sign: A sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed or painted upon the exterior wall, window, door, or roof of a building. The term "building sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Awning or canopy sign: A sign imposed or painted or suspended beneath any awning or canopy. 
(2)  Façade or wall sign: A sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly and extends from the surface of the wall no more than 18 inches. 
(3)  Incidental sign: An announcement or other display providing information about the occupancy or conduct of business permitted on a premises, such as logos of credit cards accepted on the premises, hours of operation, a "closed" or "open" sign, emergency contact person name and telephone number, street address, "help wanted," "no loitering or solicitations," security system notices, notices required by law, and similar information. 
(4)  Projecting sign: A sign affixed to a wall and extending more than 18 inches from the surface of such wall, usually perpendicular to the wall surface. 
(5)  Roof sign: A sign that is mounted on, applied to, or otherwise structurally supported by the roof of a building. 
(6)  Window sign: A sign that is placed on or behind a window pane and intended to be viewed from outside the building. 
Building tree line: The lines extending from the corners nearest a street to the side lines of the lot (not including a street right-of-way), parallel to the right-of-way line or to the chord of that line. 
Business or vocational school: See under "School." 
Business, professional, or trade association: See under "Membership Organization." 
Business service: The use of a building or premises primarily for rendering a service to other business establishments on a contract or fee basis, such as advertising, credit reporting, computer programming, photocopying, and employment services. 
(1)  Miscellaneous business service establishment: An establishment offering such business services as private security, photo finishing, appraisals, map drafting, paralegal, press clipping, recording studio, repossession, and telephone answering. 
Caliper: The diameter of a tree (usually nursery stock) measured at a point six inches above the ground or top of root ball for up to and including four inch caliper trees, and at a point 12 inches above the ground or top of root ball for larger sizes. 
Canopy: A roof-like structure supported by columns or projecting from a building and open on at least three sides. 
Carwash: The use of a building or premises primarily for washing automobiles, recreation vehicles, and motorcycles, whether by hand or mechanical means. 
Cemetery: A facility for the burial of deceased human beings or animals. 
Centerline: That line connecting the succession of midpoints between the identifiable limits of any improvements on the ground or of any easement. 
Chief building inspector: The Chief Building Inspector of the City of Rome and Floyd County, also known as the Chief Building Official. 
Church or place of worship: See under "Membership Organization." 
Civic, social, or fraternal association: See under "Membership Organization." 
Clinic: An establishment where medical or dental patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination or treatment requiring less than an hour recovery time. 
Common party wall: A wall used jointly by contiguous structures, erected upon a line dividing two parcels of land, each of which is a separate real estate entity. 
Community garden: Land used to grow flowers, vegetables, or fruit; cultivated and managed by members of a community for their own use or to produce food to donate to other community members. Such a garden may have plots for individual use or plots for communal use; and have as accessory uses small sitting areas, gathering areas, no more than four off-street parking spaces, or play areas. 
Comprehensive plan: The Comprehensive Plan adopted pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, which includes Floyd County and the City of Rome, as amended from time to time. 
Concentrated/confined animal feeding operation (CAFO): A lot or facility, together with any associated treatment works, where animals have been, are, or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12-month period; and where crops, vegetation, forage growth, or post-harvest residues are not sustained over any portion of the confinement area; and where 1,000 animal units (as defined elsewhere in this article) or more are confined, as currently defined by the State of Georgia, Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control (Chapter 3.391). 
Condition of zoning approval: A requirement adopted by the governing body at the time of approval of a zoning change, placing greater or additional requirements or restrictions on the property provided in this Development Code in order to reduce an adverse impact of the zoning change and to further the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
Condominium: A multifamily unit, the interior of which is owned by an individual. Common walls and exterior common space of the development is maintained in undivided unit owners. 
Congregate personal care home: See under "Personal Care Home." 
Construction contractor: An establishment engaged in the construction of buildings, engaged in heavy construction (such as streets, bridges, or utilities), or specialized in construction trades as plumbing, heating and air conditioning, electrical wiring, masonry, roofing or gutters, well drilling, or house painting. 
Construction sign: A sign identifying the contractors, engineers, architects, or financial institutions involved in the building construction or development of a property. 
Convalescent home: An intermediate care facility primarily engaged in providing inpatient nursing and rehabilitative services to residents who require watchful care and medical attention or treatment, but not on a continuous basis, although staff is on duty 24-hours per day. 
Convenience gas station: A building or premises where gasoline, diesel fuel, and oil may be dispensed at retail with no automobile repair facilities. Uses permissible also include the sale of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and similar household convenience goods for station customers. 
County health officer: The Floyd County Health Department officer responsible for approval of on-site sewage disposal systems. 
Critical root zone: The land area circular in shape and centered on the trunk of a tree, the radius of which circle is determined by the farthest extent of the drip line from the trunk. 
Cul-de-sac: A dead-end street that terminates in a permanent turnaround and not intended for future extension. 
Curb break or curb cut: Any interruption or break in the line of the street curb for the purpose of connecting a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
Custom order and specialty shop: A business establishment that offers handmade or special order merchandise, one of a kind original artwork, home furnishings or similar merchandise, but which maintains no inventory on-site other than display items. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Cutting: The removal of any soil or other solid material from a natural ground surface. 
Day care facility: The use of a building or premises for the care and supervision of children or elderly adults who do not reside on the property, for periods of less than 24 hours. 
(1)  Day care center: A day care facility that enrolls for pay, supervision, and non-medical care, 19 or more children or elderly adults with no overnight stays. 
(2)  Family day care home: An accessory use within a private residence operated by the occupant of the dwelling that enrolls for pay, supervision, and non-medical care, five or fewer children or elderly adults with no overnight stays, or no more than six children or elderly adults if the structure meets the Building Code requirements for institutional uses. 
(3)  Group day care home: A day care facility that enrolls for pay, supervision, and nonmedical care, seven—18 children or elderly adults with no overnight stays. 
Dead-end street: A street connected to another street only at one end. 
Deflection angle: The angle between a deviation in the direction of the centerline of a street and the extension of the centerline along a straight course from the point from which the centerline changed direction. 
Design variance: An alteration or relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such alteration will not be contrary to the public interest, convenience and welfare, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property over which the applicant for a variance has no control, a literal enforcement of these regulations would create unnecessary and undue hardship on the applicant in the use of the property. 
Developer: The person, corporation, or other legal entity that undertakes the subdivision of property, the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity, or the construction of streets, utilities, buildings, or other improvements required for the habitation or use of property. 
Development: (1) a land development project involving the construction of streets, utilities, buildings, or other improvements required of the habitation or use of property, such as a residential neighborhood, an apartment complex, a store, or a shopping center; (2) any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials; (3) the act of constructing or carrying out a land development project, including the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Development permit: The authorization necessary to initiate and conduct a land-disturbing activity and to carry out the planned development of land and structures. 
Diameter breast height (DBH): The diameter of a tree trunk (usually a mature tree) measured at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Director of planning: The Director of the Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission. 
Director of public utilities: The Director of the Water and Sewer Department of the City of Rome or the Floyd County Water Department, as appropriate to the jurisdiction where a development is proposed. 
Director or public works: The Director of the Department of Public Works of the jurisdiction within which a development project is located. 
District: The Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erosive material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control flood control purposes. 
Drip line: A perimeter formed by the points farthest away from the trunk of a tree where precipitation falling from the branches of that tree lands on the ground. 
Drive-in motion picture theatre: See under "Theatre." 
Dwelling: A building or portion of a building arranged or designed to provide living quarters for one or more families on a permanent or long-term basis: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwelling: A residential building, whether site built or a manufactured home or an industrialized building, designed for occupancy by one family. 

(2)  Site-built single-family detached dwelling: A single-family detached dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials and pre-assembled components delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the Building Codes as adopted by the governing body and, if applicable, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
(3)  Single-family attached dwelling: A zero-lot line single-family dwelling unit constructed on an individual lot attached to a dwelling unit on an adjoining lot where the units are attached by a common party wall. The common party wall in all units, including Type V construction, must be a parapet wall that meets the standards adopted by the governing body and, if applicable, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
(4)  Site-built single-family attached dwelling: A single-family attached dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials and pre-assembled components delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the Building Codes as adopted by the governing body and, if applicable, the Georgia Industrial Building Act. 
(5)  Two-family dwelling (duplex): A residential building whether site built, or manufactured or industry built home, designed for or occupied by two families, respectively, in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(6)  Site-built two-family dwelling: A dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials and pre-assembled components delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the Building Codes as adopted by the governing body and, if applicable, the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
(7)  Multi-family dwelling: A residential building designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(a)  Townhouse: A multi-family dwelling in which the dwelling units may adjoin one another only at the vertical walls and no dwelling unit may be located above another. Also referred to as a "townhome." 
(b)  Three-family dwelling (triplex): A residential building designed for occupied exclusively by three families, respectively, in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(c)  Garden apartment building: A multi-family dwelling in which a dwelling unit may be located above another. 

(d)  Loft dwelling: A dwelling unit located in a building above the first floor, the first floor being used for nonresidential purposes such as stores or offices. 
Dwelling unit: One or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment complete with provisions for cooking, eating, sleeping, bathing, and personal hygiene, and physically set apart, whether by doors, stairs, walls, or partitions, from any other dwelling unit in the same structure. 
Easement: A strip of land on which the property owner has granted to another entity the right to use such land for specific purposes. 
Electronic message board: A type of sign that presents its message through illumination of flashing, intermittent, or moving lights forming the letters, numbers, or symbols of the message, whether or not the message appears to move across the sign face. 
Elevated building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill; solid foundation perimeter walls; pilings, columns, posts and piers, shear walls; or breakaway walls. 
EPD: The Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
EPD director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Erosion: The process by which land surface if worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Erosion and sediment control plan: A plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. 
Existing construction: Any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the original ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
Family: An individual or two or more persons living together as a household. 
Family dare care home: See under "Day Care Facility". 
Family personal care home: See under "Personal Care Home". 
Farm equipment sales and service: The use of a building or premises primarily for the retail sale of vehicles and equipment used in agriculture, such as tractors, combines, brooders or thrashers, and which may include the sale of seed and feed or any farm equipment repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
Farm winery or distillery: A facility in which wine or alcoholic spirits are produced from non-animal agricultural products (fruits, grains or vegetables), at least some of which are grown on the premises, in conjunction with an operating, conforming agricultural operation, and subject to production limits of 60,000 gallons per year. 
Farming: See "Agricultural Operations". 
Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of wood, wire, wire mesh, or decorative metal erected to enclose, screen, or separate portions of a lot. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added: the depth above the original ground. 
Filling: The placement of any soil or other solid material, either organic or inorganic, on a natural ground surface or excavation. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling, and conforming to the proposed design. 
Fire department: A reference to action by the "Fire Department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Rome Fire Department to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Fire Chief or the State Fire Marshall, as applicable. 
Flood or flooding: A general or temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)  Overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reversed in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement, i.e., to of slab in concrete slab construction or top or wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor or a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Freestanding sign: A sign permanently attached to the ground, which is wholly independent of any building or other structure. The term "freestanding sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Pole sign: A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face is at least six feet above the ground. 
(2)  Ground sign: A freestanding sign, other than a pole sign, in which the bottom of the sign face is less than six feet above the ground but not directly in contact with the ground. 
(3)  Monument sign: A freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign. 
Freight agency or shipping coordinator: An establishment primarily engaged in the remote arrangement of freight or cargo transportation, and not located where the freight or cargo is handled, stored or transported. 
Frontage or street frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where if abuts the right-of-way of any street from which access may be directly gained. 
Functionally dependent facility: A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term "functionally dependent facility" does for include long-term storage, manufacture, sales or service facilities. 
Funeral home: A building used for the preparation of deceased human beings for burial or cremation and for conducting funeral ceremonies, and where cremations may be conducted as a necessary use. 
Furniture or equipment rental establishment: A business establishment that rents or leases items of personal property such as furniture, tools, medical equipment, appliances, and construction equipment to the general public, but not including automobiles or trucks. 
Garden apartment building: See under "Dwelling." 
Garment services: A business establishment engaged primarily in such activities as linen supply, dressmaking, custom tailoring, or fur cleaning and storage. 
General business office: See under "Office." 
General merchandise store: A retail establishment that sells a number of lines of merchandise, such as dry goods, apparel, furniture, small wares, hardware, and boutique foods. Such stores are also known as "department stores," "variety stores," and "country general stores." 
Governing body: The Floyd County Commission or the Rome City Commission, whichever is appropriate to the context. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stock piling, and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Greenhouse: A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of plants for subsequent sale of for personal enjoyment. 
Greenway: An area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition, or which may contain limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. 
Gross floor area: The total area of all floors of a building, measured from the outside planes of the exterior walls. 
Ground anchor: Any device at the manufactured home space designed to secure a manufactured home to the ground. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Group residence: A dwelling unit occupied by several unrelated persons as their normal place of residence, but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons. A retirement community, nursing home, personal care home, hotel or motel, rooming or boarding house, or bed and breakfast inn shall not be deemed to be a group residence as herein defined. 
Guest house: An accessory use to a dwelling designed and intended for the temporary housing of visitors to a property at the behest of the property residents for no fee or other consideration. 
Handicapped parking space: A space laid out and designated by signage in accordance with the requirements of the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Health club or fitness center: A business that provides facilities for aerobic exercises, such as running and jogging tracks, exercise equipment, game courts, gymnasium, or swimming facilities. 
Health department: The Floyd County Health Department. 
Health services facility: An establishment primarily engaged in outpatient health services and counseling, such as kidney dialysis center, blood bank, alcohol or drug treatment center, or childbirth preparation center. 
Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
Home occupation: Any activity carried out for profit by the resident and conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. 
Home office: A home occupation that is limited to an office use and does not involve visits or access by the public, suppliers, or customers, and does not involve the receipt, maintenance, repair, storage, or transfer of merchandise at the home. 
Hospital: The use of a building or premises for the provision of diagnostic health services and medical or surgical care to inpatients and out-patients suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other physical or mental afflictions, and including as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities. 
Hotel or motel: A business establishment offering temporary lodging to the traveling public while away from their normal places of residence, and often including a restaurant as an accessory use. See also "Bed and Breakfast Inn." 
Household: An individual living alone or a group of individuals living together in a single dwelling unit, sharing common use of and access to all living and eating areas, bathrooms, and food preparation areas, who mutually combine their efforts and share responsibilities for domestic chores such as child rearing, cleaning, and cooking in a permanent and long-term relationship, as contrasted to one in a transient relationship who pays for lodging such as a boarder. 
Impermeable: Something (such as a layer of rock) that water cannot be passed through or be absorbed by. 
Impervious surface: A man-made structure or surface that prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface, such as a building, paved road or driveway, parking lot, deck, swimming pool or patio. 
Indoor athletic training or fitness facility: A facility that provides low density and/or guided athletic training or fitness activities such as CrossFit training, cheerleading and gymnastics. 
Industrialized home: A dwelling manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act (O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 2, Part 1) and the Rules of the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs issued pursuant thereto. State approved buildings meet the State Building and Construction Codes and bear an insignia of Approval issued by the Commissioner. 
Inflatable sign: A sign that is intended to be expanded by air or other gas for its proper display or support. 
Intersection: (1) the place where two streets cross; (2) the point where at which the centerline of a street intersects the centerline of another street or railway. 
Junkyard or salvage yard: A building or premises used primarily for the collecting, storage, or sale of water, paper, rags, scrap metal, or other discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, or salvage of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof. 
Jurisdiction: That area over which each governing body has authority for planning, zoning, and developmental permitting under the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
Kennel: A shelter where dogs or cats are bred, raised, trained, or boarded as a business. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling land but not including agricultural practices as described in Section 8.3.2.a.(5). 
Livestock: Animals used for the production of food or products or for recreation, such as cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, poultry, ratites or equines. 
Lot: Parcel or tract of land held in single ownership. 

(1)  Corner lot: Any lot bounded by two streets at their intersection. 
(2)  Double-frontage lot: A lot bounding on two or more streets, but not at their intersection, so that it is not a corner lot. 
(3)  Interior lot: A lot having frontage on only one street. 
Lot area: The total horizontal area included within lot lines. 

Lot lines: The boundary dividing a given lot from the street, an alley, or adjacent lots. 
(1)  Front lot line: Any boundary line of a lot that abuts a street right-of-way line. A lot adjacent to more than one street will have more than one front lot line. 
(2)  Rear lot line: Any boundary line of a lot that does not intersect with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 
(3)  Side lot line: Any boundary line of a lot that intersects with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 
Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Clerk to Superior Court, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
Lot width: The distance measured along the front principal building setback line between intersecting lot lines. 
Major street or major thoroughfare: An arterial or collector street (see under "Street Classifications.") 
Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia: A publication of the same name published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, and as amended or supplemented from time to time. 
Manufactured home: A structure that is transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and has been designated to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation. This structure, when connected to the required utilities, which includes plumbing, heating and air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein, bears a label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, U.S. Public Law 93-383. This definition is different than that of a "mobile home" below. 
Manufactured home development: A general category of development that includes manufactured home subdivisions and manufactured home parks. 
Manufactured home lot/site: A plot of ground within a manufactured home park designated for the placement of not more than one manufactured home of single-family occupancy. 
Manufactured home owner: The person who has legal title to the manufactured home. 
Manufactured home park: A parcel of land designed and/or intended for the lease or rental of spaces for the placement of two or more manufactured homes. 
Manufactured home park street: A street that affords principal means of access to manufactured home lots/sites or auxiliary buildings from any adjacent county maintained street. 
Manufactured home skirting: Installation of approved material from the exterior base of the manufactured home to the ground, that may or may not provide support to the home. Acceptable materials include masonry, brick, rock, materials manufactured for such purposes, or other appropriate durable materials. The materials shall be secured, as necessary, to assure stability, to minimize vibrations, to minimize susceptibility to wind damage, and to compensate for possible frost heave. An access opening not less than 18 inches in any dimension and not less than three square feet in area shall be provided and shall be located so that any water supply and sewer drain connections located under the home are accessible for inspection. Such access panel or door shall not be fastened in a manner requiring the use of a special tool to remove or open same. 
Manufactured home underpinning: See "Manufactured Home Skirting" above. 
Manufacturing: The creation of finished goods from raw materials or intermediate component parts. 
(1)  Heavy manufacturing: The extraction of natural resources or the transformation of raw materials through mechanical or chemical means to into basic products for subsequent assembly, fabrication, or use in the production of finished goods. 
(2)  Light manufacturing: The finishing, fabrication, or assembly of previously manufactured parts into a final product or component products ready for retail sale. Light manufacturing is characterized by no emissions of noxious odors, dust, fumes, gas, noise, or vibration outside of any building. 
Mean sea level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for established various elevation within the flood plain or for airport zone elevations. For purposes of this Section, the term "mean sea level" is synonymous with the Nation Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Medical or dental office: See under "Office." 
Membership organization: An organization that operates on a membership basis for the promotion of the members' interests. 
(1)  Business, professional, or trade association: A private organization that promotes the interests of business groups, such as the Chamber of Commerce; professions, such as the Bar Association; or members of a trade, such as a labor union. 
(2)  Church or place of worship: A religious organization operated for worship, religious training or study, and including convents, monasteries, shrines, and temples. 
(3)  Civic, social, or fraternal association: An organization dedicated to public activities of a civic and non-profit nature, such as an alumni association, American Legion, Hibernian Society, Masonic Lodge, or Oddfellows. 
(4)  Political organization: An organization established to promote the interests of a local, state, or national political part or candidate. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Mini-warehouse: A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis to the general public. 
Miscellaneous business service establishment: See under "Business Service." 
Miscellaneous personal service: See under "Personal Service Establishment." 
Miscellaneous retail stores: See under "Retail Store." 
Mobile food vehicle: A unit mounted on or pulled by a motorized vehicle where food, including prepackaged foods and beverages for individual portion service are prepared, stored, served or dispensed. 
Mobile home: A transportable, factory-built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, that became effective June 15, 1976. In many cases mobile homes were built to a voluntary industry standard of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) - A119.1 Standards for Mobile Homes. This definition differs from that of a "manufactured home" above. 
Mobile home court: See "Manufactured Home Park." 
Mobile home inspection: An inspection conducted according to the requirements set forth in this article. 
Motion picture theater: See under "Theater." 
Motor freight truck terminal: A building or premises where trucks load and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation. 
Motor vehicle dealers, miscellaneous: A business establishment primarily engaged in the sale of motorized vehicles and related equipment other than automobiles, motorboats, motorcycles, or recreational vehicles, such as aircraft dune-buggies, go-carts, snowmobiles, and utility trailers, and which may include a repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
Motorcycle sales and service: The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used motorcycles, scooters or mopeds, and which may include any repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
Multi-faced sign: A sign structure that contains two or more sign face surfaces that are located on different sides of the structure and are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than three feet. 
Multi-tenant nonresidential development: A single office, commercial or industrial property that is designed or intended for occupancy by two or more separately-owned principal businesses having no corporate relationship. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): As corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidal dispersed particles are present. 
New construction: Any structure for which the start of construction commenced after the effective date of this Development Code. 
Nonconforming use: A use or activity that was lawfully established prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Ordinance, but which, by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment, is no longer a use or activity permitted by right or no longer meets or conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance. 
Nonconforming structure: A structure or building whose size, dimensions, or location on a property were lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Ordinance, but which, by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment, no longer meets or exceeds one or more such requirements of this Ordinance. 
Nonconforming sign: A sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of this Ordinance, and by which reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this Ordinance. 
Nursery school: See "Day Care Facility." 
Nursing home: A skilled nursing care facility primarily engaged in providing full-time convalescent or rehabilitative care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves and require continuous care under the direction of a physician. See in contrast "Convalescent Home." 
Office: The use of any building or premises primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government, and generally furnished with desks, tables, files and communication equipment. 
(1)  General business office: An office used primarily for the administrative or legal affairs of a company. 
(2)  Medical or dental office: An office occupied and maintained for the provision of services by a person licensed by the State of Georgia to practice in the healing arts for humans, such as a physician, surgeon, dentist or optometrist. 
(3)  Professional office: An office occupied by a member of a recognized profession and maintained for the provision of professional services, such as a lawyer, architect, city planner, landscape architect, interior designer or engineer. 
One-hundred-year floodplain: A land area subject to a one percent or greater statistical occurrence probability of flooding in any given year. 
Opaque: Impenetrable to view, or so obscuring to view that features, buildings, structures, and uses become visually indistinguishable. 
Open space: An essentially unimproved area of land or water permanently set aside through dedication designation, or reservation for passive recreation or enjoyment. 
(1)  Common open space: Useable land area of a site that is available to all occupants of a development on a continuing and permanent basis and is not covered by buildings (except recreational structures) or public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Public open space: Land reserved for leisure and/or recreational use but dedicated in fee simple to a governing body or agency to be responsible for operation and maintenance; therefore, such land is not for the exclusive use of the residents of a specific development. 
Operator: The entity that is legally responsible for operation of the mobile food vehicle, or mobile food vehicle park. 
Outdoor display area: A portion of a property outside of any building where merchandise, goods, or other items are placed in public view for the purpose of direct sale or lease to customers. 
Outdoor storage: The keeping within an unroofed and unenclosed area of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours. 
Outparcel: A lot deeded separately from a larger tract for individual development, but generally sharing access with the larger tract. Outparcels are most generally associated with shopping centers. 
Overlay zone: A geographical area that encompasses one or more underlying zoning districts and that imposes additional requirements above that required by the underlying zone. 
Parking aisle: The traveled way, which is not the public right-of-way, by which cars enter and depart. 
Parking area: Any public or private area at grade or within a structure used for the express purpose of temporarily parking automobiles and other vehicles otherwise in operation for personal or business use. 
Parking bay: Three or more parking spaces adjacent to one another and aligned side-by-side. 
Parking garage: An accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles as an accessory use. See also "Automobile Parking Lot, Commercial." 
Parking space: A space identified and set aside for the temporary parking of an automobile or other motor vehicles. 
Passive park: A publicly or privately owned greenspace where recreational opportunities are limited to walking/running/biking trails or sidewalks, roofed or open picnic facilities, children's playgrounds, fishing piers, interactive fountains, park benches, artistic exhibits, and open space; as opposed to athletic playing fields, sports complexes, neighborhood or community recreation centers, or commercial amusement or recreational attractions. 
Pawn shop: A type of used merchandise store in which merchandise is offered as collateral for obtaining loans and wherein such merchandise is offered for sale in recompense for default of loan repayment. 
Perennial stream: A stream that flows throughout the whole year. Perennial streams may be identified as shown as such on a United States Geologic Service Quad Map. 
Performing arts theatre: See under "Theatre." 
Personal care: Protective care and watchful oversight of a resident who needs a watchful environment but does not have an illness, injury, or disability that requires chronic or convalescent care such as medical or nursing services. Protective care and watchful oversight means a 24 hour responsibility for the well-being of the resident, which includes at least a daily awareness by the management of the resident's functioning and whereabouts, the making and reminding a resident of appointments, the ability and readiness to intervene if a crisis arises for the resident, supervision in areas of nutrition and medication, and actual provision of transient medical care. 
Personal care home: A place of residence for adults where lodging, meals, and personal care are provided 24 hours per day, seven days per week and where federal and/or state licensing or permitting is required. 
(1)  Family personal care home, individual or family: A personal care home in a family-type residence that is non-institutional in character and offers care for one to four adults. 
(2)  Personal care home, group: A personal care home that is non-institutional in character and offers care for five to 15 adults. 
(3)  Personal care home, congregate: A personal care home that offers care to 16 or more adults. 
Personal enrichment school: See under "School." 
Personal service establishment: A business primarily engaged in providing a service generally to individuals, such as a laundry, portrait photographic studio, or beauty or barber shop. 
(1)  Miscellaneous personal service: An establishment offering such personal services as tax return preparation, clothing or costume rental, dating service, hair removal or replacement or tanning salon. 
Planning commission: The duly appointed Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission. References to the Planning Commission pertain only to the appointed board acting in their official capacity. 
Planning department: References to action by the "Planning Department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Rome-Floyd County Planning Commission to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Director of Planning or the Planning Commission. 
Plant nursery: Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs, trees, and other plants for sale to distributors or for subsequent replanting by the owner, a landscape company, or others. 
Political organization: See under "Membership Organization." 
Pollution susceptibility: The relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundment, applications of chemicals, injections, and other human activities in a recharge area. 
Premises: An area of land with its appurtenances and buildings, which, because of its unity of use, is one unit of real estate. 
Presiding official: The person chairing a meeting of the Planning Commission, Board of Appeals and Adjustments, or the Governing Body in their official capacity. 
Principal building: A building in which is conducted a principal use. 
Principal building setback line: A line delineating the required minimum allowable distance between a property line or the right-of-way line of an abutting street and a principal building on a lot. 
(1)  Front building setback: The required minimum allowable distance between the right-of-way of any abutting street and any part of a principal building on a lot. The front setback distance is applied along the full length of the right-of-way line and is parallel to it. If the required minimum lot width is not achieved at the required minimum front setback then the front setback is to be established at that point beyond the required minimum setback at which the required minimum lot width is achieved. 
(2)  Rear building setback: The required minimum allowable distance between a rear lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The rear building setback extends along the full length of the rear lot line (if any). 

(3)  Side building setback: The required minimum allowable distance between a side lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The side building setback extends along the side lot line between the front building setback and a rear building setback (if any). 
Principal freestanding sign: The main freestanding sign on a property, other than a billboard. 
Principal use: The specific, primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
Professional engineer: An engineer licensed and registered to perform the duties of a professional engineer (P.E.) by the State of Georgia. 
Professional office: See under "Office." 
Prohibited use: A use that is not permitted in a zoning district by right, as an accessory use, or as a conditional use. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Project entrance sign: A sign located at a discernable entrance into a particular subdivision, development, or office or industrial park. 
Projecting sign: See "Building Sign." 
Property or parcel of land: See "Lot." 
Property owner: Person(s) having a fee simple interest of 50 percent or more in real estate. 
Public improvement: The construction, enlargement, extension, or other construction of a facility intended for dedication to and maintenance by the public, including but not limited to a street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, cross drain, catch basin, traffic control and street name sign, or other roadway appurtenance other than a driveway apron connection; domestic water supply system main, fire hydrant valve or other appurtenance other than a supply line to a building; or sanitary sewerage main or outfall, lift station, force main, manhole, or other appurtenance other than a drain line from a building. 
Public open space: See under "Open Space." 
Public utility: A utility owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
(1)  Public sewerage system: A sanitary sewerage for the collection of water borne wastes complete with a sewage treatment plant that is owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
(2)  Public water system: A system for intake, treatment, and distribution of potable water that is owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
Public utilities department: References to action by the "Public Utilities Department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Water and Sewer Department of the City of Rome or the Floyd County Water Department, as appropriate to the jurisdiction where a development is proposed, to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Director of the respective Departments. 
Public works department: References to action by the "Public Works Department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the of the Rome or Floyd County Public Works Department to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the Director of the respective Public Works Departments. 
Public works director: The Director of the Department of Public Works of the jurisdiction, or his designee, whose duties include the review and approval of construction plans for public streets. 
Publicly dedicated: Land or improvements that has or have been transferred by plat or deeded to and accepted by the jurisdiction for public use and maintenance. 
Real estate sign: A sign offering a property or premises for sale or lease. 
Recharge area: Any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Record and video tape sales: A business Establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale (but not rental) of prerecorded music, movies, or other audio or video programs. See also "Video Tape Rental Store." 
Recreation facility, community: A swimming pool, tennis court, or other recreation facility owned by or provided for the use of the residents of a subdivision, apartment project, or other residential development. 
Recreation facility, private: An accessory use to a dwelling designed and equipped for the conduct of personal leisure time activities such as a swimming pool, tennis court, deck, or patio. See also "Community Recreation Facility." 
Recreational vehicle: A motorized camper, converted bus, tent trailer, motor home, or other similar vehicular or portable structure used or designed for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation or other recreational trip and provided with sleeping accommodations. 
Recreational vehicle dealer: The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used recreational vehicles, and which may include any repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
Recycling center: A use operated exclusively for the collection and temporary storage of used paper, glass, metal, and similar materials suitable for reprocessing, which are transported elsewhere for separating, processing or storage. 
Registered land surveyor: A land surveyor licensed and registered to perform the duties of a registered land surveyor (R.L.S.) by the State of Georgia. 
Repair shop, miscellaneous: A business establishment primarily engaged in specialized repair services such as bicycle repair, leather goods repair, lock and gun repair, musical instrument repair, septic tank cleaning, furnace cleaning, and taxidermists. 
Reserve strip: A strip of or tract of land reserved for the purpose of controlling or limiting access from properties to abutting streets. 
Restaurant: An establishment in a site built or "brick and mortar" structure where food is prepared and served on the premises for consumption on or off the premises: 
(1)  Custom Service: An establishment where food and drink are prepared to individual order, ordered and served at the table, and consumed primarily within the principal building or in established outdoor dining areas. 
(2)  Drive-In or Drive-Through: Any establishment, building, or structure where food or drinks are served for consumption, either on or off the premises, by order from or service to persons either over an interior counter, outside the structure or from an outdoor service window or automobile service window, or by delivery. This definition shall not include otherwise permitted restaurants where outdoor table service is provided to customers in established outdoor dining areas or where drive-through or take-out service is provided incidental to a Custom Service Restaurant. 
(3)  Mobile Food Vehicle Park: Any property allowing as a primary use a site for more than one mobile food vehicle to serve food and/or drink to customers for consumption on- or off-site; where rent is charged. A set-up fee, registration fee, or participation fee for special events shall not be considered to be rent. 
Retail store: An establishment principally engaged in offering a category of similar goods or products for sale to the general public, such as a grocery store, hardware store, pharmacy, clothing shop, home furnishings store, office supplies store, and the like. 
(1)  Miscellaneous retail stores: Retail stores such as florists, tobacco stores or newsstands, optical goods stores, artists' supplies, stamp and coin shops, pet stores, telephone stores, and home swimming pool or hot tub stores. 
Retirement community: An age-restricted residential development that offers significant services and facilities for the elderly, including social and recreational activities, personal care services, or health facilities limited to use by the development's residents. At least 80 percent of the units must be occupied by residents 55 years old or older. 
Right-of-way: Land reserved for and immediately available for use as a street or other public purpose. 
Roadbed: That portion of a street improved for vehicular travel, measured from back of curb to back of curb, or from edge of pavement to edge of pavement for swale ditch roads. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Roof sign: See "Building Sign." 
Rooming or boarding house: A dwelling unit within which a resident family or manager offers lodging or lodging and meals to two or more unrelated adults in exchange for monetary compensation or other consideration. 
School: A facility used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. 
(1)  Academic school: A private educational facility offering instruction following the same curriculum used in a public kindergarten, elementary, secondary, trade or technical, or higher education facility, and accredited to award diplomas as such. 
(2)  Business or vocational school: A business establishment offering courses of instruction oriented to improving business skills or securing employment in a specific field, such as data processing, secretarial or office services, banking, commercial art, nursing, real estate, truck driving, or other trade or vocation. 
(3)  Personal enrichment school: A business establishment offering courses in the arts or personal skills, not necessarily related to employment, such as automobile driving, drama, ceramics, cooking, diction, languages, modeling, music, public speaking or reading. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Semi-public use: A use owned or operated by a nonprofit, religious, or eleemosynary institution for the purpose of providing educational, cultural, recreational, religious, or social services to the general public. 
Setback: The shortest straight line distance between a street right-of-way line and the nearest point of a structure or building or projection there from (excluding roof overhangs of 18 inches or less). 
Setback, minimum: The shortest distance allowed between a street right-of-way or any other lot line and any principal or accessory building on a lot. Minimum setback requirements for buildings are associated with the type of lot line from which the setback is taken; for instance, a "side yard setback" is measured from a side lot line. 
Shade tree: A broadleaf tree having an average height at maturity of at least 20 feet and having a broad spread relative to its height (excluding trees with pyramidal, conical, or columnar crown) and a dense canopy, so as to provide shade to structures or parking areas in the summer months. 
Shopping center: A commercial development containing at least three retail sale or service establishments located in one building, the total gross floor area of which is 25,000 square feet or greater. 
Sign: The term "sign" shall mean any structure, display, or device that is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement or illumination. 

Sign face: That portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
Sign face module: Each portion or unit of a sign face that is clearly separable from other such units by virtue of the expression of a complete thought, message, logo or idea. 
Sign height: The vertical distance to the highest point of a sign structure, as measured from the grade at the base of the structure or directly below a projecting structure. 

Sign structure: All elements of a freestanding sign, including the sign face, background, or decorative elements related to the presentation of the sign's message, and the structural supports. 
Single-family detached dwelling: See under "Dwelling." 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion and sediment control plan approved in writing by the Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Solar farm: Multiple solar panels converting the energy of the sun into electricity and selling it for distribution through a utility company's service grid. 
Solar panel array: Single or multiple solar panels converting the energy of the sun into electricity almost entirely for the use of an office, residential, industrial or agricultural development or operation as an accessory use. 
Solar panel installation: Less than ten solar panels or 300 square feet, whichever is less, converting the energy of the sun into electricity for the sole use of a single-family dwelling or duplex as an accessory use. 
Solid waste transfer station: A facility where refuse and garbage (but no hazardous waste) is delivered for compaction or aggregation and loaded on trucks for shipment to a remote landfill or other disposal facility. 
Special outdoor event: A festival, carnival, or exhibition produced for a limited time by or on behalf of a non-profit organization or in conjunction with special promotional activities of a business. 
Sports facility, commercial: The use of any building, structure, or premises for the conduct of a professional or semi-professional sport, such as a boxing pavilion, racetrack, stadium, or sports field where admission is charged in order to pay the players or fund a prize purse. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Start of construction: The initiation of new construction or a substantial improvement, as follows: 
(1)  For New Construction: The date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a building, including a manufactured home, on a site, such as pouring slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets or walkways; the excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations, or erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. 
(2)  For a Substantial Improvement: The date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural parts of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Storage: The placement, keeping or retention of vehicles, equipment, materials, goods or products on a temporary basis for intermittent use or subsequent distribution or transfer. 
Street: An improved way for the conveyance of motor driven, rubber-tired vehicles, such as automobiles and trucks. The term includes streets that have been opened and accepted by the jurisdiction as a "public" street, streets otherwise maintained by the jurisdiction, and streets that have been approved and designated by the jurisdiction as a "private" street. 
Street classifications: Streets are classified according to the function that they are to serve, the type, speed, and volume of traffic they will carry and the required standards of design. The classification of streets and roads are as follows: 
(1)  Major streets include the following: 
(a)  Arterial roads (major): A road intended to move through traffic to and from major areas of activity and/or as a route for traffic between communities or large areas. A minor function is to provide direct access to abutting property. 
(b)  Arterial roads (minor): A road intended to collect and distribute traffic in a manner similar to major arterials, except that these roads service major activity centers, and/or are designed to carry traffic from collector streets to the major arterials. A minor function is to provide direct access to abutting property. 
(c)  Collector streets: Major streets that carry traffic between minor and arterial streets. 
(2)  Minor streets including the following: 
(a)  Local Streets: Streets in residential subdivisions that primarily provide access to individual lots, do not carry through traffic, and serve fewer than 100 dwelling units. 
(b)  Alleys: A public or private right-of-way that affords only a secondary means of access to abutting properties and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Street jog: The incidence where two streets or two portions of a street are separated by a relatively short distance, usually at their intersection with another street. (See illustration below.) 

Structural Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sedimentation control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediments traps, and land grading. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include but are not limited to, buildings, driveways, parking lots, walls, fences, signs and swimming pools. 
Structure height: The vertical distance to the highest point of a structure, as measured from the average grade at the base of the structure or directly below a projecting structure. 
Subdivision: (1) the division of a property or tract of land into two or more tracts or lots; (2) a land development project in which two or more lots are created, along with the streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots. 
Substantial improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building prior to improvement. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. 
For the purpose of this definition, the term does not include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
Tangent: The straight-line distance between the ending of one curve of a line (centerline of a street) and the beginning of another curve of the same line (centerline.) (See illustration below.) 

Temporary special event: An activity that occurs sporadically for definitive periods of time or until a definitive ending, such as a grand opening or special sale, or a festival or bazaar. 
Temporary use: A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. 
Temporary vehicle storage (county): The temporary outdoor storage of vehicles on property which may also contain an office. 
Tenant: One who possesses or occupies land or buildings by title, under a lease, or through payment of rent; an occupant, inhabitant, or dweller of a place. 
Theater: A building or premises devoted to showing motion pictures, or for live dramatic or musical performances. 
(1)  Drive-in motion picture theater: An open lot with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures or other pre-recorded productions to the general public in an outdoor setting. 
(2)  Motion picture theater: A building primarily used for the exhibition of movies or other pre-recorded productions to the general public in an indoor setting. 
(3)  Performing arts theater: A building primarily used for the presentation of live performances of play or music. 
Tire retreading or repair shop: See under "Automotive Repair Shop." 
Townhouse: See under "Dwelling." 
Travel trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight feet. 
Triplex: A three-family dwelling. See under "Dwelling: Multifamily Dwelling." 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designed by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown, or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Truck loading docks: A portion of a building designed for the loading and unloading of trucks. 
Truck terminal: See under "Motor Freight Truck Terminal." 
Two-family dwelling: See under "Dwelling." 
Uniform sign plan: Coordinated drawings and specifications that establish a unified design concept with regard to the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all signs to be placed on a property. 
Unrelated: When referring to persons, two or more people not related by blood, marriage, or adoption. 
Use: The purpose for which land or a building or other structure is designed or arranged, or for which it is occupied. See also "Principal Use" and "Accessory Use or Structure." 
Used merchandise store: The use of a building or premises primarily for the retail sale of used merchandise or secondhand goods, such as used clothes, antiques, secondhand books or rare manuscripts, or items of architectural salvage, but not including used cars or other motorized vehicles. A pawn shop is a type of used merchandise store. 
Utility company: A private business providing electricity, natural gas, telephone, wireless communications, or other services under the regulation of the Georgia Public Services Commission or license of the federal government. 
Utility company substation: A facility used for the transmission or distribution of services provided by a utility company, such as an electrical transformer station, telephone junction box, cable television box, or natural gas regulator station. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging, or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Veterinary: A hospital or clinic providing medical care and treatment for animals. 
(1)  Large animal veterinary: A place where horses, cattle, sheep, or other animals normally kept in agricultural settings are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals in limited to short-term care. 
(2)  Small animal veterinary: A place where dogs, cats, birds, or other animals normally kept as household pets are given medical or surgical treatment and the boarding of animals is limited to short-term care. 
Video tape rental store: An establishment primarily engaged in renting movies or other entertainment programs pre-recorded on tape, disks, or other media, to the general public for personal or household use. 
Wall sign: See "Façade or Wall Sign" under "Building Sign." 
Warehouse or indoor storage facility: A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. See also "Mini-Warehouse." 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Water supply intake: The point at which water is withdrawn from a river, stream or lake to be sent to a treatment plant for public consumption. 
Water supply watershed: The area upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
(1)  Large water supply watershed: One with 100 or more acres of land in the drainage basin upstream of the intake. 
(2)  Small water supply watershed: One with fewer than 100 acres of land in the drainage basin upstream of the intake. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Wholesale trade establishment: A place of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. 
Window sign: See "Building Sign." 
Yard: An area that lies between the principal building on a lot and the nearest lot line. 
(1)  Front yard: A yard situated along any public street right-of-way or private street easement. 
(2)  Rear yard: A yard situated along a rear lot line. 
(3)  Side yard: A yard situated along a side lot line, but not extending into a front or rear yard. 

Zoning change: An amendment to the Zoning Map (rezoning), approval of a special use, or approval of a change in the conditions of approval associated with a rezoning or special use. 
Zero-lot line: The location of a building on a lot in such manner that one or more of the building's sides rest directly on a lot line. 
(Ord. No. 2010-001ULDC, § 1, 5-25-10; Ord. No. 2011-005ULDC, § I, 5-24-11; Ord. No. 2012-001ULDC, § I, 1-24-12; Ord. No. 2012-004ULDC, § IV, 10-23-12; Ord. No. 2013-002ULDC, § V, 3-26-13; Ord. No. 2014-002ULDC, § III, 8-12-14; Ord. No. 2014-003ULDC, § IV, 8-12-14; Ord. No. 2014-005ULDC, § III, 9-23-14; Ord. No. 2015-005ULDC, § I, 5-26-15; Ord. No. 2015-006ULDC, § I, 6-23-15) 
ARTICLE 9. - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 

9.1. - Purpose of article 9. 
This Article establishes overlay zoning districts to guide development in specific areas within the City of Rome and unincorporated Floyd County. The purpose of overlay zoning districts is to allow the Governing Body to establish special land use regulations, standards, or procedures in areas with unique land use, site planning, building design, or environmental resource issues. Overlay zoning districts are also an appropriate mechanism to implement long-term goals and land use requirements of the City and County for a specific property, location, or to coordinate land use and design requirements unique to a large tract of land. Overlay zoning districts are intended to be applied only where special circumstances justify the modification of base zoning district regulations to achieve specific land use and design objectives. 
9.2. - Establishment and designation. 
Overlay zoning districts are established through "zoning change" procedures as established in Article 2 of this code and in conjunction with base zoning districts. Except as modified by the overlay zoning district, the provisions of the applicable base-zoning district shall apply to all development within the boundary of the designated area. If regulations conflict, the applicable overlay zoning district regulations shall prevail. 
Whenever an overlay district is established, any subsequent application to change the base-zoning district shall not be construed to be an application to eliminate the overlay district for the property covered by the application. An intent to eliminate the overlay district on a given property shall be expressly stated to be part of the application. 
9.3. - South Rome Redevelopment District. 
9.3.1. - Purpose.The purpose of this district is to provide such additional standards and uses to the underlying zoning districts as needed to promote appropriate redevelopment in the South Rome Redevelopment District (SRRD), in conformance with the South Rome Redevelopment Master Plan, adopted by the City of Rome in August of 2004. 
9.3.2. - South Rome Overlay Districts Map.Boundaries of the South Rome Overlay District and redevelopment areas shall be amended to and shown on the official zoning map of the city and county on the respective dates of adoption for this ordinance, and as subsequently amended thereafter from time to time in conformance with this code. The South Rome Overlay District Map is hereby made a part of this Code, and all notations, references and other information shown on it shall be a part of this Code. 
9.3.3. - South Rome Overlay District DefinedThe South Rome Overlay District shall include that property designated by the City of Rome as the South Rome Redevelopment Area. The overlay district shall be further divided into six distinct redevelopment areas: Hillsboro Residential Neighborhood, Etowah Heights Area, Blacks Bluff Neighborhood, Northern Commercial Mixed-use, Central Commercial Mixed-use, and Southern Commercial Mixed-use. 
The six redevelopment areas are established to insure that new development is attractive, pedestrian oriented, and compatible with the existing neighborhoods; while promoting the preservation of heritage resources and sense of place. 
a.  Hillsboro Neighborhood Area (HNA). 
(1)  The HNA Area is bounded by the Coosa River on the north and west, South Broad Street and East Main Street to the east, and City of Rome municipal property to the south. 
(2)  The HNA Area is a traditional residential neighborhood built along a grid pattern. Residential architectural styles reflect the residential neighborhoods established prior to and during the 1940s with steeply pitched roofs and modest, but varied, architectural detailing. Single-family residences predominate, with scattered duplexes and some multi-family residential. Commercial development includes retail and service businesses, located mostly along the South Broad Street corridor. One legal non-conforming industry (zoned L-TR) occupies two lots adjacent the Coosa River, south of the residential area. 
(3)  Large tracts of institutional property are located within the HNA Area; including the Coosa Country Club, Myrtle Hill Cemetery, Shadyside Cemetery, Parks Hoke Park, and Anna K. Davie Elementary School. 
b.  Etowah Heights Area (EHA). 
(1)  The EHA Area is bounded by the South Broad Street corridor on the west, the Northern Commercial - Mixed Use Area to the north, the Etowah River and Silver Creek to the east, and East Main Street/East 12 th Street to the south. 
(2)  The EHA, which includes the Mount Aventine neighborhood, is one of the oldest established residential areas in Rome. Due to the area's unique topography, this single-family residential neighborhood was developed along a curvilinear design. Residential architectural styles reflect the residential neighborhoods established prior to and during the 1940s with steeply pitched roofs and varied architectural detailing. Several excellent examples of Victorian, Queen Anne, and Craftsman architecture are located in this area. Commercial uses are limited in this area, and are located mainly in the South Broad Street corridor. The Jewish cemetery is the only institutional use. The land on the eastern side is largely within the floodplain and is undeveloped 
(3)  The Etowah Heights area includes a strip of residential property along both sides of Etowah Terrace. This neighborhood of historic, but generally run down houses, is further identified as the Etowah Terrace Arts Village (ETAV). Its location between the Mt. Aventine residential neighborhood and the Northern Commercial/Mixed Use Area; and between the river and Broad Street makes it an ideal area for redevelopment as a mixed use/residential neighborhood. 
c.  Blacks Bluff Neighborhood Area (BBNA). 
(1)  The BBNA Area comprises the southern extremes of the South Rome Overlay District including the Blacks Bluff Road Corridor, Cave Spring Street Corridor, and the Anchor Duck mill houses. 
(2)  This area is comprised mainly of mixed density, strip residential development and large tracks of institutional uses including City of Rome municipal property (zoned HI to accommodate a waste water treatment plant) and the Darlington School. No distinct architectural pattern is evident in this area with the exception of the Anchor Duck mill houses along Cave Spring Street and South McLin Street; and the Darlington School campus. Industrial and commercial development is interspersed with residential development along the street corridors. 
d.  Northern Commercial Mixed-use Area (NCMA). 
(1)  The NCA is bounded on the north and west by South Broad Street, on the east by the Etowah River, and on the south by the Mt. Aventine Neighborhood Area. 
(2)  The NCA Area includes a strip of mostly vacant commercial buildings along South Broad Street, and vacant lots. The buildings located in the commercial strip along South Broad Street are architecturally and geographically related to the downtown commercial district across the Charles Graves Bridge. 
e.  Central Commercial Mixed-use Area (CCMA). 
(1)  The CCMA Area is centered on South Broad Street and the intersection of Black Bluff Road and East Main Street. The area is bounded by the Hillsboro, Etowah Heights, and Black Bluff Neighborhood Areas. The area currently includes a church, a contractor office and storage yard, and single-family residences. 
f.  Southern Commercial Mixed-use Area (SCMA). 
(1)  The SCMA is bounded on the north by Etowah Terrace Area, on the east by the exiting rail line, on the west by Silver Creek, and on the south by the Black Bluff Neighborhood Areas. 
(2)  The area is developed with several large unused industrial buildings. Some of these are empty, and some are used for a variety of commercial uses. The Silver Creek trail ends near this complex. The Floyd County Health Department building is located in the SCMA. 
9.3.4. - Underlying zoning districts in designated areas.This section establishes appropriate underlying zoning district designations for each redevelopment area. Underlying zoning districts are shown in Table 9-1. 
TABLE 9-1  APPROPRIATE ZONING DISTRICTS IN DESIGNATED AREAS 

 
9.3.5. - Design requirements in designated areas. 
a.  The provisions regarding design standards of the applicable underlying zoning district shall apply to all development within the boundary of the Overlay District; however, if regulations conflict, the applicable Overlay District regulations shall prevail. 
b.  The following general standards shall apply to all redevelopment areas within the Overlay District: 
(1)  Requests for rezoning of property within the South Rome Overlay District shall be accompanied by a site plan showing the development proposed for the site. The site plan shall meet the requirements of Article 2.2.2, and include elevations for all primary structures. 
(2)  In addition to site plans and building plans that meet the requirements of Article 2.8.2, building permit applications shall include elevations for all primary structures. Permits for renovation, repair, or remodeling where the cost of the work does not exceed 50 percent of the structural value, as determined by the Chief Building Official, shall be exempt from this requirement. 
The determination by the Chief Building Official as to whether or not the total cost of renovations is at least 50 percent of the structural value may be appealed to the Board of appeals and Adjustments. 
For commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential developments a Uniform Sign Plan that meets the requirements of Article 5.4.3 shall also be submitted. 
(3)  Infill on vacant lots shall be compatible in use, scale, height, exterior material, roof pitch, landscaping, orientation, setbacks, and design with existing development of a similar use on surrounding lots within 100 feet or on the same or opposite block. 
(4)  Existing structures within the Overlay District should be preserved and adaptively reused. Demolition shall be undertaken only in response to health and safety issues as determined by the Building Official, or if specific redevelopment projects have special merit in terms of providing benefit to the community. 
(5)  Sidewalks shall be placed along all street frontages when development occurs. Sidewalks that meet the requirements of this code; the standards for streetscaping, as defined in the South Rome Redevelopment Master Plan; and the designs, patterns, and materials used on adjacent and opposite properties are required on all streets adjacent to new non-residential and multi-family residential construction or renovation of non-residential and multi-family residential property in which the total cost of renovations are at least 50 percent of the total property value. 
(6)  Unless otherwise specified, streets and sidewalks shall be constructed in conformance with the standards listed in Article 6.6 and 6.7. 
(7)  Parking requirements shall be those associated with the underlying zoning district and use. However, requests for Special Exceptions to reduce the parking requirements for commercial and mixed use developments shall be considered favorably if adequate and feasible alternatives are proposed, such as available on-street or public parking, centralized shared parking, pedestrian/bike accessibility, and/or location on transit routes. The number of off-street parking spaces shall not exceed the minimum requirement by more than five percent unless the spaces will be shared. Shared parking arrangements shall be approved by the Building Official. 
All parking for Multi-family and non-residential development shall meet the standards for required parking found in Article 6 of this code, including but not limited to surfacing, landscaping, and dimensions. These regulations shall apply to new parking areas, redeveloped parking areas, and to any enlargement of parking areas by ten percent or more. The enlargement of any existing parking area by ten percent or more shall require that existing and new parking areas conform to the standards for required parking found in Article 6. Multi-level parking structures are exempt from the interior planting requirements. 
(8)  New construction, demolition, and renovation (in which the total cost of renovations are at least 50 percent of the structural value, as determined by the Chief Building Official) require review and approval by a panel consisting of the South Rome Redevelopment Agency Director or their designee, plus at least three of the following staff members; Director of Planning, Historic Preservation Planner, Director of Community Development, of the Chief Building Official; or their designee as required. 
The determination by the Chief Building Official as to whether or not the total cost of renovations is at least 50 percent of the structural value may be appealed to the Board Adjustments. 
The Chief Building Official shall notify the panel when a complete application for a permit has been submitted. The applicant may, at their request or at the request of the Chief Building Official, meet with the panel to discuss the project. 
Failure of the panel to approve or deny an application within 14 days of submittal of a complete application shall constitute approval. 
c.  Variations in development standards (from the standards listed in this code for each zoning district) are shown in Table 9-2. 
TABLE 9-2  VARIATIONS IN DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

 
d.  Variations in sign regulations (from the standards listed in this code for each zoning district) are shown in Table 9-3. 
TABLE 9-3  PERMITTED SIGNS-BY ZONING DISTRICT OR SPECIAL USE 
Principal Freestanding Sign — One Use or Two or More Uses on Property 

 
NOTE: Height of sign means, in the case of freestanding signs, the distance in vertical feet measured from the level of an adjacent street centerline to the highest point of the sign structure. The sign measured at its base shall not extend over 40 ft. in height above the centerline of any adjacent road. 
Building Sign: Wall signs and awning, canopy, projecting, incidental, roof and window signs, etc. 

 
Note: Street frontage is defined in this Code as being a street "from which access may be directly gained." 
9.3.6. - Permitted uses in designated areas. 
a.  The uses permitted by right and by special use permit, with or without limitations, of the applicable underlying zoning district shall apply to all development within the boundary of the Overlay District; however, if regulations conflict, the applicable Overlay District regulations shall prevail. 
b.  Variations in use from those permitted in each underlying zoning district are shown in Table 9-4. 
TABLE 9-4  PERMITTED USES IN DESIGNATED AREAS 

 
9.4. - River Corridor District. 
9.4.1. - Purpose.The rivers of Rome are an important but limited resource that should be utilized and protected for the benefit of the community. The intent of this district is to establish such additional standards and uses to the underlying zoning districts that will promote appropriate and sustainable development within the River Corridor; preserve the scenic, natural, cultural, and recreational resources within the corridor; and protect the health and ecological diversity of the Etowah, Oostanaula, and Coosa Rivers. 
9.4.2. - River Corridor Overlay District Map.Boundaries of the River Corridor Overlay District (RC) shall be amended to and shown on the Zoning Districts Maps, Rome-Floyd County, Georgia on the respective dates of adoption for this ordinance, and as subsequently amended thereafter from time to time in conformance with this code. The River Corridor Overlay District Map is hereby made a part of this Code, and all notations, references and other information shown on it shall be a part of this Code. 
9.4.3. - River Corridor Overlay District Defined.The River Corridor Overlay District (RC) shall include that property designated by the City of Rome as shown on the Zoning Districts Maps, Rome-Floyd County, Georgia. This area shall include all property within 200 feet of the Etowah, Oostanaula, and Coosa Rivers. 
9.4.4. - Applicability.No structure or land within the River Corridor Overlay District (RC) shall hereafter be used, located, extended, converted or structurally altered except in full compliance with the provisions of this ordinance section regardless of previous development status. Legal non-conforming uses and structures shall be treated as specified in Article 1 of this code. Agricultural operations shall be exempt from this overlay zone. 
9.4.5. - Review of development plans by special review panel.Review of new construction, demolition, renovation, and land disturbance is required. A Special Review Panel consisting of at least three of the following staff members; Assistant City Manager, Director of Planning, Historic Preservation Planner, Director of Community Development, Environmental Services Director, and Chief Building Official or their designee shall accomplish such reviews. The Chief Building Official shall be responsible for distributing all plans and elevations to each member of the review panel. No permit shall be issued prior to approval by the special review panel. Decisions of the Special Review Panel may be appealed to the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
9.4.6. - Building and site design.The following standards shall apply to all development in the corridor, except single-family dwellings and duplexes on individual lots. 
a.  Minimum building setbacks, landscaping requirements, and buffers shall conform to the requirements of the underlying zoning district. Additionally, no building shall be allowed within 100 feet of the Etowah, Oostanaula, and Coosa Rivers, except on previously developed property. On previously developed property, new development may infringe on the 100 foot river buffer only to the extent of the infringement by the previous development, including depth and area, and only if granted a variance by the Zoning Board of Appeals and Adjustments. 
b.  All office buildings and retail sales and service establishments shall have a customer entrance facing the river or other architectural design addressing the river that is approved by the Special Review Panel. 
c.  The outdoor storage of equipment and/or merchandise, when permitted, shall not be visible from public property or the rivers. The outdoor display of sales merchandise is permissible so long as it meets with other requirements of the code. 
d.  In order to ensure the permanency of buildings, reduce the need for periodic maintenance and maintain a character which is commensurate with the public interest, the following materials shall be used as primary exterior building wall finishes on portions of the building which are visible from the river right-of-way: brick, stone, glass, wood, stucco, imitation stucco, pre-cast concrete, poured concrete, and/or split-face concrete block. Materials should be sealed or otherwise treated if they will be subjected to wet conditions in order to maintain a clean and finished appearance. Other materials may be used if approved by the Special Review Panel. 
e.  Service and loading areas, outdoor sales and storage areas, trash receptacles, utility equipment, mechanical units and similar appurtenances shall be located so as to minimize visibility from the rivers and shall be visually screened from view from off the premises. Trash receptacles shall be located within a four sided structure which completely conceals the trash receptacle. The color and architecture of the structure shall be compatible with that of the building which it serves. Building orientation shall be such that loading and service areas do not face the river or public road, except in the case of double frontage lots, where such areas must be located in a rear or side yard, which faces the highway. All loading and service areas shall be screened from view from off the premises. 
f.  Screening walls and fences shall match the color and materials of the building on the premises. Fences designed to create privacy or separation shall be made of masonry, ornamental metal, durable wood, vinyl that is designed and fabricated to appear as wood, or a combination of these materials. Chain link, plastic or wire fencing is not permitted for fences visible from public property, unless screened by landscaping. 
g.  Development plans shall include site amenities that enhance safety and convenience of pedestrians and promote walking or bicycling as an alternative means of transportation. Site amenities may include bike racks, drinking fountains, canopies and benches. 
h.  When multi-use trails exist or are planned, pedestrian access lanes shall link the multi-use trail with street sidewalks and with building entries through parking lots. Special paving, raised surfaces, bollards, or landscaping shall be used to separate pedestrian access lanes from traffic. Such lanes shall be a minimum of six feet in width. 
9.4.7. - Appropriate land uses and zoning. 
a.  Appropriate land uses may include residential, multi-family residential, office, retail sales and service, historical education/interpretation, and some light industrial uses. Heavy industrial uses are not appropriate in the River Corridor Overlay Zone. Other uses allowed in the underlying zoning district shall be allowed on property within the district. 
Appropriate zoning districts in the River Corridor Overlay Zone may include Suburban Residential, Agricultural Residential, High Density Traditional Residential, Low Density Traditional Residential, Duplex Residential, Multifamily Residential, Neighborhood Office Commercial, Office Institutional, Community Commercial, and Light Industrial zoning districts. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1979 CODE 
This table gives the location within Part II of this Code of those sections of Division 2 of the 1979 Code, as supplemented through November 23, 1983, which are included herein. Sections of Division 2 of the 1979 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete, or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE—ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1979 Code, as supplemented through November 23, 1983, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1979 Code. This table contains some ordinances which precede November 23, 1983, but which were never included in Division 2 of the 1979 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws included herein. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within Part I and Part II, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 

 

 