THE CODE OF ROCKDALE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2004 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of 
ROCKDALE COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Oz Nesbitt, Sr. 
Chairman 
____________ 
Sherri L. Washington, Esq. 
Dr. Doreen Williams 
Commissioners 
____________ 
Corey K. Hambrick 
Chief of Staff 
____________ 
M. Qader A. Baig 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Jennifer O. Rutledge 
Director of Legislative Affairs/County Clerk 
____________ 
Roselyn Miller 
Director of Finance 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Rockdale County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1978 Code, as supplemented through May 13, 1997, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1978 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Senior Code Attorney, and William B. Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. John Nix, County Attorney, and Ms. Jennifer Rutledge, County Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Rockdale County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Rockdale County, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Rockdale County, Georgia. 2004. 
ORDINANCE NO. 0-2004-21 
AN ORDINANCE TO ADOPT A NEW CODIFICATION OF THE ORDINANCES CURRENTLY IN EFFECT IN ROCKDALE COUNTY, GEORGIA; TO PROVIDE FOR AN EFFECTIVE DATE; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
WHEREAS, Rockdale County currently has a codified Code of Ordinances of Rockdale County, Georgia; and 
WHEREAS, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19, the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners undertook to update and reorganize the format of the Code of ordinances with the specific intent of substituting this recodification for the current codification and making the Code available on the internet; and 
WHEREAS, the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners contracted with the Municipal Code Corporation to reformat and recodify the existing ordinances currently having the force and effect of law in Rockdale County; and 
WHEREAS, on September 2, 2004 Municipal Code Corporation submitted to the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners a newly reorganized codification of the Code of Ordinances of Rockdale County; and 
WHEREAS, the growth and development of Rockdale County, along with changes and advances in local, state and federal laws applicable to Rockdale County, require the reorganization of the ordinances currently in effect in Rockdale County; and 
WHEREAS, following a review of the codification presented to the Board by Municipal Code Corporation, the Board of Commissioners finds that the following changes to the official Code of Ordinances of Rockdale County are necessary to enhance public service by County employees, to encourage public participation in local government; and are generally appropriate in order to advance the public health, safety and welfare; and 
WHEREAS, the Board of Commissioners herewith exercises the authority delegated to the Board pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19, regarding the adoption and enactment of a general codification of the ordinances of Rockdale County, Georgia having the force and effect of law, as well as authority provided by other state and local laws; 
NOW, THEREFORE BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County, Georgia, and it is hereby ordained by the authority of same as follows: 
Section 1 
The Code of Ordinances entitled "The Code of Rockdale County, Georgia", published in September 2004 by Municipal Code Corporation by order of the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners, is hereby adopted in its entirety as the official codification of the ordinances of Rockdale County and shall replace any existing codification. 
Section 2 
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 9, 2004, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3 
The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance, nor to repeal valid rezoning, special use permits, and similar zoning ordinances applicable to identified parcels of property. 
Section 4 
All ordinances adopted after March 9, 2004 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the previous Code of Ordinances shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the newly enacted Code. 
Section 5 
The new codification known as "The Code of Rockdale County, Georgia" shall be made available as soon as possible via the internet to be accessed from the Rockdale County website. 
Section 6 
This Ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
This 14 th day of September, 2004. 
ROCKDALE COUNTY, GEORGIA  BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 


Attest: 

Approved as to form: 

1 st reading 9/14/04 
2 nd reading waived 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part I of this volume is a compilation of local laws involving the county adopted by the Georgia General Assembly or adopted under home rule by the county along with state constitutional amendments and general laws of local application (population acts) to the county only. No state laws of general application are reprinted here but references to those laws are occasionally included in appropriate places. 
The material included in this part has been arranged according to subject matter. The title, enactment, severability, repealer, transitional, ratification, publication and effective date provisions have been omitted, and where a section has been amended or repealed by a later provision, only the current language has been printed. Any material in brackets has been added to clarify the meaning of the text. At the end of each section appears a reference to the basic act and amendatory acts, if any. The editor has added section numbers and catchlines to facilitate use of this compilation and indexing; however, formal citations should be to the original act, and not to this compilation. There is a Related Laws Comparative Table listing chronologically the laws in this part and their location in this part. 
A uniform system of citations to state statutes has been used. 

Sec. 1-1. - County created and original boundaries; name. 
(a)  A new county shall be laid out and organized from the counties of Newton and Henry, to be included within the following limits, to wit: beginning at the Peachstone Shoals on South River, running thence up said river to the north of Camp Creek; thence running up said creek to Flat Shoal Road in Henry county; running thence along said road to the land line between Robert M. Clark and John Calaway; thence along the present county line between the counties of DeKalb and Henry to the point on South River where the county line between DeKalb and Newton counties strikes said river; thence along the county line between the counties of DeKalb and Newton, to the point where the lines between the counties of DeKalb, Gwinnett, Newton and Walton intersect; thence along the county line between the counties of Newton and Walton to Little Haynes Creek; thence down Little Haynes Creek to its mouth; running thence down Big Haynes Creek to its mouth; running thence South 38 degrees, 33′ 33″ West, a distance of 14,166.7 feet to a concrete monument; thence South 32 degrees, 32′ 32″ West, a distance of 3,451.6 feet to a concrete monument; thence South 34 degrees, 03′ 34″ West, a distance of 3,183.6 feet to a concrete monument; thence South 32 degrees, 08′ 52″ West, a distance of 3,912.7 feet to a concrete monument; thence South 89 degrees, 55′ 45″ West, a distance of 490.0 feet to a concrete monument; thence South 37 degrees, 01′ 55″ West, a distance of 14,903.96 feet to a concrete monument; thence North 89 degrees, 42′ 12″ East, a distance of 2,176.25 feet to a concrete monument; thence South 00 degrees, 01′ 30″ East, a distance of 3,002.06 feet to a concrete monument; thence North 89 degrees, 36′ 24″ West, a distance of 2253.4 feet to a concrete monument; thence North 00 degrees, 53′ 54″ East, a distance of 2936.21 feet to a concrete monument: thence South 37 degrees, 01′ 55,′ West, a distance of 17,070.5 feet to Peachstone Shoals on the South River, the starting point. 
(b)  The new county described above shall be called and known by the name of Rockdale county. 
(1870 Ga. Laws, page 16, §§ 1, 2; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 2983) 
Editor's note— This section is an edited version of the original act. Sections 3 through 9 and part of section 2 have either been impliedly repealed or are now invalid. Section 1 (subsection (a) above) has been altered by the sections below and changed or clarified under procedures in O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Boundary changes of 1875. 
Fractional lot No. 250, in the 4th district of Gwinnett, and fractional lot No. 256, in the 16th district of DeKalb, be and the same are hereby included in the county of Rockdale. 
(1875 Ga. Laws, page 272) 
Sec. 1-3. - Boundary changes of 1876. 
The line between the counties of Newton and Rockdale are so changed as to include the land and residence of H. C. Penn, in the county of Rockdale. 
(1876 Ga. Laws, page 308) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State constitution references— General powers of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § I, ¶ I; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Code reference— Board of commissioners, § 2-31 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-31. - Board of commissioners created. 
There is hereby created in and for the County of Rockdale a board of commissioners to be elected and organized as hereinafter set forth, which board of commissioners, also to be known as the "commission," shall constitute the governing authority of said county and shall exercise the powers, duties and responsibilities herein vested in and imposed upon said officers. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 1) 
Sec. 2-32. - Definitions and general provisions. 
The following words and phrases shall, for purposes of this act, have the indicated meanings and limitations unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(1)  Board shall mean the board of commissioners of Rockdale County. 
(2)  Capital improvements shall mean any real or personal property of any kind or any repair and maintenance thereof, other than a contract for services, where said property or repairs and maintenance has a useful life expectancy of over one (1) year and where said property is acquired by the county through the expenditure of county funds of over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or the exchange of the equivalent in county property, service or labor. This shall include but not be limited to the acquisition of any land or interest therein and the acquisition of any building or road, unless otherwise provided by law, and any repairs or maintenance of any road or building. The acquisition of capital improvements shall be made only where funds therefor have been appropriated in the county budget and are also directly and specifically authorized by the board or a designee thereof. Additionally, said improvements shall only be made in the order of priority established by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Commission shall mean the board of commissioners of Rockdale County. 
(4)  Chairperson shall mean the county chairperson or chairperson of the board of commissioners of Rockdale County. 
(5)  Elected official or elected county official shall mean the Rockdale County sheriff, judge of the probate court, clerk of the superior court, tax commissioner or coroner. 
(6)  Expenditure shall mean the disbursement of any funds from any account under the budgetary control of the board of commissioners. Other than expenditures from bank accounts which may be established for the various elected county officials, all expenditures from county funds shall be authorized by or bear the authorized signature of the chairperson and the director of finance or others in their absence as may be defined and provided for by the board of commissioners. Except for purchases of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) or less and payroll expenditures, no expenditure shall be authorized by the chairperson except with the prior specific approval of the board of commissioners where required by this act or with at least the informal advance approval of one (1) other member of the board of commissioners or by designees thereof. 
(7)  Purchase shall mean the expenditure of county funds for or contracting for any goods or services for which any expenditure of county funds may be made or where county property or services are exchanged for any goods or services; provided, however, that "purchase" shall not include regular payroll expenditures for county employees, nor shall it include expenditures or contracts for professional services as herein defined. Purchase orders shall not be accumulated or split so as to evade any purchasing limitations in this act, including but not limited to unnecessarily issuing several purchase orders for substantially the same or similar goods or services from the same vendor or similar vendors over a short period of time. 
(8)  Professional services shall mean services of a unique nature not normally subject to competition such as legal and medical services as well as telephone and other utilities. Acquisition by the county of such services shall be made only upon approval of the board of commissioners, which board may advertise, interview, seek bids or quotations for such services as will, in the board's discretion, aid in obtaining the best such service available. Insurance shall be considered a "professional service" hereunder. 
(9)  Payroll expenditure shall mean and include wages and salaries paid to county employees under any county personnel, civil or merit system or any personnel exempt by law or contract from direct control and supervision of the chairperson or board. Any expenditure of county funds made to any person performing services for the county under a separate and distinct personal contract with the county shall not be considered a "payroll expenditure." 
(10)  Resolution shall mean and include any resolution, ordinance or other official action of the board of commissioners approved at a public meeting of the board by a majority vote of a quorum of the members thereof. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817; Ord. No. 1979-2, 1-23-1979; Ord. No. 1979-18, § 1, 4-24-1979; Ord. No. 1996-4, § I, 5-28-1996) 
Sec. 2-33. - Composition of commission. 
(a)  The commission established herein shall consist of three (3) members, of which one (1) member shall be known as chairperson and two (2) members shall be known as commissioners. The chairperson and two (2) commissioners shall be elected by a majority vote of the voters of the entire county voting at the elections provided for hereinafter. Positions on the board shall be chairperson and commissioner posts 1 and 2, and all candidates for membership on the board shall designate the position for which they are offering. 
(b)  The chairperson shall be a citizen of this state who has attained the age of 30 years and who has been a resident of Rockdale County for not less than two (2) years next preceding his election, and shall hold no other elective public office. The chairperson shall be a full voting member of the board. 
(c)  Members of the commission, other than the chairperson, shall be citizens of this state who have attained the age of 25 years and who have been residents of Rockdale County for not less than two (2) years next preceding their election, and shall hold no other elective public office. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 2) 
Sec. 2-34. - Election; terms of office. 
The first members of the board of commissioners created hereunder shall be as follows: The individual serving as sole commissioner of Rockdale County upon approval of this act shall serve as chairperson of the board until January 1, 1981; and the chairperson thereafter shall be elected for a four (4) year term in the general election held for members of the General Assembly in 1980, and said term shall commence on January 1, 1981. The commissioner from post 1 shall be elected to serve until January 1, 1981; and thereafter shall be elected for a four (4) year term in the general election held for members of the General Assembly in 1980 and said term shall commence on January 1, 1981. The commissioner from post 2 shall be elected to serve until January 1, 1979, and thereafter shall be elected for a four (4) year term in the general election held for members of the General Assembly in 1978 and said term shall commence on January 1, 1979. Thereafter, all successors shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of terms of office and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following their election for terms of four (4) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. The first election for commission post 1 and commission post 2 shall be called not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days after approval of this act in the referendum provided for in section 24 [not codified]. It shall be the duty of the Judge of the Probate Court of Rockdale County to issue the call for said special election and he shall set the date of such election for a date not less than 30 nor more than 60 days after the date of issuance of the call. The judge of the probate court shall set the date for opening and closing for candidates to qualify for said positions. Qualification by candidate shall be nonpartisan. Each candidate shall pay a qualification fee of $150.00 to the judge of the probate court at time of qualifying which shall be deposited to the county treasury to assist in defraying expenses of said election. It shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to hold and conduct said election. He shall hold said election under the same laws and rules and regulations as govern special elections and Code Title 34, known as the "General Election Code," as amended [now O.C.G.A. title 21 (Elections)]. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 3) 
Sec. 2-35. - Restrictions on qualifying for other office. 
Neither the chairperson nor any commissioner shall be qualified to offer for election to any position on the board other than the one in which he is serving without first resigning from the position in which he at that time is serving. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 4) 
Sec. 2-36. - Election returns, vacancies. 
(a)  Except as set forth in section 3 [section 2-34], all elections for members of the board of commissioners created by this act shall be held and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Code Title 34, known as the "Georgia Election Code" [now O.C.G.A. title 21 (Elections)], as now or hereafter amended. 
(b)  In the event of a vacancy in the office of chairperson of the board of commissioners or of a commissioner or commissioners, either of whose unexpired term equals or exceeds two hundred ten (210) days, it shall be the duty of the Judge of the Probate Court of Rockdale County to call a special election for the filling of such vacancy or vacancies, which election shall be governed by the provisions of said Georgia Election Code [now O.C.G.A. title 21 (Elections)] relative to special elections for the filling of vacancies. Such special election shall be held within sixty (60) days of the date of the creation of the vacancy; provided, however, that it shall be the further duty of the Judge of the Probate Court of Rockdale County to appoint within ten (10) days following the vacancy or vacancies an interim chairperson or commissioner or commissioners as appropriate to serve pending the election of a new chairperson or commissioner or commissioners. Said interim appointee(s) shall be subject to the same qualifications, oath and bond as a duly elected or permanently appointed chairperson or commissioner or commissioners. 
(c)  In the event of a vacancy in the office of chairperson of the board of commissioners or of a commissioner or commissioners, either of whose unexpired term does not equal or exceed two hundred ten (210) days, it shall be the duty of the remaining elected member or members of the com mission to fill vacancies by permanent appointment. The said appointment or appointments shall be made within twenty (20) days following the occurrence of the vacancy or vacancies. If only one (1) elected commissioner remains at that point in time, he shall make both appointments for less than two hundred ten (210) days. If, however, there are two (2) remaining elected members of the commission and they cannot unanimously agree on a suitable appointee, then, after the twenty (20) days aforesaid have passed, both remaining elected commissioners shall submit an appointee's name to the Judge of the Probate Court of Rockdale County, whose duty it shall then be to select one (1) name or the other within twenty-four (24) hours after submission. 
(d)  If all seats on the commission shall become vacant concurrently and if any unexpired term is for less than two hundred ten (210) days, the Judge of the Probate Court of Rockdale County shall proceed to fill such vacancy or vacancies by appointment. All remaining vacancies for which the unexpired term equals or exceeds two hundred ten (210) days shall then be filled by following the procedure set out in subsection (b) hereinabove. 
(e)  All persons elected or appointed to fill vacancies pursuant to the provisions of this section, except interim appointees, shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of any such office. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 5; 1981 Ga. Laws, page 3152, § 1) 
Sec. 2-37. - Oath and bond. 
Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, the chairperson and commissioners shall subscribe an oath before the judge of the probate court of said county for the true and faithful performance of their duties and that they are not the holders of any public funds unaccounted for. In addition, the chairperson shall further give a satisfactory surety bond to be judged by said judge of the probate court of the county and payable to the judge of the probate court or his successor in office and filed in the office of the judge of the probate court, in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office. Each commissioner shall give like bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The costs of said bonds shall be paid out of the county treasury. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 6) 
Sec. 2-38. - Compensation. 
(a)  Commissioners other than the chairperson shall receive an annual salary for services as same equal to 16.5 percent of the base salary of a superior court judge as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 45-7-4, as now or hereafter amended. The chairperson shall receive an annual salary for services as same equal to 71.5 percent of the base salary of a superior court judge as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 45-7-4, as now or hereafter amended. The base salary of a superior court judge shall mean that salary paid from state funds and shall not include any county supplement or expense reimbursements. The salary of the chairperson and commissioners shall be paid in equal monthly installments paid out of the county treasury upon warrants drawn upon the county treasury. Except as otherwise provided by subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the salary so fixed shall constitute the entire compensation from all public sources to which said chairperson and other commissioners shall be entitled. The chairperson and other commissioners shall not be entitled to any further compensation for serving on any other boards or authorities by virtue of their office. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall be authorized to provide the chairperson with a county-owned automobile which the chairperson may use in carrying out his official duties, and county funds may be expended for the operation and maintenance of said automobile. The board of commissioners may provide by ordinance or resolution for the reimbursement from county funds of actual and necessary expenses incurred by the chairperson and other commissioners in carrying out their official duties. No member of the board of commissioners shall receive any expense allowance, mileage allowance, or travel allowance unless such member has personally performed such service and has personally incurred the expense for mileage or travel. Each member of the board submitting a voucher shall certify that he has personally performed the service and personally incurred the expense for mileage or travel covered by the voucher and that the information contained on the voucher is true and correct. The voucher shall contain such a certificate for the member to sign. It shall be unlawful for any member of the board to make such a certificate willfully, knowing it to be false; and any member convicted of making such a false certificate shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment of not less than one (1) nor more than five (5) years, or both. 
(c)  The chairperson and other members of the board of commissioners shall be authorized to participate in the group retirement program and the group hospitalization benefit program on the same basis as other officers and employees of Rockdale County if they meet the normal eligibility requirements of the programs. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 7; Ord. No. 1979-18, § 1, 4-24-1979; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3166; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3166; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3496, § 1; 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 954), page 4518, § 1) 
Sec. 2-39. - Meetings; quorum; chairperson's vote. 
The commission shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at the County seat at 10:00 a.m., which meetings shall be open to the public, and may hold such additional meetings as shall be necessary when called by the chairperson or any two (2) commissioners, provided all members of the commission shall have been notified at least one (1) day in advance of such special meeting. No official action shall be taken by the commission except in a meeting which is open to the public. Any two (2) commissioners or the chairperson and any one (1) commissioner shall constitute a quorum, but no official action shall be taken except under the affirmative vote of at least two (2) commissioners or one (1) commissioner and the chairperson. The chairperson shall be entitled to the same voting rights as other commissioners on questions considered by the commission. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 8; Ord. No. 1979-18, § 1, 4-24-1979; Ord. No. 1980-22, § 1, 10-28-1980; Ord. No. 1983-1, § 1, 1-25-1983; Ord. No. 1986-17, § 1, 8-12-1986) 
Sec. 2-40. - Records; minutes. 
The executive assistant shall be ex officio clerk of the commission and chairperson, and shall keep a proper and accurate book of minutes wherein shall appear all the acts, orders and proceedings of the commission, in chronological order. The minute books of the commission shall be open to the public for inspection during regular office hours; and certified copies of any entries therein shall be furnished by the clerk to any person requesting same upon payment of a reasonable fee, to be paid into the county treasury as other funds, to be assessed by the commission in an amount sufficient to defray the cost of preparing same. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 17; Ord. No. 1979-18, § 1, 4-24-1979; Ord. No. 1990-3, § I, 4-13-1990) 
Sec. 2-41. - Agreement of candidates unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any candidate, either for the office of chairperson or commissioner, or for nomination to either of such offices, to enter into any agreement or understanding with any person as to the disposal of any work or appointment which is or shall be under the control of the chairperson or commission; and any person so offending shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction shall be punished as prescribed in the Code of Georgia. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 22) 
Secs. 2-42—2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL POWERS, DUTIES AND LIMITATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State constitution references— Home rule for counties and municipalities, art. IX, § II; taxation power of county and municipal governments, art. IX, § IV; special districts, art. IX, § II, ¶ VI; eminent domain, art. IX, § II, ¶ V; intergovernmental contracts, art. IX, § III, ¶ I; immunity of counties, municipalities and school districts, art. IX, § II, ¶ IX; limitation on local debt, art. IX, § V; levy of taxes to pay bonds, art. IX, § V, ¶ VI; temporary loans authorized, art. IX, § V, ¶ V; exceptions to debt limitations, art. IX, § V, ¶ IV; revenue bonds, art. IX, § VI. 
State Law reference— Highways, bridges and ferries, O.C.G.A. title 32; local government, O.C.G.A. title 36. 

Sec. 2-61. - Chairperson; vice-chairperson. 
(a)  The chairperson shall be the chief executive officer of the county government and shall generally supervise, direct and control the administration or the affairs of the county pursuant only to the powers herein specifically conferred upon him and pursuant to the adopted resolutions of the board of commissioners in regard to matters reserved to the exclusive jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The chairperson shall preside over meetings of the board of commissioners; provided that a vice-chairperson appointed by said board from among its members shall preside in the chairperson's absence. 
(c)  The chairperson, consistent with resolutions of the board of commissioners, shall establish rules and regulate purchasing services for all county departments, offices and agencies, including all such services for all elected county officials. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817; § 9; Ord. No. 1979-18, § 1, 4-24-1979; Ord. No. 1996-4, § I, 5-28-1996) 
Sec. 2-62. - Board of commissioners; powers. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall have the power and authority to fix and establish, by appropriate resolutions or ordinance entered on its minutes, policies, rules and regulations governing all matters reserved to its exclusive jurisdiction, which policies, rules and regulations, when so adopted, with proper entry thereof made on said board's minutes, shall be conclusive and binding on the chairperson. 
(b)  The policies, rules and regulations so adopted by the board of commissioners shall be carried out, executed and enforced by the chairperson as chief executive officer of the county, and said board may exercise administrative powers, but only where such are "necessarily and properly incident" to its functions as a policymaking or rulemaking body or which are necessary to compel enforcement of its adopted resolutions or ordinances. Any action taken by said chairperson which is in conflict with such adopted resolutions or ordinances or which deals with matters exclusively reserved to the jurisdiction of said board shall be null, void and of no effect. 
(c)  The following powers are hereby vested in the board of commissioners and reserved to its exclusive jurisdiction: 
(1)  To levy taxes. 
(2)  To make appropriations. 
(3)  To fix the rates of all other charges by the county. 
(4)  To authorize the incurring of indebtedness by the county. 
(5)  To order work done where the cost is to be assessed against benefited property, and to fix the basis for such assessment. 
(6)  To authorize all contracts or binding agreements, except purchases and employment otherwise provided for in this act. 
(7)  To establish, alter or abolish public roads, private ways, bridges and ferries, according to law; provided, however, that the chairperson shall have the authority to accept subdivision plats when the requirements established by the board of commissioners for subdivisions have been met. 
(8)  To establish, abolish or change election precincts and militia districts according to law. 
(9)  To allow the insolvent lists for the county. 
(10)  To accept, for the county, the provisions of any optional statute where the statute permits its acceptance by the governing authority of the county, or by the commissioner or board of commissioners of the county. 
(11)  To exercise all powers, duties and authorities heretofore imposed upon or vested in the Commissioner of Rockdale County in respect to zoning and planning. 
(12)  To create and change the boundaries of special taxing districts authorized by law. 
(13)  To fix the bonds of county officers where same are not fixed by statute. 
(14)  To enact any ordinances or other legislation the county may be given authority to enact. 
(15)  To determine the priority of capital improvements. 
(16)  To call elections for the voting of bonds. 
(17)  To exercise all of the power and authority heretofore vested by law in the Commissioner of Rockdale County, together with the power and authority which may hereafter be delegated by law to the governing authority of the county, by whatever name designated, except such authority or power specifically given to the chairperson by the provisions of this act. 
(18)  To make purchases of not more than $15,000.00 which, in the discretion of its members, are deemed necessary for the operation of the county. 
(19)  To make purchases in amounts greater than fifteen thousand ($15,000.00) dollars, provided that the following provisions regarding competitive bidding shall be followed: 
a.  The board of commissioners, by and through its designated department, shall publicly advertise an invitation for bids. Such notice shall be posted conspicuously at the offices of the board of commissioners; by electronic means on Rockdale County's website; and shall be advertised in the legal organ of Rockdale County once a week for two consecutive weeks; 
b.  Bidders shall submit sealed bids based on the criteria set forth in the bid invitation; 
c.  The board of commissioners, by and through its designated department, shall open the bids publicly and evaluate such bids without discussion with the bidders; and 
d.  The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the bid invitation; provided, however, that if the bid from the lowest responsible and responsive bidder exceeds the funds budgeted for the contract, the board of commissioners, by and through its designated department, may negotiate with such apparent low bidder to obtain a contract price within the budgeted amount. Such negotiations may include changes in the scope of work and other bid requirements. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, purchases for road projects subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 32-4-40—32-4-74, and purchases for public works construction projects as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1(10) shall be advertised and bid in accordance with the provisions of Georgia law applicable to such projects and shall be subject to the increased noncompetitive bid amounts provided thereby. These requirements regarding competitive bidding shall not apply to public works construction contracts necessitated by an emergency. Any contract let for emergency purposes shall be ratified on the minutes of the board of commissioners as soon as practicable, and the nature of the emergency shall be described therein. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 10; Ord. No. 1979-18, § 1, 4-24-1979; Ord. No. 1995-6, § 1, 5-23-1995; Ord. No. 1996-4, § I, 5-28-1996; Ord. No. 0-2003-11, §§ 2, 3, 5-27-2003) 
Editor's note— Subsection (c)(17) above grants the present board of commissioners all the powers of the former sole commissioner. The sole commissioner was likewise granted all the powers of the board which preceded him (1941 Ga. Laws, page 95, § 2) under the original 1902 act creating a hoard of commissioners. That miscellaneous powers were codified in Ga. Code Ann. §§ 2-203—2-207 and 2-209. 
Sec. 2-63. - Powers of former commission carried forward. 
(a)  The board of commissioners so organized by this act shall have exclusive jurisdiction, care and control over bridges, public roads, public buildings and other property of the county, and shall exercise a jurisdiction invested in the ordinary [now judge of the probate court] over the following subject matters to wit: In assessing general and special taxes for county purposes, in examining and settling the accounts of all officers charged with the collection, keeping or disbursement of public moneys, in auditing and settling all claims against the county, in establishing and changing militia districts and election precincts, and in changing the places for holding justices' courts [now the magistrate court]; in establishing and discontinuing public roads, in the appointment of road commissioners and the enforcement of road laws, in the establishment and control of public bridges and ferries; in the providing for the care, maintenance and burial of paupers, and fixing the fees for dieting prisoners confined in the county jail. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall have exclusive authority to lease or hire out to such persons and on such terms as they may deem proper, all persons convicted of misdemeanor in the superior or county courts of the county and sentenced to labor on the chain-gang or on the public works, taking from such lessees such bond and security for the safe-keeping and comfort of the convicts so leased or hired as they may deem sufficient, or they may, in their discretion, employ such convicts on the public roads of the county, and shall have authority to make suitable provisions for guarding and feeding them while so employed. 
(c)  The board herein provided for shall have exclusive authority to take and approve the official bonds of all county officers, and to provide, either by appointment or by ordering elections, as the ordinary [now judge of the probate court] was heretofore authorized to do, for filling all vacancies in the offices of the county. That said commissioners shall be authorized to purchase real and personal property to be used for county purposes, or when sold for taxes or other debts in which the county may be interested, and may sell and convey property so purchased when in their judgment the interest of the county demands it. 
(1902 Ga. Laws, page 231, §§ 2—4) 
Editor's note— See note after section 2-62. 
Sec. 2-64. - Additional powers. 
In addition to powers herein enumerated, said commissioner [the board of commissioners] shall have and exercise all the powers and duties now vested by law in the ordinaries [now judges of the probate courts] of the several counties of the state when sitting for county purposes. 
(1941 Ga. Laws, page 952, § 16-A) 
Editor's note— See note after section 2-62. 
State Law reference— County governing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq. 
Sec. 2-65. - Power to build airport. 
(a)  Said commissioner of roads and revenues [the board of commissioners] shall be empowered and authorized to construct, maintain and operate within the county limits of Rockdale County airports and landing fields; to purchase, rent, or lease land for such purposes; to levy taxes, issue bonds or borrow money as provided by law to provide funds to purchase land to build, construct, operate and maintain said airports or landing fields. 
(b)  Be it further enacted that for the purpose of carrying out the provisions and intentions of this amendment, said commissioner [the board of commissioners] is permitted, authorized and empowered to perform such acts and things as may be necessary to participate in federal aid for such projects. 
(1941 Ga. Laws, page 952, §§ 16B, 16C; 1947 Ga. Laws, page 683) 
Editor's note— See note after section 2-62. 
State Law reference— Aviation, O.C.G.A. title 6. 
Sec. 2-66. - General police powers (constitutional amendment). 
Be it resolved by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia that article VI, section I of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1945 be and the same is hereby, amended by adding a new paragraph, which shall read as follows: 
"The General Assembly of the State of Georgia is hereby authorized to empower the governing authority of Rockdale County, Georgia, to adopt ordinances or regulations for the governing and policing of said county for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens thereof as it may deem advisable, not in conflict with the general laws of this state and of the United States, and for the implementation and enforcement of all duties and powers now or hereafter vested in the said governing authority of Rockdale County, Georgia, and to provide penalties for violations of such ordinances." 
(1961 Ga. Laws, page 622, § 1) 
Editor's note— The local constitutional amendment above and the section below executing the constitutional amendment does not limit the county police power to the unincorporated areas but includes authority over incorporated territory of cities within the county. 
Sec. 2-67. - General police powers. 
(a)  The governing authority of Rockdale County, Georgia, is hereby empowered to adopt ordinances or regulations for the governing and policing of said county for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens thereof as it may deem advisable, not in conflict with the general laws of Georgia and of the United States, and for the implementation and enforcement of all duties and powers now or hereafter vested in the said governing authority. 
(b)  This act is enacted pursuant to authority contained in an amendment to article VI, section I of the Constitution of Georgia, said amendment found in 1961 Ga. Laws, page 622 [section 2-66 above]. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 3639, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 2-68. - Specific police powers. 
(a)  In addition to all powers enumerated elsewhere in this act or otherwise provided or permitted by law, the Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County, Georgia, is hereby empowered to adopt all such ordinances and regulations as it may deem advisable, not in conflict with the general laws of this state and of the United States, for the governing and policing of said county for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens thereof, and for the implementation and enforcement of all duties and powers now or hereafter vested in said board as the governing authority of Rockdale County, Georgia, within the classes of subjects and areas of regulation enumerated below and as the same may from time to time hereafter be amended, and to provide penalties for violations of such ordinances within the limits hereinafter stated: 
(1)  To control and regulate the operation of and running of bicycles, automobiles, motorcycles, motor scooters, buses, taxicabs, trucks, wagons and any and all kinds of vehicles operated in, upon, over and across the roads, streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parks, plazas, squares and other public places in said county, outside the corporate limits of municipalities situated therein, whether such vehicles are propelled by hand, foot, animal, steam, electric, gasoline or other motive power; to prescribe and fix speed limits and speed zones for all of the enumerated vehicles; to erect stop and warning signs and signals at dangerous intersections or places, at schools or other public places; to prescribe and establish lanes and directional signs, signals and markings to control the direction of flow of traffic for all such vehicles, including limitation of travel to one (1) direction and including markings, signals and devices to control and regulate the manner of turning at intersections; to regulate and control, as well as to prohibit entirely, the parking, stopping and standing of all such vehicles on or adjacent to such streets and public places; to control to the extent not prohibited by the laws of the State of Georgia the use of county rights-of-way, easements and property by any firm, corporation, utility, or association, including the power to grant, prohibit, or regulate, as well as the power to grant franchises for the use thereof upon such terms as the governing authority may by ordinance prescribe; to impound such vehicles involved in violations of traffic ordinances or regulations; to restrict and limit the size and weight of all such vehicles operated on such streets and public places; to regulate and establish routes to be followed by trucks and other heavy or slow-moving vehicles; to regulate and control, by permits or otherwise; and to prohibit entirely the times, routes and manner of conduct of parades, motorcades and other assemblages of all such vehicles, and public address systems or other noise-making devices on such streets and public places; to regulate and control the manner of operation of all such vehicles along, over and across all such streets and ways so as to prohibit and prevent the careless and reckless operation of same in such manner as would be hazardous to persons or property; to regulate and control in any and all of the foregoing respects all travel be [by] pedestrians and equestrians along, over and across such streets, ways and other public places; and to do any and all things to provide for the safety of persons and property using such roads, streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parks, plazas, squares and other public places and of persons and property situated adjacent thereto; and any and all things necessary or incident to accomplishment of any of the foregoing powers, including the authority to require registration of the enumerated vehicles and of their owners and to prescribed [prescribe] standards of mechanical safety for such vehicles and qualifications of operations [operators] thereof; to provide for regulation of business licenses in all unincorporated areas. To carry out all or any of the foregoing powers, said board is hereby empowered to adopt as county ordinances all or such portions of the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, approved January 11, 1954 (1953 Ga. Laws, Nov.-Dec. Sess., page 556), as now or hereafter amended, and O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq., the Uniform Rules of the Road, as now or hereafter amended, as to said board may seem appropriate and the Superior Court of Rockdale County may punish for violations thereof by fines or imprisonment, or both, not to exceed those set forth in said act or in this act or in the ordinances adopting same; and said board may adopt such other and additional ordinances and regulations, not in conflict with said uniform act and prescribe punishment for violation of same not to exceed the limits set forth in this act. 
Editor's note— See the Uniform Rules of the Road (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.). 
(2)  To adopt rules and regulations for the promotion of health and quarantine in the unincorporated areas of said county, as are authorized by law or not inconsistent with general laws or regulations of the State Department of Human Resources or the Rockdale County Board of Health, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations, thereof, within the limits prescribed by this act; to provide for the implementation of said health laws through the ordinances of said board, and to further promote adequate health and quarantine provisions in said county in addition to those otherwise provided by law; and to this end said board is authorized to adopt all or any portion of the regulations of said Rockdale County Board of Health, as the same may be amended from time to time, and to prescribe additional regulations not inconsistent therewith, and to prescribe penalties and punishment, within the limits permitted by this act, for violation of any such ordinances and regulations, which penalties and punishments may be enforced and imposed by the Superior Court of Rockdale County, or other court having jurisdiction over offenses against county ordinances. Said health and quarantine powers shall extend to and embrace the health and quarantine of animals as well as persons. 
(3)  To prevent dogs, horses, mules, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, chickens and all other animals, or any one (1) or more kinds of such animals, from running at large in the unincorporated area of said county; to prevent the keeping of any animal or animals or to regulate the manner and numbers in which they may be kept; to take up and impound any of such animals and to punish all owners or other persons keeping animals for failure or refusal to obey any such ordinance and to fix penalties and charges to be paid for release of such impounded animals; to provide for the sale or disposition of unclaimed animals impounded; to levy and collect a tax or license fee upon dogs kept in said county and to provide for registration of dogs; and to do any and all things necessary to carry out the purposes of this section for the public interest. 
(4)  To prescribe penalties and punishment within the provisions of this act for the violation of zoning ordinances, building codes (including electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning regulations) and all other lawful ordinances adopted by said board pursuant to this or any other law in force in said county. 
(5)  To provide ordinances for the preservation and protection of county property and equipment and the administration and use of county facilities, such as parks, playgrounds and swimming pools, by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(6)  To prescribe fire safety regulations in the Rockdale County fire districts not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof. 
(7)  To prohibit or regulate and control the erection and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads within the unincorporated area of said county; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances. 
(8)  To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of idleness, loitering, vagrancy, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness and disturbing the peace in the unincorporated area of said county and to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein; and to prohibit or regulate such other conduct and activities within said area of Rockdale County which, while not constituting an offense against the general law of this state, is deemed by said board to be detrimental and offensive to the peace, good order and dignity of Rockdale County and to the welfare and morals of the citizens thereof. 
Editor's note— See the Georgia Lottery for Education Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-27-1 et seq.). 
(9)  To authorize the Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County to assess and collect license fees and taxes from all persons, firms and corporations maintaining a place or places of business in any area of said county outside the incorporated limits of the municipalities therein; to license and regulate taxicabs for hire in such unincorporated areas of said county; to classify businesses and business enterprises in unincorporated areas and to assess different license fees and taxes against different classes of businesses in unincorporated areas; to license all businesses and business enterprises in such areas of interest and welfare of citizens in unincorporated areas of said county, and prescribe rules and regulations concerning same, excepting from the application of these provisions only these businesses which are subject to regulation by the state public service commission; to authorize said board to provide that the violation of any license fee or tax prescribed from [for] any business shall constitute a misdemeanor which, upon conviction, shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor, as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(10)  To provide ordinances for the protection of county rights-of-way, including, but not limited to, prohibiting the dumping of trash, debris, or litter thereon; the cutting of ditches, drains or excavations, on said road rights-of-way; to prescribe penalties, and punishment within the provisions of this act for the violation of such ordinances. 
(11)  To provide ordinances for minimum housing for the health and safety of the public in areas not providing same; the power to require that abandoned or unsafe structures be repaired, demolished, or removed, including the removal of abandoned, junk automobiles or other property which shall become a safety or health hazard. 
(12)  To provide rules and regulations governing quasipublic services, such as garbage collections, wrecker service, ambulance services, taxicabs, or other public conveyance; and other activities that concern the public welfare and safety, including the power to operate and maintain such agencies for the welfare and safety of Rockdale County in unincorporated areas. 
(13)  To provide for a declaration of a state of emergency and prescribe and initiate emergency powers for the protection of persons and property. 
(b)  All persons, firms, associations, utilities and corporations, whether public or private, shall be subject to the terms of said ordinances of Rockdale County within its jurisdiction un less expressly excluded herein and the board of commissioners shall have the power to enforce such ordinances by civil action, or injunction, or as otherwise provided herein. 
(c)  The Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County is hereby authorized to adopt ordinances prescribing penalties or punishment for violation of any and all ordinances adopted by said bond of commissioners to carry out any of the foregoing provisions of this section or the provisions of any other law, and to prescribe minimum and, maximum penalties or punishment for violation of same so that such violation shall constitute a misdemeanor which, upon conviction, shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor, unless such ordinance shall provide for a lesser penalty. 
(d)  The Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County is hereby vested with all powers necessary and, incident to the accomplishment and enforcement of the foregoing powers and duties. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 12) 
Sec. 2-69. - Appointment, removal and compensation of county officials, employees, attorneys, the executive assistant and employees of elected officials. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by paragraph (b) hereof or other provisions of this act, all county employees shall be employed and dismissed and have their compensation set by the chairperson or a designee thereof subject to county budgetary provisions and any applicable civil service, merit system or personnel laws or ordinances. 
(b)  All nonelected county officials, department heads, chiefs, directors, superintendents or executives shall be appointed and removed by the chairperson with the consent of the board of commissioners. When a vacancy exists in any such office, the chairperson shall, within 90 days, propose an appointment to which the board of commissioners consent; otherwise, said board may fill the vacancy by majority vote. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall have the exclusive authority to appoint, remove and fix the compensation of the executive assistant, the finance director and the county attorney employed at county expense. 
(d)  Elected county officials shall have the exclusive authority to appoint, remove and fix the compensation of the personnel within their respective offices subject to county budgetary provisions and any applicable civil service or merit system, state laws or county personnel ordinances; provided that, in the case of county personnel ordinances, the particular elected county official or a predecessor in that office must authorize in writing the inclusion of the employees of that office under the county personnel ordinance before said ordinance shall include such employees. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 13; Ord. No. 1978-7, 5-23-1978; Ord. No. 1979-18, § 1, 4-24-1979; Ord. No. 1996-4, § I, 5-28-1996; 1995 Ga. Laws, (Act No. 143), page 2817, § 1) 
Sec. 2-70. - Statutory positions; appointment; removal; compensation. 
The appointment and removal of, and the compensation to be paid to persons filling offices and positions created by state statute, where not otherwise prescribed by such statute, shall be made and fixed by the chairperson, subject to the approval of the compensation therefor by the commission, within budgetary provisions. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 14) 
Sec. 2-71. - License, regulate and tax businesses (constitutional amendment). 
Be it resolved by the General Assembly of Georgia: 
Ga. Const. Art. XI, § I, ¶ VI is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
"The governing authority of Rockdale County, by whatever name designated, shall have the right and power, for regulatory and revenue purposes to levy, assess, and collect license fees and occupational taxes from any persons, firms or corporations, except those subject to regulation by the state public service commission, who may maintain a place of business or who may in any manner engage in any type of business in any area of Rockdale County outside the incorporated limits of municipalities; and in levying and assessing such license fees and occupational taxes, the governing authority shall have the right and power to classify businesses and to assess different license fees and taxes against different classes of business. To provide for the public welfare, health and security of the people of Rockdale County, the governing authority shall have the right to regulate and exercise police powers over any businesses operated within the unincorporated areas of said county, except those subject to regulation by the state public service commission, and to prescribe such rules and regulations as may be necessary to effectuate the powers herein granted, including the right to enforce payment of the license fees and occupational taxes by the issuance and levy of executions, and to provide that a violation of any such regulations adopted by the governing authority shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction thereof as prescribed by the general laws of the State of Georgia. No further enabling legislation by the general assembly shall be necessary for the exercise of the powers herein granted, but the general assembly may at any time modify, alter, restrict and limit the powers herein granted, and may at any time prescribe the manner and means by which the powers may be exercised by said governing authority." 
(1960 Ga. Laws, page 1266, § 1) 
Secs. 2-72—2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— County manager, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-101. - Office of county treasurer abolished. 
The office of county treasurer of said County of Rockdale be and the same is hereby abolished. 
(1915 Ga. Laws, page 342, § 1) 
Secs. 2-102—2-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAX COMMISSIONER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— County tax officials and administration, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-100 et seq. 

Sec. 2-121. - Office created. 
There is hereby created the office of tax commissioner of Rockdale County, with the same rights, duties and liabilities as were heretofore incumbent on the tax collector, and tax receiver of Rockdale County. All general laws now governing the office of tax receiver and tax collector shall govern the tax commissioner insofar as the same are applicable, and except as hereinafter provided. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1106, § 1) 
Editor's note— The county tax collector's and tax receiver's offices were created by 1870 Ga. Laws, page 16 and abolished by 1943 Ga. Laws, pages 1106 and 1109, respectively. 
Sec. 2-122. - Fees, commissions and fines. 
(a)  All fees, commissions, costs, fines, emoluments and perquisites of whatever kind received and collected by the tax commissioner shall be received, collected and held by him as public funds belonging to Rockdale County. Once each month the tax commissioner shall turn over to the fiscal authority of said county all funds collected by him with a detailed itemized statement showing the sources from which such funds were collected. It is specifically provided that the salary provided herein for the tax commissioner shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions, costs, fines, emoluments and perquisites of whatever kind, including those commissions allowed by an act approved March 9, 1955 (1955 Ga. Laws, page 659), as amended [O.C.G.A. § 40-2-33], relating to the sale of motor vehicle license plates by local tax officials, notwithstanding the fact that such services for which the commissions are derived may have been performed in the capacity of an agent for the state revenue department and an act relating to the commission on taxes collected in excess of a certain percentage of the taxes due according to the tax net digest, approved January 17, 1938. 
(b)  The tax commissioner is hereby authorized and directed to remit to the board of education of Rockdale County once each month the proceeds from all education taxes collected by him; except one (1) percent of the education taxes collected shall be retained and turned over, to the, fiscal, authority of Rockdale County, as provides by subsection (a) hereof, as reimbursement to the county for the cost of collecting such education taxes. 
(1937-38 Ga. Laws, Ex. Sess., page 297; 1943 Ga. Laws, page 1106, § 3; 1967 Ga. Laws, page 3149; 1978 Ga. Laws, page 3832) 
State Law reference— Rate of commissions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-180. 
Sec. 2-123. - Salary; deputies. 
The tax commissioner of Rockdale County shall receive an annual salary equal to 56 percent of the base salary of a superior court judge as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 45-7-4, as now or hereafter amended. The base salary of a superior court judge shall mean that salary paid from state funds and shall not include any county supplement or expense reimbursements. The salary shall be payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Rockdale County. The tax commissioner shall be authorized to appoint a chief deputy and four full-time deputies to assist him in the discharge of his official duties. The tax commissioner shall also be authorized to participate in the group retirement program and the group hospitalization benefit program on the same basis as other officers and employees of Rockdale County if he meets the normal eligibility requirements of the programs. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1106, § 4; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 2837; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3168; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3492, § 1; 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 865), page 4183, § 1) 
State Law reference— Salary, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-183. 
Sec. 2-124. - Salaries of deputies of tax commissioners fixed for counties of 18,100 to 18,250 in population (general law). 
In all counties of this state having a population of not less than 18,100 and not more than 18,250 according to the United States Decennial Census of 1970 or any future such census, the deputies of the tax commissioner shall each receive a salary [as provided by law], payable from the funds of such counties. Beginning January 1, 1976, such deputies shall each receive a salary of not more than $600.00 per month, payable from the funds of such counties. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2912) 
Sec. 2-125. - Office location. 
That said tax commissioner shall have his office in the courthouse of said county at Conyers, Georgia, and he shall not be required to make any rounds to receive tax returns or tax payments. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1106, § 5) 
Sec. 2-126. - Term of office. 
The term of office of such commissioner shall be for a period of four (4) years, and the successor of Mrs. Fannie S. Freeman is to be elected in the same manner and time as the Ordinary of Rockdale County [judge of the probate court] is now elected. Her successor to be named in the general election of 1948. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1106, § 7) 
Sec. 2-127. - Vacancy. 
That in the event said office becomes vacant by death or otherwise, the said vacancy to be filled for any unexpired term by appointment of the governor. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1106, § 8) 
Sec. 2-128. - Commissioning. 
That said commissioner shall be commissioned as the clerk of superior courts are [sic]. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1106, § 9) 
Sec. 2-129. - Oath. 
That before entering upon the duties of his office, said tax commissioner shall take the oath now prescribed by law for the tax collector and tax receiver, and shall at the same time give bond and security as prescribed by section 92-4801 of the Code of Georgia of 1933 [now O.C.G.A. § 48-5-122]. Said bond premium to be paid by the Commissioner of Roads and Revenues [Board of Commissioners] of Rockdale County from county funds. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1106, § 10) 
Sec. 2-130. - Tax to pay salary. 
That the Commissioner of Roads and Revenue [Board of Commissioners] of Rockdale County is hereby authorized and empowered to levy and collect a tax on all taxable property in Rockdale County, sufficient to pay the salary of said commissioner and his expenses as herein provided. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1106, § 12) 
Sec. 2-131. - Equipment and supplies. 
The Commissioner of Roads and Revenue [Board of Commissioners] of Rockdale County shall furnish the necessary equipment and supplies for said office [of the tax commissioner]. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1106, § 13) 
Secs. 2-132—2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SHERIFF[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Sheriffs generally, O.C.G.A. § 15-16-1 et seq.; sheriffs authorized to contract with municipalities for law enforcement, O.C.G.A. § 15-16-13; jails, O.C.G.A. § 42-4-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-151. - Sheriff on salary. 
The present mode of compensating the sheriff of Rockdale County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished; and in lieu thereof an annual salary for such officer is prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2039, § 1) 
Sec. 2-152. - Compensation, sheriff. 
The sheriff shall receive an annual salary equal to 62.5 percent of the base salary of a superior court judge as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 45-7-4, as now or hereafter amended. The base salary of a superior court judge shall mean that salary paid from state funds and shall not include any county supplement or expense reimbursements. The salary shall be payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Rockdale County. The sheriff shall also be authorized to participate in the group retirement program and the group hospitalization benefit program on the same basis as other officers and employees of Rockdale County if he meets the normal eligibility requirements of the programs. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2039, § 2; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 2848, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3302; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3494, § 1; 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 863), page 4179, § 1) 
Sec. 2-153. - Collection of fees, fines and the like. 
Said officer shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed him as compensation for services in any capacity, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the fifteenth day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, the sheriff shall furnish the governing authority of the county a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2039, § 3) 
Sec. 2-154. - Personnel. 
The sheriff shall have the authority to appoint such deputies, clerks, investigators and other employees as he shall deem necessary to discharge the official duties of his office efficiently and effectively; and in no event shall the sheriff appoint fewer deputies, clerks, investigators, and other employees than that number so employed on January 1, 1985. He shall, from time to time, recommend to the governing authority of said county the number of such personnel needed by his office, together with the suggested compensation to be paid each employee. However, it shall be within the sole discretion of the governing authority of said county to fix the compensation to be received by each employee in said office. It shall be within the sole power and authority of the sheriff, during his term of office, to designate and name the person or persons who shall be employed as such deputies, clerks, assistants or other employees, and to prescribe their duties and assignments, and to remove or replace any of such employees at will and within his sole discretion. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2039, § 4; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 2848, § 2; 1985 Ga. Laws, page 4001, § 1) 
Sec. 2-155. - Operating expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of the sheriff's office, expressly including the compensation of all personnel and employees, shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture, utilities, uniforms, vehicles and equipment, and the repair, replacement and maintenance thereof, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority of Rockdale County. 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 2039, § 6) 
Secs. 2-156—2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CORONER[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Coroners, O.C.G.A. § 45-16-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-171. - Coroner on salary. 
The present mode of compensating the coroner of Rockdale County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished, and in lieu thereof, an annual salary for such officer is prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
(1967 Ga. Laws, page 2505, § 1) 
Sec. 2-172. - Compensation. 
The coroner shall receive an annual salary equal to 10.5 percent of the base salary of a superior court judge as set forth in Code O.C.G.A. § 45-7-4, as now or hereafter amended. The base salary of a superior court judge shall mean that salary paid from state funds and shall not include any county supplement or expense reimbursements. The coroner shall also be authorized to participate in the group retirement program and the group hospitalization benefit program on the same basis as other officers and employees of Rockdale County if he meets the normal eligibility requirements of the programs. 
(1967 Ga. Laws, page 2505, § 2; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 2839; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3159; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3490, § 1; 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1016), page 4724, § 1) 
Sec. 2-173. - Collection of fees, fines and the like. 
After the effective date of this act, said officer shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed him as compensation for services in any capacity, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the fifteenth day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, the coroner shall furnish the governing authority of the county a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month by such officer and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. 
(1967 Ga. Laws, page 2505, § 3) 
Sec. 2-174. - Operating expenses. 
The necessary operating expenses of the coroner's office shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. All supplies, material, furnishings, furniture, utilities and equipment, and the repair, replacement and maintenance thereof, as may be reasonably required in discharging the official duties of said office, shall be furnished by the county and shall be paid from any funds of the county available for such purpose. The determination of such requirements shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority of Rockdale County. 
(1967 Ga. Laws, page 2505, § 4) 
Secs. 2-175—2-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 

Sec. 2-201. - Departments generally. 
(a)  The internal organization of the county government shall be subordinate to and act as administrative instrumentalities of the commission and shall be divided into such departments and agencies as said board shall deem necessary. 
(b)  Such county departments and agencies may be created, abolished or any two (2) or more departments or agencies may be consolidated, from time to time, by a majority vote of the board of commissioners; except that the department of finance, as provided in this act, shall be maintained at all times as a separate and distinct department. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 15; Ord. No. 1977-18, § 1, 4-24-1977) 
Sec. 2-202. - Department of finance. 
(a)  The department of finance shall be under the supervision and control of the finance director. The finance director shall be appointed by the chairperson of the board of commissioners and confirmed by the commission and shall be directly responsible to them. The finance director's compensation shall be fixed by the commission. 
(b)  The department of finance shall, pursuant to the resolutions adopted by the board of commissioners and instructions, consistent with said resolutions, given by the chairperson, perform the following functions: 
(1)  Keep and maintain accurate records reflecting the financial affairs of the county. 
(2)  Assist the chairperson in compiling the annual budget covering all funds. 
(3)  Maintain current accounts over the collection and deposit of monies due the county from taxes and other sources. 
(4)  Examine all claims against the county and make recommendations as to payment. 
(5)  Maintain budgetary control accounts, showing encumbrances for obligations entered into, liquidation of such encumbrances, unencumbered balances of allotments, unexpended balances of allotments, and all unallotted balances of appropriations. 
(6)  Maintain proprietary accounts of the current assets and of the liabilities of all county funds. 
(7)  Prepare and issue monthly financial reports on the operations of all county funds. 
(8)  Maintain property control records of all county property, including equipment and stores, and to [sic] supervise stores. 
(9)  Plan and prepare for meeting the financial needs of the county, project financial requirements, recommend a means of financing those requirements and advise the chairperson and board of commissioners on financial matters. 
(10)  Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the chairperson or the board of commissioners or both. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 16; Ord. No. 1979-18, § 1, 4-24-1979; 1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 143), page 2817, § 2) 
Secs. 2-203—2-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-231—2-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL BUILDING AUTHORITY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Code reference— Board of commissioners, § 2-31. 

Sec. 2-251. - Creation; powers; debts; compensation; bonds (constitutional amendment). 
Ga. Const. art. V, § IX, is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof a new paragraph which shall read as follows: 
"A.  There is hereby created a body corporate and politic in Rockdale County to be known as the Rockdale County Industrial Building Authority, which shall be an instrumentality of Rockdale County and a public corporation and which in this amendment is hereafter referred to as the `authority.' 
"B.  The authority shall consist of five (5) members. The President of the Rockdale County Chamber of Commerce, the Mayor of the City of Conyers, and the Commissioner of Roads and Revenue [Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners] of Rockdale County shall be ex officio members of the authority. In addition, the ex officio members of the authority shall appoint two (2) members who shall be eligible for a term of five (5) years and shall be eligible for reappointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by the said ex officio members. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum and a majority may act for the authority in any matter. No vacancy shall impair the power of the authority to act. 
"C.  The property, obligations and the interest on the obligations of the authority shall have the same immunity from taxation as the property, obligations and interest on the obligations of Rockdale County. 
"D.  The powers of the authority shall include, but not be limited to, the power: 
"(1)  To receive and administer gifts, grants and donations and to administer trusts; 
"(2)  To borrow money, to issue notes, bonds and revenue certificates, to execute trust agreements or indentures, and to sell, convey, mortgage, pledge and assign any and all of its funds, property and income as security therefor; 
"(3)  To contract with political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and with private persons and corporations and to sue and be sued in its corporate name; 
"(4)  To have and exercise usual powers of private corporation except such as are inconsistent with this amendment, including the power to appoint and hire officers, agents and employees and to provide their compensation and duties, which officers and agents may or may not be members of the authority, and the power to adopt and amend a corporate seal and bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority; 
"(5)  To encourage and promote the expansion and development of industrial and commercial facilities in Rockdale County so as to relieve insofar as possible unemployment within its boundaries, and to that end to acquire by purchase or gift any building or structure within the limits of Rockdale County, suitable for and intended for use as a factory, mill, shop, processing plant, assembly plant, or fabricating plant, including all necessary and appurtenant lands and appurtenances thereto, and all necessary or useful furnishings, machinery and equipment. Such acquisition may be through the, acquisition of land and the construction thereon of a building, including the demolition of existing structures, or through the acquisition of an existing building and the remodeling, renovating, reconstructing, furnishing and equipping of such building; 
"(6)  No building acquired hereunder shall be operated by the authority but shall be leased or sold to one or more persons, firms or corporations. If sold, the purchase price may be paid at one time or in installments falling due in not more than thirty (30) years from the date of transfer of possession. The lessee or purchaser shall be required to pay all costs of operating and maintaining the building or buildings and to pay rentals or installments sufficient, together with other revenues which may be pledged for the purpose, to retire all bonds, both principal and interest, and to pay all other expenses which the authority may have incurred in connection with the undertaking. 
"(7)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested; 
"(8)  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter; 
"(9)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated. 
"E.  The authority shall not be authorized to create in any manner any debt, liability or obligation against the State of Georgia or Rockdale County. 
"F.  The members of the authority shall receive no compensation for their services to the authority; 
"G.  In order to finance any undertaking within the scope of its power or to refund any bonds then outstanding, the authority is hereby authorized to issue bonds bearing rate or rates of interest and maturing at the years and amounts determined by the authority and the procedure of validation, issuance and delivery shall be in all respects in accordance with the revenue bond law (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761) as amended, Ga. Code Ann. supp. chapter 87-8 [now O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.], as if said obligations had been originally authorized to be issued thereunder; provided, however, that any property, real or personal, of the authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated or otherwise encumbered as security for any lawful debt of the authority. The authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture not in conflict with the provisions of this amendment to provide security for any bonds issued as provided herein, and such trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or under any term or condition under which such bonds are issued. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to create a right to compel any exercise of the taxing power of Rockdale County to pay any such bonds or the interest thereon nor to enforce payment thereof against any property of Rockdale County. 
"H.  The authority may authorize additional bonds, for extensions and permanent improvements to any industrial building acquired hereunder, to be placed in escrow and to be negotiated from time to time as proceeds for that purpose may become necessary. Bonds so placed in escrow shall, when sold and delivered, have such standing with the bonds of the same issue as may be provided in the authorizing proceedings. 
"I.  No bonds except refunding bonds shall be issued hereunder unless the authority shall have found and declared that: 
"1.  The undertaking for which the bonds are to be issued will increase employment in Rockdale County. 
"2.  The lessee or purchaser of the building or buildings involved will not by virtue of establishing operations in said county, reduce the number of employees employed by said lessee or purchaser elsewhere in the State of Georgia. 
"J.  No moneys derived by the authority from any source other than gifts and contributions from private individuals, firms or corporations shall at any time be used for entertainment, or other promotional expenses. 
"K.  Should said authority for any reasons be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to Rockdale County subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
"L.  This amendment is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare industry and trade within Rockdale County and reducing unemployment to the greatest extent possible, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of these purposes. 
"M.  This amendment shall be effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the governor and the first members of the authority shall be appointed within 30 days after such proclamation. 
"N.  The general assembly may by law further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and the exercise thereof, and may enlarge and restrict the same, and may likewise further regulate the management and conduct of the authority. The authority shall be an instrumentality of Rockdale County and the scope of its operations shall be limited to the territory embraced within said county. The general assembly shall not extend the jurisdiction of the authority nor the scope of its operations beyond such limits." 
(1962 Ga. Laws, page 992, § 1) 
Secs. 2-252—2-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF EDUCATION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State constitution reference— Boards of education, Ga. Const. art. VIII, § V, ¶ II. 
State Law reference— Local boards of education, O.C.G.A. § 20-2-50 et seq. 

Sec. 2-271. - Board of education elected; districts; team; qualifications (constitutional amendment). 
Ga. Const. art. VIII, § V, ¶ I, be and the same is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof a new paragraph as follows, to wit: 
"The members of the county Board of Education of Rockdale County shall be elected by the people at the same time and for the same term that other county officers are elected and shall hold their offices until their successors are elected and qualified. Sixty days after ratification of this amendment it shall be the duty of the Ordinary [judge of the probate court] of Rockdale County to call an election for the purpose of electing by the qualified voters in each school district of a member of the county board of education from that school district. The members of the board who are elected at that time shall hold office until their successors are elected and qualified. Should a vacancy occur in the office of any member thus elected, a successor shall be appointed by the judge of the superior court for the unexpired term. One (1) member from each of the existing militia districts in Rockdale County shall be elected to serve on said board, and only the registered and qualified voters in each militia district shall vote for the election of a member from that district. For the purposes of this resolution each such militia district shall be known and designated as a school district. 
"In addition to the members provided for above, there shall be two (2) additional members of the Board of Education of Rockdale County who shall be elected by the qualified voters of the entire county. The first additional members shall be elected in the general election at which this amendment is ratified, and shall take office on January 1, 1965, and shall serve for a term of office of two (2) years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. Candidates offering for election to the board at said election shall qualify with the Ordinary [judge of the probate court] of Rockdale County between September 25, 1964 and October 7, 1964. Thereafter, all successors to the additional members of the board of education added by this amendment shall serve for a term of four (4) years and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. 
"At the first meeting of the board in each off-numbered year, the board shall elect a chairperson to serve for a term of office of two (2) years. If any vacancy should occur in the office of chairperson, the same shall be filled by the board by electing a successor thereto. 
"No publisher of school books or any agent for such publisher or any person who shall have a pecuniary interest in the sale of school books shall be eligible for election as a member of the county board of education; and in said election, only the qualified voters of the county residing in that part of the county where the schools are under the jurisdiction and control of the county school superintendent shall be eligible to vote. 
"That from and after the ratification of this amendment, the Grand Jury of Rockdale County shall make no future appointments of members of the county board of education, but the present board shall serve until their successors are duly elected as above provided. 
"No person shall be eligible to hold office as a member of the county board of education who is not of good moral character, who has not at least a fair knowledge of the elementary branch of an english education, who is not favorable to the common school system, and who is not a voter qualified to vote for the members of the General Assembly. 
(1949 Ga. Laws, page 2106; 1964 Ga. Laws Ex. Sess, page 369) 
Annotation— The superior court has held that the election of board members in each militia district violates the "one-man, one-vote" rule and that at large elections of all board members are required. 
Sec. 2-272. - School superintendent (constitutional amendment). 
Ga. Const. art. VIII, § VI, ¶ I, is amended by adding thereto the following language: "The County School Superintendent of Rockdale County shall be appointed or elected by the members of the County Board of Education of Rockdale County. The board shall appoint or elect the superintendent within a period of 60 days after the ratification of this amendment. The superintendent shall serve at the pleasure of the board and shall possess such qualifications as the board may prescribe. It shall not be necessary that the superintendent be a resident of Rockdale County or the State of Georgia, or a citizen thereof. The superintendent may serve as Principal of Conyers High School." 
(1952 Ga. Laws, page 545, § 1) 
Secs. 2-273—2-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - BOARD OF ELECTIONS AND REGISTRATION 

Sec. 2-291. - Creation; powers and duties. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-40(b), there is created the Board of Elections and Registration of Rockdale County. The board shall have the powers and duties of the former Rockdale County Board of Registrations and Elections created by an Act approved March 19, 1981 (1981 Ga. Laws, page 3144), as amended, relating to the conduct of primaries and elections and relating to the registration of voters and absentee balloting procedures. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 1) 
Sec. 2-292. - Initial membership. 
The initial members of the board, who shall take office on July 1, 1995, shall be: 
(1)  Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection [section], those persons who were serving on June 29, 1992, as members of the board of registrations and elections which was created in and for counties having a population of not less than 18,150 and not more than 18,250 according to the 1970 United States decennial census or any future such census pursuant to an Act approved March 19, 1981 (1981 Ga. Laws, page 3144), as amended; or 
(2)  If one or more persons have been appointed to fill a vacancy in such office or as successor to a member serving on June 29, 1992, the last person appointed to fill a vacancy in office or as a successor to a member serving on June 29, 1992, shall replace the predecessor member serving on June 29, 1992, as an initial member of the board created by this act [division]. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 2) 
Sec. 2-293. - Subsequent membership; selection. 
Each subsequent board shall be composed of three members, each of whom shall be an elector and a resident of the county and who shall be selected in the following manner: 
(1)  One member shall be appointed by the chairperson of the county executive committee of the political party whose candidates at the last preceding regular general election held for the election of all members of the General Assembly received the largest number of votes in this state for members of the General Assembly; and one member shall be appointed by the chairperson of the county executive committee of the political party whose candidates received the next largest number of votes at such election; provided, however, each of the appointments shall have been ratified by a majority of the members of each of the respective executive committees voting at a regularly scheduled meeting of the executive committee or a meeting duly called and held for such purposes. In the event the appointments are not ratified by a majority of the members of the executive committees at least 45 days preceding the date on which such members are to take office, then the members of the respective executive committees may elect a member by a two-thirds' majority of the membership of the executive committees at a regularly scheduled meeting or at a meeting duly called and held for such purposes. In the event the members of said executive committees fail to elect such members at least 30 days preceding the date on which such members are to take office, then such members shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions of Section 5 of this Act [section 2-295]. 
(2)  The two members appointed pursuant to paragraph (1) of this section shall within 30 days, after both such members take office, appoint a third member. The third member so selected shall be deemed to be a member at large. Any appointment made under the provisions of this paragraph shall also be entered upon the minutes of the governing authority. The appointment of the member at large shall not be governed by the provisions of Section 5 of this Act [section 2-295]. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 3) 
Sec. 2-294. - Appointment procedure. 
(a)  The appointment or election of each member appointed or elected by political parties shall be made by the respective appointing or electing authority. Said appointing or electing authority shall file an affidavit with the clerk of the superior court, no later than 30 days preceding the date at which such member is to take office, which states the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifies that such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. 
(b)  The appointment of the member at large shall be made by the other members of the board. Said members of the board shall file an affidavit with the clerk of the superior court, no later than 15 days preceding the date on which such member is to take office, which states the name and residential address of the person appointed and certifies that such member has been duly appointed as provided in this Act. 
(c)  The clerk of the superior court shall record each of such certifications on the minutes of the court and shall certify the name of each appointed member to the Secretary of State and provide for the issuance of appropriate commissions to the members, as provided by law for registrars. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 4) 
Sec. 2-295. - Failure to make appointments; filling vacancies. 
In the event any appointing or electing authority fails: 
(1)  To make a regular appointment within the times specified in Section 4 [section 2-294] or Section 5 [section 2-295]; or 
(2)  To make an interim appointment to fill a vacancy within 60 days after the creation of such vacancy; 
such regular member or the member to fill such vacancy shall be appointed forthwith by the county governing authority. This section shall not apply to the selection process of the member at large. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 5) 
Sec. 2-296. - Service; resignation; removal. 
Each appointed member of the board shall: 
(1)  Serve for a term of two years and until his or her successor is appointed and qualified, except in the event of resignation or removal as provided in this Act; 
(2)  Be eligible to succeed himself or herself and shall have the right to resign at any time by giving written notice of resignation to the respective appointing or electing authority and to the clerk of the superior court; and 
(3)  Be subject to removal from the board at any time, for cause after notice and hearing, in the same manner and by the same authority as is provided for the removal of registrars. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 6) 
Sec. 2-297. - Filling vacancies. 
In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of any member before the expiration of such member's term by removal, death, resignation, or otherwise, the respective appointing or electing authority shall appoint or elect a successor to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. The clerk of the superior court shall be notified of interim appointments or elections and record and certify such appointments or elections in the same manner as the regular appointment or election of members. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 7) 
Sec. 2-298. - Eligibility. 
No person who holds public office, whether elective or appointive, shall be eligible to serve as a member of the board during the term of such office; and the position of membership of any member shall be deemed vacant upon such member's qualifying as a candidate for said elective public office. The elections superintendent of Rockdale County shall not be eligible to serve as a member of the board. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 8) 
Sec. 2-299. - Terms of office. 
(a)  The initial members of the board shall take office on July 1, 1995. 
(b)  The board shall take no official action until all members have been certified to the clerk of the superior court. 
(c)  The terms of office of each of the three members of the initial board shall expire on June 30, 1997. 
(d)  Subsequent boards shall be composed of members who shall be appointed for terms of office of two years and until their successors are appointed and qualified in accordance with the provisions of Section 3 of this Act [section 2-293]. The members of each subsequent board shall take office on the first day of July following their appointment. 
(e)  The board shall take no official action until all members have been certified to the clerk of the superior court. 
(f)  The members of the board shall take substantially the same oath as required by law for registrars and shall have the same privileges from arrest. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 9) 
Sec. 2-300. - Duties and authority. 
(a)  The board shall: 
(1)  With regard to the preparation for and conduct of primaries and elections, succeed to and exercise all duties and powers granted to election superintendents by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended, of whatever nature and kind, and any other provision of law with respect thereto; and 
(2)  With regard to the registration of electors, succeed to and exercise all powers, duties, and responsibilities granted to boards of registrars under O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq., "the Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended, or any other provision of law. 
(b)  The board of registrations and elections shall have the authority to contract with any municipality located within the county for the holding of any primary or election to be conducted within the municipality. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 10) 
Sec. 2-301. - Conflicts. 
Any rule or regulation promulgated by a county executive committee of Rockdale County under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 21-2-111(c), relating to the conduct of conventions and other party affairs, as now or hereafter amended, shall be null and void if in conflict with a valid rule or regulation of the board of registrations and elections. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 11) 
Sec. 2-302. - Joint primaries. 
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require or prohibit joint primaries or to require or prohibit the governing authority or any other public agency to bear any expense of conducting primaries not otherwise required by law. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 12) 
Sec. 2-303. - Expenditure of public funds. 
With the consent of the governing authority, the board shall be authorized to expend public funds for the purpose of preparing and distributing material solely to inform and instruct adequately electors of the county with regard to elections. No material distributed by the board shall contain or express, in any manner or form, any commentary or expression of opinion or request for support with respect to any political issue or matter of political concern. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 13) 
Sec. 2-304. - Organization; majority decisions. 
(a)  The board shall be authorized and empowered to organize itself, elect its officers, determine its procedural rules and regulations, adopt bylaws, specify the functions and duties of its employees, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate to the management of the affairs committed to its supervision; provided, however, that no such action shall conflict with state law. 
(b)  Action and decision by the board shall be by a majority of the members of the board. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 14) 
Sec. 2-305. - Procedures and meetings; records. 
(a)  The board shall fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, directives governing the execution of matters within its jurisdiction. The board shall hold regular monthly meetings at a place designated by the governing authority of Rockdale County. Any specially called meeting held pursuant to the bylaws adopted by the board shall be held only after written notification of the time and place of the holding of such meeting has been communicated in writing to the person designated by the county governing authority to provide public information. 
(b)  The board shall maintain a written record of policy decisions that shall be amended to include additions or deletions. Such written record shall be made available for the public to review. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 15) 
Sec. 2-306. - Selection of administrative director. 
The board shall be responsible for the selection and appointment of the administrative director to administer and supervise the conduct of elections, primaries, and registration of electors for the county. The board shall act within 60 days of any resignation or removal of the administrative director to hire a new administrative director from a job description developed by the board. Compensation shall be determined in accordance with the salary schedule for department heads established by the governing authority of the county. Compensation for the administrative director shall be paid by the governing authority wholly from county funds. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 16) 
Sec. 2-307. - Offices; clerical assistants and employees. 
The governing authority of the county shall expend public funds to provide the board with such proper and suitable administrative offices and with such clerical assistants and other employees, approved by the board, as the governing authority shall deem appropriate. Compensation for such administrative personnel shall be paid by the governing authority wholly from county funds. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 17) 
Sec. 2-308. - Filling of vacancy in administrative director position. 
In the event the board fails to appoint or retain an administrative director to fill a vacancy within the time specified in section 16 of this Act [section 2-306], an acting administrative director who shall fill temporarily such vacancy shall be appointed forthwith by the county governing authority to serve until the board fills the vacancy as provided in this Act [division]. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 18) 
Sec. 2-309. - Selection, appointment and training of poll workers. 
The board shall be responsible for the selection, appointment, and training of poll workers in elections. Such workers shall be appointed, insofar as practical, from lists provided by the county executive committees of the two political parties appointing or electing members to the board of registrations and elections. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 19) 
Sec. 2-310. - Compensation. 
Compensation for the members of the board shall be $50.00 per month. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 20) 
Sec. 2-311. - Terms defined. 
The words "election," "elector," "political party," "primary," "public office," "special election," and "special primary" shall have the same meaning ascribed to those words by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-2, relating to definitions, as now or hereafter amended, unless otherwise clearly apparent from the text of this Act [division]. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 21) 
Sec. 2-312. - Succession. 
Upon the effective date of this Act, the Rockdale County Board of Registration and Elections created by an Act approved March 19, 1981 (1981 Ga. Laws, page 3144), as amended, shall be relieved from all powers and duties to which the Board of Elections and Registration of Rockdale County succeeds by the provisions of this Act and shall deliver thereafter to the board, upon written request, the custody of all equipment, supplies, materials, books, papers, records, and facilities of every kind pertaining to such powers and duties. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 22) 
Sec. 2-313. - Effective date. 
This Act [division] shall become effective on July 1, 1995, except that for the purpose of making appointments to the board, it shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3929, § 23) 
Secs. 2-314—2-330. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SHERIFF'S DEPARTMENT MERIT BOARD 

Sec. 2-331. - Created. 
There is created the Rockdale Sheriffs Department Merit Board. The board shall have jurisdiction and authority to review and modify disciplinary actions against employees of the Rockdale County sheriffs department as provided in this Act [division]. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3747, § 1) 
Sec. 2-332. - Membership. 
(a)  The board shall consist of five (5) members as follows: 
(1)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the judge or judges of Superior Court of Rockdale County for a term of two (2) years beginning July 1, 1984; and successors to such member shall be appointed by the judge or judges for terms of two (2) years beginning July 1 of each even-numbered year. 
(2)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the sheriff of Rockdale County for a term of two (2) years beginning July 1, 1984; and successors to such member shall be appointed by the sheriff for terms of two (2) years beginning July 1 of each even-numbered year. 
(3)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the chairperson of the board of commissioners of Rockdale County for a term of one (1) year beginning July 1, 1984; and successors to such member shall be appointed by the chairperson for terms of two (2) years beginning July 1 of each odd-numbered year. 
(4)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the district attorney of the Superior Court of Rockdale County for a term of one (1) year beginning July 1, 1984; and successors to such member shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years beginning July 1 of each odd-numbered year. 
(5)  One (1) member shall be an employee of the sheriff's department other than the chief deputy or the sheriff. Such member shall be elected by majority vote of all employees of the sheriffs department other than the chief deputy or sheriff. The sheriff may prescribe the manner of conducting such election, but such election shall be by secret ballot. The first such member shall be elected for a term of two (2) years beginning July 1, 1984; and successors to such member shall be elected for terms of two (2) years beginning July 1 of each even-numbered year. 
(b)  Each appointment and election to the board shall be conducted during the month of June immediately preceding the expiration of the term of office of the member for whom a successor is to be chosen. 
(c)  Any vacancy on the board shall be filled in the same manner as the original member was chosen, and any member selected to fill a vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(d)  No person shall serve as a member of the board for more than two (2) consecutive terms. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3747, § 2) 
Sec. 2-333. - Meetings. 
(a)  The initial meeting of the board shall be called by the member appointed by the sheriff, and the board shall meet thereafter on the call of the chairman. 
(b)  During the month of July of each year the board shall meet for the purpose of electing a chairman and a secretary to serve until the election of a new chairman and a new secretary in the next month of July. In the absence of the chairman, the secretary shall act as chairman. 
(c)  A quorum shall consist of three (3) members of the board, and any matter before the board shall be decided by majority vote of those present. The chairman shall have a vote on all matters before the board. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, page 3747, § 3) 
Sec. 2-334. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, the board shall have jurisdiction to reduce, set aside or modify any disciplinary action, including dismissal, imposed on any employee of the sheriff's department in any case in which the employee appeals to the board. 
(b)  Any employee may appeal any disciplinary action by filing with the chairman of the board a written notice that the employee desires to appeal from such disciplinary action. Such written notice must be filed within ten (10) days following the disciplinary action to be appealed or the right to appeal to the board shall be waived. 
(c)  Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the chairman shall set a hearing date and notify the members of the board, the employee, and the sheriff of the hearing. The board shall have the right to call witnesses at the hearing and may direct the sheriff to produce any relevant records in the custody of the sheriffs department. The employee and the sheriff shall have a right to be heard and to present witnesses and evidence. 
(d)  The decisions of the board shall be based on federal and state law, the rules and regulations of the sheriffs department, and justice and fairness. 
(e)  The following actions shall not be subject to appeal to the board, and the board shall have no authority over the following matters: 
(1)  Disciplinary action against an employee on probationary status; 
(2)  Disciplinary action against the chief deputy, who shall be solely responsible to and shall serve at the pleasure of the sheriff; 
(3)  The reassignment or demotion by one (1) step or rank of a division commander; 
(4)  Punishment of any employee by suspension for five (5) days or less or by cancellation of five (5) or fewer days of leave; or 
(5)  The reassignment of an employee from one division to another. 
(1984 Ga. Laws, (Act No. 624), § 4) 
Secs. 2-335—2-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CONYERS-ROCKDALE-BIG HAYNES IMPOUNDMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-351. - Short title. 
This act [division] shall be known and may be cited as the "Conyers-Rockdale-Big Haynes Impoundment Authority Act." 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 1) 
Sec. 2-352. - Created; members; meetings. 
(a)  There is created a body corporate and politic to be known as the "Conyers-Rockdale-Big Haynes Impoundment Authority," which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation; and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(b)  The authority shall be composed of five (5) members who shall be appointed as provided in this subsection. Two (2) members shall be appointed by the chairperson of the board of commissioners of Rockdale County; two (2) members shall be appointed by the mayor of the City of Conyers; and one (1) member shall be appointed by the other four (4) members of the authority; provided, however, that, if the fifth appointment has not been made by May 10 of 1987 or any future odd-numbered year, then the superior court judge or judges of Rockdale County shall make such appointment prior to June 1. The terms of all members shall begin on June 1 and shall run until May 31 of the year of expiration and until their successors are appointed and qualified. The initial terms of office shall begin June 1, 1987, and expire May 31, 1989. Thereafter, all terms of office shall be for two (2) years. Successors shall be appointed in the same manner as the initial members in the month of May immediately preceding the expiration of a member's term of office. Any member of the authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself. As of June 1, 1987, the members of such authority shall enter upon their duties. The members of the authority shall be entitled to reimbursement for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties but shall not be entitled to any other compensation for their service on the authority. The authority shall have the power to establish bylaws and to promulgate and adopt rules and regulations necessary or desirable for the management and operation of the authority. 
(c)  To be eligible for appointment as a member of the authority, a person shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age and a resident of Rockdale County for at least one (1) year prior to the date of his or her appointment and shall not have been convicted of a felony. 
(d)  The members of the authority shall at their first meeting after June 1 of each odd-numbered year elect one of their number as chairman. Also, the members of the authority shall at the same time elect one of their number as vice-chairman, shall elect one of their number as secretary, and may also elect one of their number as treasurer. The secretary may also serve as treasurer. Each of such officers shall serve for a period of two (2) years and until his or her successor is duly elected and qualified. The chairman of the authority shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, motion, or resolution. 
(e)  Three (3) members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and perform all of the duties of the authority. 
(f)  In the event of a vacancy by reason of death, disqualification, resignation, or other reason, the officer or body which appointed the member vacating his or her position shall select and appoint a qualified person to fill the unexpired term of the member whose position has been vacated. A vacancy shall exist in the office of any member of the authority who is convicted of a felony or who enters a plea of nolo contendere thereto; who is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or who enters a plea of nolo contendere thereto; who moves his or her residence from the county; who is convicted of any act of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance of his or her duties as a member of the authority; or who fails to attend any regular or special meeting of the authority for a period of three (3) months without an excuse approved by a resolution of the authority. 
(g)  All meetings of the authority, regular or special, shall be open to the public. The authority may hold public hearings on its own initiative or at the request of residents of Rockdale County or residents of any area affected by the actions of the authority. 
(h)  No member or employee of the authority shall have directly or indirectly any financial interest, profit, or benefit in any contract, work, or business of the authority nor in the sale, lease, or purchase of any property to or from the authority. No member of the authority shall be a member of the board of commissioners of Rockdale County or a member of the city council of the City of Conyers or the mayor of the City of Conyers. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 2) 
Sec. 2-353. - Definitions. 
As used in this act [division], the term: 
(1)  Authority means the Conyers-Rockdale-Big Haynes Impoundment Authority created by this act [division]. 
(2)  Cost of the project means and embraces the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one (1) year after completion of construction; the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal agents', and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized; the cost of the acquisition or construction of the project; the cost of placing any project in operation; and the cost of condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] for such project. 
(3)  Project shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, and equipping of a surface water impoundment and adjacent lands, to be used for purposes of water supply, flood control, recreation, or conservation, for any combination of such purposes, or for any combination of such purposes and other purposes for which governmentally controlled impoundments are customarily used; the treatment of water, and the distribution and wholesale of water to the State of Georgia and counties and municipalities for the purpose of resale, within and without the territorial boundaries of Rockdale County; the operation, maintenance, additions, improvements, and extensions of such facilities so as to assure an adequate water utility system deemed by the authority necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of such type of undertaking and the provision of any such flood control, recreational, conservation, or other related services and facilities as may be deemed useful or appropriate by the authority. 
(4)  Revenue bonds and bonds mean revenue bonds as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., as now or hereafter amended, known as the "Revenue Bond Law"; and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for in this act [division]. 
(5)  Any project shall be deemed self-liquidating if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all facilities used in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the costs of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 3) 
Sec. 2-354. - Powers. 
The authority shall have the power: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure. 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes. 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property, either inside or outside of Rockdale County and either inside or outside the boundaries of any other political subdivision, or rights or easements therein, or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of, or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority, the authority being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this act [division] except from the funds provided under the authority of this act [division]; and, in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned; and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this act [division] upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance. 
(4)  To appoint, select, and employ agents and officers, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys and fix their respective compensations, provided that other staff and office space for the authority shall be provided jointly by, and the cost thereof shared equally by, the City of Conyers and Rockdale County. 
(5)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be constructed, erected, or acquired. Any and all persons, firms, and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations, counties, and other political subdivisions and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relating to the furnishing of water and flood control, recreational, conservation, and other related services and facilities by the authority to such municipal corporations, counties, and political subdivisions or for the purchase of any such services or facilities by the authority therefrom for a term not exceeding fifty (50) years. Likewise, without limiting the generality of the above and foregoing, the same authority above granted to municipal corporations, counties, political subdivisions, and to the authority relative to entering into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings is authorized between the authority and private corporations, both within and without the State of Georgia, and between the authority and public bodies, including counties and cities outside the State of Georgia. 
(6)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from such proceeds and any grant or contribution from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality thereof. 
(7)  To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may require. 
(8)  To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may require. 
(9)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof. 
(10)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to make short-term loans and approve, execute, and deliver appropriate evidence of such indebtedness, provided no such power is in conflict with the constitution or general laws of this state. 
(11)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this act. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 4) 
Sec. 2-355. - Revenue bonds—Power to issue. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created hereby, shall have power and is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds of the authority for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one (1) or more projects. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund hereby provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates per annum, shall be payable at such time or times, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding forty (40) years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority, and may be redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution for the issuance of bonds. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 5) 
Sec. 2-356. - Same—Form, denomination; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereon, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine; and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both principal and interest. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 6) 
Sec. 2-357. - Same—Signatures; seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if such officer had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the authority, and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto and attested by the secretary of the authority, and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and the secretary of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons; and any bond may be signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such person may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 7) 
Sec. 2-358. - Same—Negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of this state. Such bonds, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 8) 
Sec. 2-359. - Same—Sale; price; proceeds. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority. The proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose or purposes provided in the resolutions and proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 9) 
Sec. 2-360. - Same—Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of any definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 10) 
Sec. 2-361. - Same—Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may provide for the replacement of any bonds or coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 11) 
Sec. 2-362. - Same—Conditions precedent to issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this act [division]. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this act [division] shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special meeting of the authority by a majority of its members. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 12) 
Sec. 2-363. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Rockdale County or the City of Conyers nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said political subdivisions; but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for, and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate said county or city to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment. All such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 13) 
Sec. 2-364. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issuance of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or without the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for the protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of any project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insuring of any project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys; and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor; and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers; and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 14) 
Sec. 2-365. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
In the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, the authority shall provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this act [division] and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 15) 
Sec. 2-366. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust instrument may provide. Such funds so pledged from whatever source received, including funds received from one (1) or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund which shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)  The necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest and other investment charges; and 
(4)  Any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture; but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, any surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds; and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 16) 
Sec. 2-367. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] or any of the coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this act [division] or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 17) 
Sec. 2-368. - Refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this act [division] insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 8) 
Sec. 2-369. - Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the "Revenue Bond Law," (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.). The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated; and the state or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the contract or contracts adjudicated as a part of the basis for the security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds when validated and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the authority issuing the same and the state and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said authority. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 19) 
Sec. 2-370. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Unless otherwise required by the constitution, any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this act [division] or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Rockdale County, Georgia; and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] shall likewise be brought in said court, which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 20) 
Sec. 2-371. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said authority or its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. No other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the authority. The provisions of this act [division] shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds, and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 21) 
Sec. 2-372. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this act [division], whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenue, income, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this act [division]. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 22) 
Sec. 2-373. - Purpose of the authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provision of this act [division], the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, managing, and otherwise dealing with a surface water impoundment and adjacent lands, within or without Rockdale County and within or without the boundaries of any other political subdivision, for purposes of water supply, flood control, or conservation, for any combination of such purposes, or for any combination of such purposes and other purposes for which governmentally controlled impoundments are customarily used, and thereafter the provisions of such services and facilities to the various municipalities and citizens in Rockdale County and environs, including adjoining counties and municipalities located therein. 
The authority shall also have the authority, where it deems it feasible, to sell its products and services to customers, governmental agencies, or governmental instrumentalities of adjoining states, providing the laws of the adjoining states do not prohibit or tax said activity. 
The authority shall not have the authority to construct waterlines for the distribution of water directly to customers. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 23) 
Sec. 2-374. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
The authority is authorized to prescribe and fix rates and to revise the same from time to time and to collect fees, tolls, and charges for the services, facilities, and commodities furnished and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of any project, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues of such project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 24) 
Sec. 2-375. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed or acquired under the provisions of this act [division]. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 25) 
Sec. 2-376. - Tort immunity. 
The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as Rockdale County; and the officers, agents, and employees of the authority when in the performance of the work of the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents, and employees of Rockdale County when in the performance of their public duties or work of the county. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 26) 
Sec. 2-377. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this act [division] shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby, shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 27) 
Sec. 2-378. - Effect on other governments. 
This act [division] shall not and does not in any way take from Rockdale County or any municipality located therein or any adjoining county the authority to exercise any of the powers herein granted to the authority or to issue revenue bonds as is provided by the "Revenue Bond Law," O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 29) 
Sec. 2-379. - Liberal construction of act. 
This act [division] being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the state and its inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5053, § 30) 
Secs. 2-380—2-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ROCKDALE COUNTY WATER AND SEWERAGE AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-401. - Short title. 
This Act [division] shall be known and may be cited as the "Rockdale County Water and Sewerage Authority Act." 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 1) 
Sec. 2-402. - Rockdale County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
(a)  There is created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Rockdale County Water and Sewerage Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style, and title and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority or the trustee acting under the trust indenture shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents, or employees of the authority. The authority is granted the same exemptions and exclusions from taxes as are now granted to cities and counties for the operation of facilities similar to facilities to be operated by the authority as provided under the provisions of this Act [division]. 
(b)  The authority shall consist of seven members who shall be selected so as to provide representation throughout Rockdale County and will be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County. To be eligible for appointment as a member of the authority, a person shall be at least 21 years of age, have been a resident of Rockdale County for at least two years prior to the date of his or her appointment, and shall not have been convicted of a felony. Any member of the authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself or herself for a maximum of two consecutive three-year terms. The water and sewerage authority shall be composed of seven posts to be designated as Post No. 1, Post No. 2, Post No. 3, Post No. 4, Post No. 5, Post No. 6, and Post No. 7. The term of each member shall be three years and until a successor is appointed and qualified, except that the initial terms shall be as follows: the members from Post No. 1 and Post No. 2 shall be appointed initially for terms which shall expire December 31, 1996, or when their respective successors are appointed and qualified; the members from Post No. 3 and Post No. 4 shall be appointed for terms which shall expire on December 31, 1997, or when their respective successors are appointed and qualified; the members from Post No. 5, Post No. 6, and Post No. 7 shall be appointed for terms which shall expire on December 31, 1998, or when their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Successors shall be appointed by the governing authority of Rockdale County. Any vacancy on the authority shall be filled in the same manner as was the original appointment of the member whose termination of membership resulted in the vacancy, and the person so selected and appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(c)  The authority shall elect from its members a chairperson, a vice chairperson, a secretary, and a treasurer or a secretary-treasurer. Members of the authority may be compensated from funds of the authority; however, it is expressly provided that they shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. The initial compensation established for the authority members and any future increases in such compensation must be submitted to the Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County for approval. 
(d)  A majority of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum and, except as provided in this subsection, any action may be taken by the authority upon the affirmative vote of a majority of a quorum of the members. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all the rights and perform all the duties of the authority. A majority vote of the total membership of the authority shall be required for the authority to create any debt or issue any negotiable revenue bonds. 
(e)  The authority shall be subject to all of the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-1 et seq. and 50-18-1 et seq., the open meetings and open records laws of the State of Georgia. 
(f)  Each member of the authority shall, not later than March 31 of each year, submit to the Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County a financial disclosure identical to that required of public officers by O.C.G.A. § 21-5-50 as now or hereafter amended. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 2) 
Sec. 2-403. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act [division], the term: 
(1)  Authority or water and sewerage authority means the Rockdale County Water and Sewerage Authority created in section 2 [section 2-402] of this act [division]. 
(2)  Cost of the project shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction; cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal, and legal expenses and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized by this Act [division]; the construction of any project; the placing of the same in operation; and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act [division] for such project. 
(3)  Project means and includes the acquisition, construction, and equipping of water facilities for obtaining one or more sources of water supply, small watershed projects, works of improvements for watersheds, projects for watershed protection and flood control and prevention, recreational facilities developed in connection therewith, the treatment of water, and the distribution and sale of water to users and consumers, including, but not limited to, the State of Georgia and counties and municipalities for the purpose of resale inside and outside the territorial boundaries of Rockdale County, and additions to, improvements to, extensions of, and the operation and maintenance of same so as to assure an adequate water system, watershed protection and improvement, and flood control and prevention; the acquisition, construction, and equipping of sewerage facilities useful and necessary for the gathering of waste matter, and the treatment of sewage of any and every type, including, but not limited to, the acquisition and construction of treatment plants, ponds, and lagoons inside and outside the territorial boundaries of Rockdale County, and additions and improvements to and extensions of such facilities and the operation and maintenance of same so as to assure an adequate sewage system. Said water facilities, small watershed projects, projects for watershed protection and flood control and prevention, recreational facilities developed in connection therewith, and sewerage facilities, at the discretion of the authority, may be combined at any time as one revenue-producing undertaking and operated and maintained as such. 
(4)  Revenue bonds, bonds, or obligations, as used in this Act [division], shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., the Revenue Bond Law, and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under the "Revenue Bond Law" and any amendments thereto and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the authority the issuance of which are specifically provided for in this Act [division]. 
(5)  Any project shall be deemed self-liquidating if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all facilities used in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 3) 
Sec. 2-404. - Powers. 
The authority shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, gift, condemnation, or otherwise, and to hold, maintain, lease, operate, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(3)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property, or rights or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or to dispose of the same in any manner it deems to be to the best advantage of the authority, the authority being under obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under this Act [division] from the funds provided under the authority of this Act [division], and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this act [division] upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money is deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; and if the authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any lands the title to which shall then be in Rockdale County or in any municipality incorporated in said county, the governing authority or body of said county or of any of said municipalities, if the governing authority of said county or of any of said municipalities consents thereto, is authorized to convey title to such lands to the authority upon payment for the credit of the general funds of said county or municipalities the reasonable value of such lands. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act [division], the authority shall have the right, easement, and franchise of laying the necessary mains, pipes, conduits, and drains for waterworks, sewerage, and drainage systems purposes within the rights of way of streets, roads, and highways in the County of Rockdale or within the rights of way of streets, roads, and highways in the corporate limits of any municipality incorporated in said county, without cost except that the authority shall repair all damage done by the authority by reason thereof; 
(4)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(5)  To make and execute contracts, leases, and instruments, which shall be necessary or convenient, including contracts for acquisition and construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be constructed or acquired; and any and all persons, firms, and corporations, and the state and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state, are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations, counties, and other political subdivisions and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of services and facilities by the authority to such municipal corporations, counties, and political subdivisions for a term not exceeding 50 years; 
(6)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects, as defined in this Act [division]; the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds or other funds of the authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(7)  To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may impose; 
(8)  To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may impose; 
(9)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute notes or other evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same; 
(10)  To issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for the purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(11)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to incur shortterm debt and to approve, execute, and deliver appropriate evidence of any such indebtedness, provided that such power is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this state; and 
(12)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act [division]. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 4) 
Sec. 2-405. - Revenue bonds. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created by this Act [division], shall have power and is authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any one or more projects, as defined in paragraph (2) of Section 3 [section 2-403(2)] of this Act [division]. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided for in this Act [division] for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates, shall provide for when interest shall be payable and when principal shall mature, and shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest, all as may be determined by the authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. In addition, the authority shall have the power to issue revenue bonds or obligations pursuant to and in conformity with the Revenue Bond Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.). 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 5) 
Sec. 2-406. - Revenue bonds; form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form or both as the authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 6) 
Sec. 2-407. - Revenue bonds; signatures; seal. 
All such bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairman of the authority, attested by the manual or facsimile signature of the secretary of the authority, and the official seal of the authority or a facsimile thereof shall be affixed thereto and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and secretary of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the authority by such person as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 7) 
Sec. 2-408. - Revenue bonds; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act [division] shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under laws of this state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and said bonds and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 8) 
Sec. 2-409. - Revenue bonds; sale; proceeds. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority and the proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose provided in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 9) 
Sec. 2-410. - Revenue bonds; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may under like restrictions issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 10) 
Sec. 2-411. - Revenue bonds; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond or any coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 11) 
Sec. 2-412. - Revenue bonds; conditions precedent to issuance. 
Such revenue bonds shall be issued as required by the Revenue Bond Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.). Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this act [division] shall become effective immediately upon passage; and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of its members. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 12) 
Sec. 2-413. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act [division] shall not constitute a debt of Rockdale County or any municipality in Rockdale County, nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said county or any such municipality, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund provided for in this Act [division] and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate said county or any such municipality to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 13) 
Sec. 2-414. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company inside or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of the project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 14) 
Sec. 2-415. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who or any agency, bank, or trust company which shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes provided for in this Act [division], subject to such regulations as this Act [division] and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 15) 
Sec. 2-416. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund, which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)  The interest upon which revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)  Any premium upon bonds acquired by redemption, payment, or otherwise; 
(4)  The necessary charges of the paying agent or agents for paying principal and interest; and 
(5)  Any investment fees or charges. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, any surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not be reissued, printed, and delivered. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 16) 
Sec. 2-417. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act [division] or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given by this Act [division] may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted by this Act [division] or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act [division] or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, fines, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 17) 
Sec. 2-418. - Refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act [division] and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act [division] insofar as the same may be applicable. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 18) 
Sec. 2-419. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act [division] or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Rockdale County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act [division] shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 19) 
Sec. 2-420. - Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq.); the petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and the state or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof shall not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as a part of the basis of the security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the authority issuing the same, the state and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality thereof, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the Rockdale County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 20) 
Sec. 2-421. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
(a)  While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said authority or of its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will complete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the authority. 
(b)  The provisions of this Act [division] shall be for the benefit of the authority and the holders of any such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions of this Act [division], shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 21) 
Sec. 2-422. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act [division], whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees, and earnings shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act [division]. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 22) 
Sec. 2-423. - Tort immunity. 
To the extent permitted by law, the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as Rockdale County, and the officers, agents, and employees of the authority when in the performance of the work of the authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents, and employees of Rockdale County when in performance of their public duties or work of the county. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 23) 
Sec. 2-424. - Tax exempt status of authority. 
The properties of the authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the state and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income, and such properties and the authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessment of any city, county, or the state or any political subdivision thereof. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 24) 
Sec. 2-425. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The authority is authorized to prescribe and revise from time to time rates, fees, tolls, and charges and to collect such rates, fees, tolls, and charges for the services, facilities, or commodities furnished and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, to issue revenue bonds as provided by this Act [division] to finance in whole or in part the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, equipment, betterment, or extension of a water system, a small watershed project, a project for watershed protection or flood control and prevention, recreational facilities developed in connection therewith, a sewerage system, or a combined water and sewerage system, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 25) 
Sec. 2-426. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects acquired or constructed under the provisions of this Act [division], including the basis on which water service and facilities, sewerage service and facilities, or both shall be furnished. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 26) 
Sec. 2-427. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act [division] shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized by this Act [division] and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. This act [division] does not in any way take from Rockdale County or any municipality located therein or any adjoining county the authority to own, operate, and maintain a water system, small watershed project, project for watershed protection and flood control and prevention, recreational facilities developed in connection therewith, a sewerage system, or a combined water and sewerage system or to issue revenue bonds as is provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60 et seq., the Revenue Bond Law. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 27) 
Sec. 2-428. - Liberal construction of act [division]. 
This Act [division] being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the State of Georgia and their inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
(1995 Ga. Laws, page 3994, § 28) 
Secs. 2-429—2-460. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-461. - Revenue payment in two installments for counties with populations between 18,100 and 18,250 (general law). 
In all counties of this state having a population of not less than 18,100 and not more than 18,250 according to the United States Decennial Census of 1970 or any future such census, and in all municipalities located in such counties, the taxes shall become due in two (2) equal installments, half of the taxes shall be due and payable on the first day of July of each year and shall become delinquent if not paid by the fifteenth day of August in each year. The taxes for the first half of the tax year shall be based on half of the taxes collected during the preceding tax year in the event the tax digest for the current year has not been completed. The remaining half of such taxes shall be due and payable on the first day of November of each year and shall become delinquent if not paid by the twentieth day of December of each year. A penalty of one-half of one (1) percent per month or fraction thereof during which any installment remains unpaid after it is due, not to exceed five (5) percent shall accrue and be added to each installment that is not paid before it becomes delinquent. All taxes and penalties remaining unpaid on the twentieth day of December of each year shall bear interest at the rate of seven (7) percent per annum from said date, and the tax collectors or tax commissioners or governing authority shall issue executions therefor against each delinquent taxpayer in their respective counties and municipalities. 
(1974 Ga. Laws, page 2060, § 1) 
Editor's note— The "taxes" referred to above apparently means property or ad valorem taxes only. 
Annotation— Interest on tax executions are retroactive to the time the execution could have been issued, Georgia Railroad Co. v. Wright, 125 Ga. 589, 610, 54 S.E. 52. 
State Law reference— Interest on tax executions, O.C.G.A. § 48-3-8; installments authorized under general state law, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-23. 
Sec. 2-462. - Debt limitation (constitutional amendment). 
Ga. Const. art. VII, § VII, ¶ I, is hereby amended by adding at the end thereof the following: 
"Notwithstanding any other provision in this Constitution to the contrary, effective January 1, 1967, the debt limitation of Rockdale County shall be 10 percentum of the assessed value of all the taxable property therein in lieu of the seven percentum (7%) limitation prescribed in this paragraph." 
(1966 Ga. Laws, page 918, § 1) 
State Law reference— Local public school finances, O.C.G.A. § 20-2-390 et seq.; local government bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-463—2-480. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUDGETS; ACCOUNTS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Employment of accountant to examine books, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-10; budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-481. - Financial reports of officers. 
The commission shall be empowered to require of all county officers to make reports on the general or specific conduct of the financial affairs of their respective offices. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 12) 
Sec. 2-482. - Budget of elected officials. 
Each elected official who orates a county fund shall submit an annual budget to the board of commissioners on or before September 1, of each year. Said budget shall constitute a part of the budget submitted by the chairperson governing expenditures of all county funds to the board of commissioners as prescribed in section 19 [section 2-483] of this act; provided, however, said budget submitted by an elected official shall not be reduced or increased prior to submission to the board of commissioners. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 18; Ord. No. 1979-18, § 1, 4-24-1979; Ord. No. 1997-10, § 1, 6-24-1997) 
Sec. 2-483. - Budget and appropriations. 
(a)  The chairperson shall propose and submit to the board of commissioners, not later than November 1 of each year, a balanced county budget and an appropriations ordinance governing expenditures for the coming year of all county funds, including capital outlay, public works projects, as well as expenditures by and for all county elected officials. 
(b)  Said board shall thereafter hold a public hearing on the proposed county budget and the appropriations ordinance, giving notice thereof at least 10 days in advance by publication in the official organ of Rockdale County and by posting the same at the courthouse door. 
(c)  The proposed budget and the appropriations ordinance shall thereafter be reviewed, amended and adopted by said board before January 1 of the year to which they apply. If the board fails to adopt a budget and an appropriations ordinance within the time provided in this section, then the prior year's level of appropriations for each budget unit shall continue proportionately month to month in an undifferentiated lump sum per such unit until a new appropriation is provided by said board. 
(d)  The adopted budget and appropriations ordinance may be revised during the year only by formal action of the board of commissioners in a public meeting and no increase in appropriations shall be made therein without provision also being made for financing same. 
(e)  A copy of the adopted budget and appropriations ordinance hereunder shall be transmitted by the chairperson to the then current grand jury of the Superior Court of Rockdale County within 10 days of the adoption thereof. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 19; Ord. No. 1979-18, § 1, 4-24-1979; Ord. No. 1997-10, § 1, 6-24-1997) 
Sec. 2-484. - Expenditures. 
No expenditures of county funds shall be made except in accordance with the county appropriations ordinance, or amendments thereto, adopted by the board of commissioners. The chairperson shall enforce compliance with this provision by all departments of county government, including those for elected officers. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 20; Ord. No. 1979-18, § 1, 4-24-1979) 
Sec. 2-485. - Audits and financial statements. 
The board of commissioners shall on or before July 31 annually employ a certified public accountant for the making of an annual continuous audit of county finances and financial records. The accountant so employed shall be paid out of county funds and shall perform a complete audit of the financial records of the county for the ensuing year, pointing out any irregularities found to exist, and reporting the results of such audit to said board annually. An annual financial report shall be submitted to the board and shall be filed with the department of finance and made available for public inspection as other records in such office. Said board shall cause to be published in the official organ of Rockdale County a statement of the financial condition of the county as of June 30 of each year. Said accountant shall transmit to the grand jury of the Superior Court of Rockdale County a copy of each annual financial report furnished by him to the board of commissioners. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 21; 1978 Ga. Laws, page 3855; Ord. No. 1979-18, § 1, 4-24-1979) 
Sec. 2-486. - Officials not to be interested in contracts. 
Neither the chairperson nor any member of the commission nor other county officer empowered to use public or county funds for the purchase of goods, property, or services of any kind for public or county purposes shall be financially interested directly or indirectly, in any contract to which the county is a party, either as principal, surety or otherwise; nor shall such officer, his partner, agent, servant, or employee of a firm of which he is a member or by whom lie is employed purchase from or sell to the county any real or personal property, goods, or services. Any contracts made in violation of any of the foregoing provisions shall be void, and the officer so offending shall be removed from office upon proper proceedings instituted by any taxpayer in said county in accordance with the provisions of section 23-1714 of the Code of Georgia of 1933 [now O.C.G.A. § 36-1-14]. 
(1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, § 23) 
Chapter 6 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Stone Mountain Judicial Circuit formerly referred to in this chapter has been superseded by the Rockdale Judicial Circuit. The editor has changed the text to read "Rockdale Judicial Circuit." 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - District attorney; salary supplement; additional personnel; office and expenses. 
Governing authorities of any county or combination of counties comprising the Rockdale Judicial Circuit may provide a supplementary salary for the district attorney of that circuit and may provide additional personnel to assist him as may be necessary to ensure the orderly and efficient operation of the office of the district attorney, and may provide all necessary offices, utilities, telephone expenses, materials, supplies, and travel expenses as may be necessary to equip, maintain and furnish the office of the district attorney of each county's superior court. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 561, § 1) 
State Law reference— Prosecuting attorneys, O.C.G.A. § 15-18-1 et seq.; district attorneys emeritus, retirement fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-12-1 et seq. 
Secs. 6-2—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SUPERIOR COURT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-1 et seq.; retirement and pensions of superior court judges, O.C.G.A. § 47-8-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-31. - Supplement to compensation. 
(a)  In addition to the compensation, salary, expenses, and allowances presently being received by the judges of the Superior Court of the Rockdale Judicial Circuit from the State of Georgia or any other source, the judges of the superior court of said circuit shall receive a supplement to such compensation from the funds of Rockdale County in the amount of $8,000.00 per annum for each such judge. The supplement shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Rockdale County. 
(b)  The supplement is made and declared to be a part of the expenses of the courts, and the power to levy a tax to pay the same or to otherwise provide to pay the same is delegated to the governing authority of Rockdale County. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (Act No. 160), page 4459, § 1) 
Secs. 6-32—6-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLERK[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Clerks of superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-50 et seq. 

Sec. 6-51. - Fees collected by clerk. 
All fees, costs, percentages, forfeitures, penalties, allowances, and all other perquisites of whatever kind, as are now or may hereafter be allowed by the law, to be received or collected as compensation for service by the clerk of the superior court, shall be received and diligently collected by him for the sole use of Rockdale County, and shall be deposited to a special account by said clerk and paid by check to the governing authority of said county by the fifteenth day of each month. All costs payable to other county officials from said funds shall be paid from said special account by said clerk before remitting the remainder to said governing, authority by the fifteenth day of each month, as herein provided. At the time each check is submitted to said governing authority, it shall be accompanied by a detailed itemized statement made by the clerk under oath showing all such collections and the sources from which collected. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 2176, § 1; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 2048, § 1) 
Sec. 6-52. - Salary of clerk. 
The clerk of the Superior Court of Rockdale County shall receive an annual salary equal to 56 percent of the base salary of a superior court judge as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 45-7-4, as now or hereafter amended. The base salary of a superior court judge shall mean that salary paid from state funds and shall not include any county supplement or expense reimbursements. The salary shall be payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Rockdale County. The clerk shall also be authorized to participate in the group retirement program and the group hospitalization benefit program on the same basis as other officers and employees of Rockdale County if he meets the normal eligibility requirements of the programs. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 2176, § 2; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 2844, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3162; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3484, § 1; 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 866), page 4185, § 1) 
Sec. 6-53. - Deputy clerks. 
The clerk of the superior court of Rockdale County shall have the authority and discretion to appoint the following clerks and employees: one (1) chief deputy clerk, [and] six (6) deputy clerks. The chief deputy clerk shall receive a salary [as provided by law]. The deputy clerks shall each receive a salary [as provided by law]. The salaries of all employees of the clerk of the superior court shall be paid in equal monthly installments out of county funds; provided, however, that such other additional help as may become necessary may be employed by the clerk of the superior court, and he shall fix their compensation upon approval by the county governing authority. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 2176, § 3; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 2844, § 2) 
Sec. 6-54. - Salaries of deputy clerks fixed for counties with populations of 18,100 to 18,250. 
In all counties of this state having a population of not less than 18,100 and not more than 18,250 according to the United States Decennial Census of 1970 or any future such census, the deputies of the clerk of the superior court shall each receive a salary [as provided by law], payable from the funds of such counties. Beginning January 1, 1976, such deputies shall each receive a salary, [as provided by law], payable from the funds of such counties. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2913, § 1) 
Secs. 6-55—6-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COURT REPORTERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Court reporters, O.C.G.A. § 15-41-1 et seq.; superior court reporters emeritus, O.C.G.A. § 47-15-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-71. - Number of court reporters. 
The judges of said circuit are hereby authorized to employ two (2) additional court reporters and to prescribe their duties and compensation, but such compensation shall not exceed the compensation of the present court reporters of the circuit, as the same is now or shall hereafter be fixed. 
(1972 Ga. Laws, page 620, § 6) 
Editor's note— Judges need no local law authorization to hire one (1) court reporter for the circuit or division or set their duties (see O.C.G.A. §§ 15-14-1, 15-14-3) but additional reporters may be authorized and this series of acts authorized. See O.C.G.A. § 15-14-4. 
Sec. 6-72. - Additional court reporters and clerical assistance in judicial circuits containing any counties with a population of 250,000 to 500,000 (general law). 
(a)  The judges of all judicial circuits in this state in which is located a county having a population of not less than 250,000 nor more than 500,000, according to the 1960 U.S. Decennial Census, or any such future census, are empowered and authorized to employ two (2) additional court reporters to serve as official court reporters of such circuits. Such reporters shall be paid in the same manner and shall receive the same compensation as is now or may hereafter be provided by law for court reporters of such circuits. 
(b)  The judges of the Superior Court of the Rockdale Judicial Circuit are empowered and authorized to employ additional court reporters upon the recommendation of the senior judge of such circuit when that recommendation is concurred in by one more than half of the remaining judges. Such reporters shall be paid in the same manner and shall receive the same compensation as is now or may hereafter be provided by law for court reporters of such circuit. 
(c)  Such additional court reporters shall perform such duties as may be assigned to them from time to time by the judges of said circuits. 
(d)  The judges of such circuits are further authorized and empowered to employ such stenographic and clerical help as they deem necessary to assist the court reporters in carrying on their work and to fix their compensation. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 876, §§ 1—3; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 249, § 1) 
Sec. 6-73. - Salary. 
From and after the passage of this act [division,] the official court reporter of the Rockdale Judicial Circuit shall be paid a salary [as provided by law], which salary shall be paid monthly on the first day of each month. The exact amount of such salary to be paid by each county in the circuit [5] shall be fixed by the governing authorities of the counties paying the salary of said official court reporter pro rata, based upon the ratio of population in each county according to the latest United States Decennial Census. Increases in said salary, not more often than annually, shall be made upon the recommendation of the senior judge of the circuit when that recommendation is concurred in by one more than half of the remaining judges of the circuit. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1143, § 1; 1973 Ga. Laws, page 247) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— This and similar language has been retained in this chapter even though the Rockdale Judicial Circuit contains only one county, viz, Rockdale County. 

Sec. 6-74. - Salary paid pro rata by counties. 
The salary herein provided shall be paid pro rata out of the general treasuries of the various counties comprising the Rockdale Judicial Circuit upon the basis of population. Each one of the counties comprising said circuit shall pay such part or portion of said salary as its population bears to the total population of all counties of said circuit according to the official federal census of 1940, until the completion and promulgation of the next official federal census, and then in like manner, according to such succeeding federal census, and so on according to each succeeding federal census. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1143, § 2) 
Sec. 6-75. - County power to levy tax for salary. 
It shall be the duty of the county authorities of the various counties comprising the Rockdale Judicial Circuit to make provision annually when levying taxes for expenses of courts to levy and make collection of sufficient taxes in their respective counties for the purpose of paying the portion of said salary chargeable against the respective counties. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1143, § 3) 
Sec. 6-76. - Fees collected and paid to county; reports. 
From and after the passage of this act [division], the official court reporter of the Rockdale Judicial Circuit shall make collection of all fees fixed by law arising from the reporting of cases in the superior courts of said judicial circuit and the City Court of Decatur so long as said official court reporter shall serve as the Reporter for the City Court of Decatur, and all fees arising from the transcript of proceedings had in such cases, and shall pay said fees into the treasury of the county in which the court trying the case is situated. In the event such reporter shall render reporting services in addition to those heretofore enumerated in this section, the proceeds therefrom shall be prorated by him to the counties comprising the circuit on the same basis as the salary herein provided for is prorated. Provided, however, that in the event such reporter shall render reporting services without the limits of said circuit, such reporter is authorized to deduct from his remittance of the proceeds thereof expenses incurred by him in the rendition of such service. Said reporter shall on the first day of each month make a report to the treasurer or other legally designated custodian of funds of the various counties comprising said judicial circuit of all funds collected from cases tried in the respective counties during the preceding month, and of all other reporting services rendered by him, and shall accompany said report with a remittance of such funds collected from cases tried in the county to which the report is made, plus the particular county's prorata portion of the proceeds from any additional reporting services rendered by him. A copy of the report to the county treasurer shall be furnished to the governing authorities of the various counties comprising the circuit. It shall be the duty of the treasurer or custodian of the funds in the various counties, to whom remittance is made, to execute and deliver to said official court reporter a receipt for all funds remitted by him. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1143, § 4) 
Editor's note— The city court referred to above was abolished by 1956 Ga. Laws, page 2932. An amendment to this section adding a paragraph setting certain fees (1957 Ga. Laws, page 316, § 2) has been excluded here since it has been implicitly repealed and superseded presently by O.C.G.A. § 15-5-21 on the state judicial council's power to set fees. 
Sec. 6-77. - Executions for unpaid fees. 
The official court reporter of said circuit shall cause to be issued executions for all unpaid fees to which he may be entitled in the name of said official court reporter for the use and benefit of the county in which the court in which said fees accrued is located. Except as herein modified, all laws applicable to such executions shall remain in full force and effect. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1143, § 5) 
Sec. 6-78. - Deposit on fees. 
The judges of the courts included in this act [article] shall have authority in all civil cases to require a deposit on the fees of the official court reporter before requiring him to take down the testimony in such cases. The amount of such deposit shall be fixed by the court, and shall be applied to the payment of legal fees to which the official court reporter may be entitled, and if such deposit exceeds the legal fees arising in such cases the excess shall be returned to the parties making the deposit. 
(1943 Ga. Laws, page 1143, § 6) 
Secs. 6-79—6-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATE COURT 

Sec. 6-111. - Created. 
There is created the State Court of Rockdale County which shall have the power, jurisdiction, and method of procedure as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-7-1 et seq. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 1) 
Sec. 6-112. - Location. 
The State Court of Rockdale County shall be located in the City of Conyers in Rockdale County and shall have territorial jurisdiction coextensive with the limits of said county. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 2) 
Sec. 6-113. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The State Court of Rockdale County shall have jurisdiction as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-7-1 et seq. 
(b)  In all criminal cases, the judge of said court shall be the judge of both questions of fact and of law unless the person subject to be tried shall, before pleading to the charge against him, or the state shall demand a jury trial. The purpose of this subsection is to eliminate trial by jury unless demanded by the person charged or by the state. Upon either such timely demand being made, such person shall be tried by jury as is hereinafter provided. 
(c)  In all civil cases, the judge shall be the judge of all questions of fact and of law unless either party to such proceeding shall, before the time expires for filing defensive pleadings, file a written demand for a jury trial. Upon such demand being timely filed, the case shall be tried by a jury as hereinafter provided unless such demand for trial by jury is withdrawn before the call of the case for trial. When a demand for trial by jury is filed, the same shall not be withdrawn without the consent of the opposite party. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 3) 
Sec. 6-114. - Rules of practice and procedure. 
The State Court of Rockdale County shall have such rules of practice and procedure as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-7-1 et seq. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 4) 
Sec. 6-115. - Terms. 
The State Court of Rockdale County shall have four (4) terms per annum which shall begin on the first Monday in January, April, July, and October at the Rockdale County Courthouse in the City of Conyers. Each such term shall remain open for the transaction of business until the next succeeding term. If the date fixed for the convening of any term is a legal holiday, then that term shall begin on the next day thereafter which is not a legal holiday. The court shall at all times be open for the purpose of receiving pleas of guilty in criminal cases and passing sentence thereon and for the transaction of civil business before the court. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 5; 1988 Ga. Laws, page 4466, § 1) 
Sec. 6-116. - Costs. 
(a)  In all civil proceedings in the State Court of Rockdale County, when the principal amount, excluding interest and fees, is not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), the total costs shall be not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)  In all other cases, costs shall be the same as in the Superior Court of Rockdale County. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 6) 
Sec. 6-117. - Transfer of matters from superior court. 
Any case of a civil nature pending in the Superior Court of Rockdale County on July 1, 1987, or thereafter, of which the State Court of Rockdale County has jurisdiction under this act [article] may be transferred by the judge of the superior court to the State Court of Rockdale County by consent of counsel of all parties and shall thereafter stand for trial in said court as though originally filed therein. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 7) 
Sec. 6-118. - Institution of criminal cases. 
All prosecutions in criminal cases instituted in the State Court of Rockdale County shall be by written accusation made by the solicitor, based upon affidavit, setting forth plainly the offense charged in terms of the law, upon which shall be entered the name of the prosecutor, if any; but the solicitor may make such accusation and proceed to trial thereon without affidavit as the basis therefor as provided by general law. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, any prosecution for violation of an ordinance which has been transferred from the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County to the State Court of Rockdale County for a jury trial as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-61, may be upon citation, as well as by accusation, as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62 and 15-10-63. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 8; 1988 Ga. Laws, page 4466, § 2) 
Sec. 6-119. - Appeals. 
Any case tried in the State Court of Rockdale County shall be subject to review by the Court of Appeals or the Supreme Court of Georgia, whichever court has jurisdiction, in the same manner and under the same rules of appellate procedure as apply to cases in the superior court. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 9) 
Sec. 6-120. - Selection and number of jurors. 
(a)  The clerk of the State Court of Rockdale County shall prepare a jury list and jury box for said court which shall contain the names of all the grand and petit jurors of said county appearing from time to time on the jury list of the superior court of said county, from which jurors shall be drawn, selected, chosen, and summoned for service in the State Court of Rockdale County in the same manner as is done in the superior court. Jurors in said state court shall receive the same per diem amount as compensation for service therein as in the Superior Court of Rockdale County and shall be paid by Rockdale County in the same manner and out of like funds as jurors are paid in the superior court. 
(b)  For the trial of any case in the Superior Court of Rockdale County or the State Court of Rockdale County requiring the use of jurors, a jury pool is created. Jurors may be selected as prescribed by law by either the judges of the Superior Court of Rockdale County or the judge of the State Court of Rockdale County to appear to be sworn and serve as jurors before either court. When both the superior court and state court are in session on the same date, either court may use as jurors persons who are summoned to appear to serve as jurors by virtue of the authority of either court. 
(c)  The jury for the trial of all civil and criminal cases tried in the State Court of Rockdale County shall be composed of six (6) members. Said trial jury shall be selected from a panel of twelve (12) jurors. Each side in all civil actions being tried by a jury shall be entitled to three (3) peremptory strikes from such panel of twelve (12), and the remaining six (6) jurors shall serve as the trial jury. In all criminal matters being tried by a jury, the state shall be entitled to two (2) peremptory strikes and the defendant shall be entitled to four (4) peremptory strikes from such panel of twelve (12) jurors; and the remaining six (6) jurors shall serve as the trial jury. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 10) 
Sec. 6-121. - Judge. 
(a)  There shall be a judge of the State Court of Rockdale County who shall be elected by the qualified voters of Rockdale County, Georgia, and shall assume office on the first day of January following his election as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-7-1 et seq.; provided, however, that the first judge shall be appointed by the governor for a term of office beginning July 1, 1987, and ending December 31, 1988. 
(b)  The judge of said court shall have such qualifications and shall be subject to such restrictions and discipline as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-7-1 et seq. He shall be vested with all the power and authority of judges of the superior courts as to all matters, except as are exclusively conferred upon the judges of the superior courts by the constitution and laws of this state. 
(c)  The judge shall devote full time to the duties of his office and he shall be paid a salary equal to 92.5 percent of the salary now or hereafter paid to the judge of the Superior Court of Rockdale County. Said salary shall be payable monthly out of the funds of Rockdale County. The salary of such judge shall be an expense of said court. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 11; 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1015), page 4723, § 1) 
Sec. 6-122. - Solicitor. 
(a)  There shall be a solicitor of the State Court of Rockdale County. The district attorney of the Rockdale Judicial Circuit shall appoint a qualified assistant district attorney to serve as solicitor of said court. 
(b)  The solicitor shall have such qualifications as provided by O.C.G.A. § 15-7-1 et seq. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 12) 
Sec. 6-123. - Solicitor pro tem. 
In the absence of the solicitor of the State Court of Rockdale County for any reason, said solicitor may appoint a solicitor pro tempore who shall have the same authority while so acting as said solicitor and shall be paid from the funds of Rockdale County such reasonable amount for the service as the solicitor shall determine. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 13) 
Sec. 6-124. - Clerk. 
The clerk of the Superior Court of Rockdale County shall be, by virtue of his office, the clerk of the State Court of Rockdale County and the sheriff of said county shall likewise be the sheriff of said state court; and each shall on behalf of the county receive compensation for services in said court as are allowed them by law for like service in the superior court. The clerk shall provide all necessary dockets, writs, minute books, printed forms, and the like as may be necessary for said court which shall be paid for by Rockdale County in like manner as such items in the superior court. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 14) 
Sec. 6-125. - Stenographer. 
The judge of the State Court of Rockdale County may appoint an official stenographer for said court who shall report such cases as the court may require. He shall receive the same fees as allowed for similar service in the superior court which shall be taxed and enforced as in the superior court. 
(1987 Ga. Laws, page 5452, § 15) 
Secs. 6-126—6-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROBATE COURT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Probate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-1 et seq.; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21; judges of the probate courts retirement fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-11-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-151. - Compensation on salary basis. 
The present mode of compensating the ordinary [judge of the probate court] of Rockdale County, known as the fee system, is hereby abolished; and in lieu thereof, an annual salary for said officer is prescribed as hereinafter provided. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 2173, § 1) 
Sec. 6-152. - Compensation. 
The judge of the probate court shall receive an annual salary equal to 51.5 percent of the base salary of a superior court judge as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 45-7-4, as now or hereafter amended. The base salary of a superior court judge shall mean that salary paid from state funds and shall not include any county supplement or expense reimbursements. The salary shall be payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of Rockdale County. The judge of the probate court shall also be authorized to participate in the group retirement program and the group hospitalization benefit program on the same basis as other officers and employees of Rockdale County if he meets the normal eligibility requirements of the programs. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 2173, § 2; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 2842, § 1; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3164; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3482, § 1; 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 862), page 4177, § 2) 
Sec. 6-153. - Collection of fees, fines and the like; report. 
The ordinary [judge of the probate court] of Rockdale County shall diligently and faithfully undertake to collect all fees, fines, forfeitures, commissions, costs, allowances, penalties, funds, monies and all other emoluments and perquisites formerly allowed as compensation for his services in any capacity, and shall receive and hold the same in trust for said county as public monies, and shall pay the same into the county treasury on or before the tenth day of each month next following the month in which they were collected or received. At the time of each such monthly payment into the county treasury, the ordinary [judge of the probate court] shall furnish the governing authority of the county a detailed, itemized statement, under oath, of all such funds received during the preceding month by him and paid into the county treasury. The statement shall show the respective amounts of money collected and the source thereof. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 2173, § 3) 
State Law reference— Costs in probate court, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-60. 
Sec. 6-154. - Deputy; compensation. 
The judge of the probate court of Rockdale County is hereby authorized to appoint a chief deputy and one (1) additional deputy to assist him in the performance of the duties of his office. The chief deputy shall receive a salary [as provided by law]. The other deputy shall receive a salary [as provided by law]. Said personnel shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Rockdale County. The judge of the probate court, during his term of office, shall have the authority to designate and name the persons who shall be employed as the chief deputy and deputy and to prescribe their duties and assignments. The judge of the probate court may remove such chief deputy or deputy at any time with or without cause. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 2173, § 4; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 2842, § 2) 
Sec. 6-155. - Expenses. 
All expenses incurred by the ordinary [judge of the probate court] in operating and discharging the official duties of his office, including, but not limited to, office equipment, supplies, fixtures and utility expenses, shall be paid by the county from county funds. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 2173, § 5) 
Sec. 6-156. - Bond. 
The official bonds of the ordinary [judge of the probate court] and his deputy shall be procured by said officer, and the premiums and costs thereof shall be paid out of any county funds available for that purpose. 
(1969 Ga. Laws, page 2173, § 6) 
State Law reference— Bond of judge of probate court, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-7 et seq. 
Secs. 6-157—6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MAGISTRATE COURT 

Sec. 6-181. - Magistrate court created. 
There is hereby created and established for and in the County of Rockdale a magistrate court to be known as the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 1) 
Sec. 6-182. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  Said magistrate court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine cases involving violation of all county ordinances and regulations and to try and dispose of all offenses and offenders against any ordinance adopted by the governing authority of said county. 
(b)  This court and the judge thereof shall have all powers to do all acts which justices of the peace now or may hereafter be authorized to do under the law of Georgia; and shall have jurisdiction as to subject matter to try and to dispose of all cases where under the law subject matter jurisdiction is conferred upon justices of the peace and justice courts; and as to the amount involved therein, the jurisdiction thereover shall extend to all cases wherein the principal amount shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000) or less. All proceedings and procedures, including but not limited to those relative to pleadings, issuance of summonses and warrants, committal hearings, trials, and appeal and certiorari shall be the same as is now or may hereafter be provided for justices of the peace and justice courts under the laws of this state, except as otherwise provided in this act. All trials shall be conducted by the court sitting without a jury. The judge of the magistrate court, upon the filing of a notice of appeal to the superior court, may, upon motion of the prevailing party or on the court's own motion, at any time require that supersedeas bond with good security be given in such amount as the court may deem necessary. Such bond shall not be required if the appellant files with the court an affidavit stating that because of his indigence he is unable to give bond. 
(c)  The court and the judge shall also have jurisdiction and power to conduct trials, receive pleas of guilty or of nolo contendere and to impose sentence upon defendants charged with the violations of the penal provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-2, now or hereafter amended, as if this court were a magistrate's court as provided in that section and upon defendants charged with violating the laws governing the inoculation of dogs against rabies as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq., relating to rabies, as now or hereafter amended, and upon defendants charged with violating the Georgia Boat Safety Act, approved April 19, 1973 (O.C.G.A. § 52-7-1 et seq.), as now or hereafter amended, and the law governing the abandonment of minor children as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 19-10-1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended. Such jurisdiction and power of said court and the judge thereof shall extend over and throughout the whole and entire County of Rockdale. 
(d)  The judge of this court shall have the power to require the posting of cash or surety bonds for appearance in said court and to forfeit the same for nonappearance. 
(e)  This court shall have like powers of jurisdiction in regard to any ordinances, law or regulation adopted by the board of commissioners of Rockdale County, if and when said board may be empowered to adopt such ordinance, laws or regulations. 
(f)  The court shall have the power to vacate a judgment during the term in which it is rendered. 
(g)  Jurisdiction of this court shall not extend to nor include those offenses related to traffic upon the public roads, streets, and highways of this state as defined under the provisions of an act known as the "Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways," approved January 11, 1954 (1953 Ga. Laws, Nov.-Dec. Sess., page 556), as now or hereafter amended; or as defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-5-1 [40-6-1] et seq., relating to Uniform Rules of the Road, as now or hereafter amended; or as defined in [Ga.] Code title 68B, known as the "Driver's Licensing Act" [now O.C.G.A. § 40-5-1 et seq.], as now or hereafter amended; or as defined in an act creating a department of public safety, O.C.G.A. § 35-2-1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended; all of which shall remain as now vested in the probate court or probate judge of Rockdale County. 
(h)  Said court shall have such other and further jurisdiction as is hereinafter set forth, and as may from time to time hereafter be granted by law. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 2; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3169; 1980 Ga. Laws, page 3486, § 1; 1983 Ga. Laws, page 3651, § 1) 
Sec. 6-183. - Limitations of prosecution. 
All prosecutions for violation of any county ordinances or regulations shall be commenced within one (1) year next after commission of the offense, and at no time thereafter; except that such period of limitations shall not run so long as the offender or offense is unknown and shall be suspended during such time as such offender may abscond from said county or absent himself therefrom or so conceal himself that he cannot be arrested or summoned to appear before said court. The arrest or service of summons on any such person charging him with such offense shall be deemed the commencement of prosecution for the purpose of this section. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 3) 
Sec. 6-184. - Magistrate ex officio justice of the peace; warrants; commitments. 
The judge of the magistrate court of Rockdale County shall be to all intents and purposes a justice of the peace so far as to enable him to issue warrants for offenses committed within the limits of Rockdale County, either with or without a hearing, which warrants shall be directed to the Sheriff of Rockdale County and his deputies and to all and singular the sheriffs, deputy sheriffs and constables of the State of Georgia; and any one (1) of said officers shall have authority to execute such warrants. Said judge as ex officio justice of the peace shall have the power and authority to commit to the jail of Rockdale County offenders against the laws of the State of Georgia and in bailable cases to admit them to bail for their appearance at the next term of a court of competent jurisdiction to be held in and for the County of Rockdale. Said judge may issue such warrants and commit or admit to bail such persons, all without regard to whether or not such offense is alleged to have been committed within or without the corporate limits of any municipality within Rockdale County. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 4) 
Sec. 6-185. - Judge; appointment; term, vacancies. 
The judge of said magistrate court shall be appointed by the board of commissioners of Rockdale County within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this act; and the first judge so appointed shall serve for a term ending December 31, 1979, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. All judges appointed for terms following the first as hereinabove prescribed shall be appointed by said board for terms of two (2) years and until their successors are appointed and qualified. All vacancies occurring in such office shall be filled in like manner for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 5) 
Sec. 6-186. - Qualifications of judge. 
The judge of said court shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age, a resident of Rockdale County at least two (2) years immediately preceding his appointment, and must have actively practiced law for at least three (3) years in this state immediately before taking office. For the purpose of this act [article], a resident of Rockdale County shall include only those qualified members of the State Bar of Georgia who have steadily maintained a permanent residence in said county as distinguished from a temporary residence, vacation home, summer home, camp, retreat or the like. Such person shaft further be a citizen and taxpayer of Rockdale County, and he shall be ineligible to hold any other public office. Said judge may engage in the practice of law in any court of this state or of the United States during his term of office except the magistrate court of Rockdale County. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 6) 
Sec. 6-187. - Chief magistrate's salary. 
The chief magistrate of the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County shall receive an annual salary equal to 43.5 percent of the base salary of a superior court judge as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 45-7-4, as now or hereafter amended. The base salary of a superior court judge shall mean that salary paid from state funds and shall not include any county supplement or expense reimbursements. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 7; 1990 Ga. Laws (Act No. 955), page 4520, § 1) 
Sec. 6-188. - Clerk; duties and bond. 
Said board of commissioners is further authorized and directed to elect a clerk of said magistrate court, whose duty it shall be to keep a record of all proceedings of said court, to collect all costs, fines and forfeitures, and to remit same on or before the fifteenth day of the following month to the director of finance of Rockdale County or such other person as may be designated by the governing authority of Rockdale County, for deposit in the county depository as general funds of Rockdale County. Said clerk shall further be authorized and empowered to issue summons, subpoenas, rules to forfeit bonds, and such other similar writs as may be by law authorized. Said clerk shall give bond to Rockdale County in, the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the faithful performance of his duties and accounting for all funds, coming into his possession by virtue of his office, and to insure the county against loss of any such funds. Said board may elect a sufficient number of deputy clerks as may be needed, who shall give bond in like manner as the clerk. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 8; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3169; 1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 825), § 2) 
Sec. 6-189. - Qualification and term of clerk. 
Said clerk and any new clerks shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age, shall have been a resident of Rockdale County for at least two (2) years shall be a citizen and taxpayer of Rockdale County and of good moral character. Said clerk and such deputy clerks shall serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners of Rockdale County. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 9) 
Sec. 6-190. - Clerks' compensation. 
The clerk and deputy clerks of said magistrate court shall be paid a salary to be fixed by the board of commissioners of Rockdale County. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 10) 
Sec. 6-191. - Oath of judge and clerk. 
The judge and clerk of said magistrate court shall, prior to the entry upon their duties, take an oath to faithfully administer and discharge the duties of their respective offices in accordance with the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the ordinances of Rockdale County. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 11) 
Sec. 6-192. - Terms and place of holding magistrate court. 
Said magistrate court shall be held in the county seat and shall be held at such regular or special terms as may be designated by the judge thereof, and to be no less than twice each month, and at such hour or hours of the day or evening as shall be fixed by the judge. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 12) 
Sec. 6-193. - Acting magistrate. 
The judge of said magistrate court shall have the authority to designate a practicing attorney having the qualifications herein established for the judge of said court as acting magistrate to serve in his place during his absence or disability; and if the judge of said court should fail to do so after being absent or disabled for a period of seven (7) days or more, the Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County, by majority vote, may designate an acting magistrate to serve in his place; the compensation of such acting magistrate to be fixed by said board of commissioners. In the event said magistrate absents himself from the duties of his office unjustifiably and for an unreasonable period of time to be adjudged of by the board of commissioners, said board may in its discretion reduce the compensation payable to said magistrate by an amount sufficient to pay the compensation of such acting magistrate. Any such acting magistrate, while so serving, shall have the same power and authority herein vested in the judge of said magistrate court. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 13) 
Sec. 6-194. - Fines and punishment. 
Upon conviction of violation of any of the ordinances, rules or regulations set forth by the governing authority of Rockdale County, the magistrate or judge of said court may punish such offender by imposing a fine not in excess of that prescribed by the ordinance or regulation violated and in no event to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any single offense, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not in excess of that prescribed by the ordinance or regulation violated and in no event to exceed thirty (30) days for any single offense, or by any one (1) or more of these punishments in the discretion of the judge of said magistrate court. The magistrate or judge of said court, at his sole discretion, may require such offender to provide public service to Rockdale County in lieu of imprisonment in the county jail. The sheriff of Rockdale County shall provide supervision for offenders performing such public service. The sheriff of Rockdale County shall receive, confine, feed and care for prisoners sentenced by said magistrate court to imprisonment in the county jail in the same manner as persons charged with an indictable offense under general laws of this state and subject to the same penalties for his refusal to receive and take charge of such persons; except that prisoners received under sentence from said magistrate court may be confined separately and apart from other classes of inmates of said jail as the sheriff may, in his discretion, provide and as general laws may require. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 14; 1982 Ga. Laws, page 4040, § 1; 1983 Ga. Laws, page 3651, § 2) 
Sec. 6-195. - Alternative sentences. 
Said magistrate court shall have the power and authority to impose fines on persons convicted of any offense within the jurisdiction of said court with the alternative of imposing other punishment allowed by law in case said fines are not paid; and to commit prisoners to the Rockdale County jail. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 15) 
Sec. 6-196. - Sentence; reduction and review. 
The judge of said magistrate court shall have the authority to reduce any sentence or fine imposed by him prior to the payment of said fine and execution of said sentence but shall not have the right to grant a new trial. Review of any final order or judgment of said magistrate court shall be by certiorari to the Superior Court of Rockdale County in the manner prescribed by law for certiorari from justice courts and a supersedeas may be obtained by compliance with the procedure set forth in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-20 and the giving of bond as provided therein, which bond shall be made to Rockdale County. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 16) 
Sec. 6-197. - Contempt. 
The judge of said magistrate court shall have the power to punish for contempt by fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding ten (10) days, either or both, or any part thereof, in the discretion of said judge. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 17) 
Sec. 6-198. - Executions for fines. 
Execution may issue immediately, where any fine is imposed by the judge of said magistrate court, to be levied upon the goods, chattels, lands and tenements of the person fined, if the fine is not immediately paid, which execution shall bear teste in the name of the judge of said court, be signed by the clerk of said court and be directed to the sheriff of Rockdale County, and to all and singular the sheriffs, deputy sheriffs and constables of the State of Georgia. The sheriff of Rockdale County and such deputies of the sheriff's department as may be appointed in writing by said sheriff, not to exceed five (5) in number, shall be ex officio constables for the purpose of levy and sale under all executions issued pursuant to this act, and such executions shall be levied and sales thereunder conducted and proceeds thereof distributed in accordance with the laws governing levy and sale in justice of the peace courts of this state, except that the judge of said magistrate court shall be deemed to be ex officio justice of the peace in whose court all such levies and sales shall proceed; and said magistrate shall be empowered to hear and dispose of all questions and claims arising therefrom, whether the same are made by said chief of police, ex officio constables or other officers to whom such executions are directed. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 18) 
Sec. 6-199. - Costs. 
In each case of conviction in said magistrate court, the costs assessable shall be five dollars ($5.00). Costs shall go into the general fund of the county for general county purposes. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 19) 
Sec. 6-200. - Peace officers' annuity and benefit fund. 
All fines and forfeitures collected in said magistrate court shall be subject to assessment in the amount prescribed by law for contribution to the peace officers' annuity and benefit fund as in cases tried in municipal courts of this state. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 20) 
Sec. 6-201. - Rights of accused. 
Any person charged with an offense against any ordinance, rule or regulation of said county shall be informed by summons in writing served on him of the nature of the course of his accusation; shall have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his behalf; shall have a speedy trial before the judge of said magistrate court; shall be confronted with the witnesses against him and have the privilege of cross examination, as in the superior courts of this state; and shall have the privilege of defending himself, by counsel or by himself, or both, as to him shall seem proper. No one shall be fined or punished without full opportunity of being heard in his own defense. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 21) 
Sec. 6-202. - Issuance of summons. 
Upon information known to or complaint lodged with the sheriff or any deputy of Rockdale County, Georgia, or the judge or clerk of said magistrate court any person, within the limits of Rockdale County charged with the violation of any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of said county within the jurisdiction of said court may be brought before said magistrate court to answer said charge by service upon said person of a summons from said court setting forth the nature of the charge and the time and place of the hearing. Said summons shall be signed by the judge, clerk, sheriff or deputy sheriff or code enforcement officer issuing same; and a copy thereof shall be served upon the accused either personally or by leaving the copy at his place of residence. In addition, the judge of the magistrate court may appoint, by written order, such other person or persons as he may determine in his sound discretion to be necessary to sign and issue summons. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 22; 1979 Ga. Laws, page 3169; 1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 825), § 3) 
Sec. 6-203. - Issuance of subpoenas. 
Said court shall have the authority to compel the attendance before any of its sessions of witnesses within the limits of Rockdale County by service upon such witnesses of a subpoena from said court directed to the witness, stating the time and place of the trial and the parties to the case and which shall be served upon said witness either personally or by leaving the copy at his place of residence. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 23) 
Sec. 6-204. - Punishment for contempt in failing to answer summons or subpoena. 
Said court shall have power to punish as for contempt of court any person failing or refusing to obey any summons or subpoena served upon him as provided in the preceding sections, within the limits hereinbefore prescribed for punishment for contempt. The cause may be continued to such time as the judge may direct, and the court shall issue an order requiring the sheriff or deputy sheriffs of Rockdale County to arrest the offender and bring him before the court to answer the contempt; and it shall be the duty of such officer to arrest such person and to keep such person in custody until he is brought before the court unless he gives bond for his appearance at the time appointed for further hearing, as provided by law. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 24) 
Sec. 6-205. - Facsimile signature. 
The name of the clerk of said magistrate court, required on subpoenas and other papers, may be printed or stamped on such papers, which shall be in compliance with law and shall have the same force and effect as if written thereon by the clerk. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 25) 
Sec. 6-206. - Arrests; bonds and forfeiture. 
When an arrest is made for the violation of any county ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation whether under a warrant or not, the arresting officer shall carry the person arrested before said magistrate court where the same shall be disposed of as other cases of arrest not under warrant. Provided, however, that any arresting officer shall have authority to release any person arrested for violation of any ordinance of said county upon such person giving a bond payable to Rockdale County in an amount and surety to be approved by the Sheriff of Rockdale County or as directed by the judge of said magistrate court, conditioned for the appearance of such person before the magistrate court at the time and place specified in said bond and from time to time until he or she shall have been tried for the offense for which charged. Upon the failure of the appearance of any person so released under bond to appear for trial at the time named therein, such bond shall be forfeited and a rule nisi shall be issued by the clerk of said magistrate court requiring such person or the surety upon such bond to show cause before said court, at a time not less than 10 days from the date of such rule nisi, why such bond should not be absolutely forfeited. Such rule nisi shall be served by any officer authorized to serve summons and subpoenas of said court upon the surety or sureties on such bond at least five (5) days before the return day thereof, and such service may be made personally or by mailing a written notice by registered or certified mail to such person or persons at their last known address. At the return time if no good and sufficient cause is shown, the judge shall proceed to forfeit said bond absolutely, and execution shall issue for the full amount, thereof, and all costs against the principal and surety thereon or such of them as shall have been served. Such executions shall be delivered by the clerk of the said magistrate court to the Sheriff of Rockdale County for collection as in cases of executions for fines. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 26) 
Sec. 6-207. - Cash deposit in lieu of bond. 
When an arrest is made for the violation of any county ordinance, regulation, rule or resolution, the party arrested, at his sole discretion, may deposit with the Sheriff of Rockdale County a sum of money to insure [ensure] his appearance in said magistrate court for trial, said deposit to be in lieu of bond and not to be less than $50.00 or more than $200.00 and said party shall be released as if bond had been given. Where such cash deposit has been made in lieu of bond and the person making such deposit shall fail to appear before said court at the time appointed, said sum of money shall be forfeited by the owner thereof and paid over by the Sheriff of Rockdale County to the county depository as general funds of said county, without necessity of any further notice or proceedings. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 27) 
Sec. 6-208. - Acceptance of forfeiture in lieu of fine. 
In all cases of forfeiture of bonds or cash deposits in lieu of bond, the judge of the magistrate court shall be authorized, in his discretion, to accept the payment of such forfeitures in lieu of fines, and as final disposition of said charges. If the same is not so accepted, such forfeitures shall not be a bar to further proceedings against such offenders for the violations charged. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 28) 
Sec. 6-209. - General powers of court. 
Said magistrate court is hereby granted all general powers heretofore or hereafter granted by any act of the General Assembly of Georgia to any police or magistrate court in this State, municipal or otherwise. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 29) 
Sec. 6-210. - General powers of board. 
The Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County shall have the full power and authority to pass any and all ordinances, rules and regulations necessary and proper to carry out the provisions of this act and to expend any public funds for such purposes. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 30) 
Sec. 6-211. - Small claims. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established a Small Claims Division of the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County. Said division shall have civil jurisdiction in cases ex contractu in which the demand or value of the property involved does not exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); said jurisdiction to be concurrent with the jurisdiction of any other court or courts now or hereafter established in said county. Said jurisdiction shall include the power to issue writs of garnishment and attachment and, in addition to the powers herein specifically granted, all the powers granted to justices of the peace by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The judge of the magistrate court shall serve as judge of the small claims division. 
(c)  The clerk of the magistrate court shall serve as clerk of the small claims division. 
(d)  (1)  Actions in the small claims division shall be commenced by the filing of a statement of claim, including the last known address of the defendant, in concise form and free from technicalities. The plaintiff or his agent shall verify the statement of claim by oath or affirmation in the form herein provided, or its equivalent, and shall affix his signature thereto. At the request of any individual, the judge or clerk may prepare the statement of claim and other papers required to be filed in an action. 
(2)  A copy of the verified statement of claim, together with a notice of hearing in the form hereinafter prescribed, shall be served on the defendant, and such service shall be sufficient to give the court jurisdiction in the premises. Service of said notice shall be made only within the county. Said service shall be made by any official or person authorized by law to serve process in the superior court, by a duly qualified bailiff of the small claims division, by registered or certified mail with receipt, or by any person not a party to, or otherwise interested in, the suit, who is specially appointed by the judge of said division for that purpose. 
(3)  When notice is to be served by registered or certified mail, the clerk or the judge shall enclose a copy of the statement of claim; the verification and the notice in an envelope address to the defendant at his last known address; prepay the postage from monies collected for that purpose, and mail the same forthwith, noting the date of mailing on the record. When a receipt therefor is returned, or if the sealed envelope in which said notice was mailed to the defendant by registered or certified mail is returned to the sender by United States postal authorities marked "refused," giving the date of refusal, and such notation of refusal is signed or initialed by a United States postal employee or United States mail carrier to whom refusal was made, then the clerk, or judge shall attach the same to the original statement and notice of claim, or otherwise file it as a part of the record in the case, and it shall be prima facie evidence of service upon the defendant. 
(4)  When served by a private individual, as provided above, such individual shall make proof of service by affidavit, showing the time and place of such service on the defendant. 
(5)  Upon the failure of the defendant to appear, the plaintiff shall be entitled to judgment by default, without further proof, when the claim of the plaintiff is for a liquidated amount. 
(6)  Said notice shall include the date, hour and location of the hearing, which date shall not be less than ten (10) nor more than thirty (30) days from the date of the service of said notice; provided, however, that where service is made by registered or certified mail, the date of mailing shall be the date of service. 
(e)  A docket shall be maintained in which every proceeding and ruling had in each case shall be indicated. 
(f)  (1)  The plaintiff, when he files his claim, shall deposit the sum of thirty-six dollars and fifty cents ($36.50) with the court, which sum shall cover all costs of the proceeding, including the cost of service of the notice. The deposit of cost in cases of attachment, garnishment or trover shall be thirty-six dollars and fifty cents ($36.50). If a party shall fail to pay any accrued cost, the judge shall have the power to deny said party the right to file any new case while such costs remain unpaid and, likewise, shall have the power to deny such litigant the right to proceed further in any pending case. The award of court costs, as between the parties, shall be in the discretion of the judge, and such costs shall be taxed in the cause at his discretion. 
(2)  Whenever a claim affidavit and bond is filed by a third party claiming personal property that has been attached or levied upon under an attachment or execution issued from the small claims division, the levying officer shall forthwith return the same to said division of the magistrate court, and the issues raised by such claim affidavit shall be heard and determined by the judge of said small claims division. The same rules of practice and procedure shall apply as in cases of affidavits of illegality. All attachment proceedings shall be tried by the judge and without a jury. 
(g)  (1)  The trial shall be conducted on the day set for the hearing, or at such later time as the judge may set. Immediately prior to the trial of any case, the judge shall make an earnest effort to settle the controversy by conciliation. If the judge fails to induce the parties to settle their differences without a trial, he shall proceed with the hearing on its merits. 
(2)  The judge shall conduct the trial in such manner as to do substantial justice between the parties according to the rules of substantive law. All rules and regulations relating to pleading, practice and procedure shall be liberally construed so as to administer justice. 
(3)  If the plaintiff fails to appear, the suit may be dismissed for want of prosecution, the defendant may proceed to a trial on the merits, or the case may be continued as the judge may direct. If both parties fail to appear, the judge may continue the case, order the same dismissed for want of prosecution, or make any other just and proper disposition thereof as justice may require. 
(h)  If any defendant has any claim against the plaintiff, the judge may require a statement of setoff to be filed, or same may be waived. If the plaintiff requires time to prepare his defense against such claim, the judge may continue the case for such purpose. If any defendant has any claim against the plaintiff which exceeds the jurisdiction of the division, he may use a part thereof to offset the claim of the plaintiff. 
(i)  When the judgment is to be rendered and the party against whom it is to be entered requests it, the judge shall inquire fully into the earnings and financial status of such party and shall have full discretionary power to stay the entry of judgment, to stay execution, and to order partial payments in such amounts, over such periods, and upon such terms as shall seem just under the circumstances and as will assure [ensure] a definite and steady reduction of the judgment until it is finally and completely satisfied. 
(j)  The judge of said small claims division shall not be obligated to collect such deferred partial payments on judgments so rendered but, if the plaintiff so requests, he may do so at the expense of the plaintiff for clerical and accounting costs incurred thereby. 
(k)  The Judge of the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County may, from time to time, make rules for a simple, inexpensive and speedy procedure to effectuate the purposes of this act [article] and shall have power to prescribe, modify and improve the forms to be used therein to ensure the proper administration of justice and to accomplish the purposes hereof. 
(l)  The Sheriff of Rockdale County and his deputies shall serve summons, make levies and sales, and serve as bailiffs of said small claims division. 
(m)  A judgment of said small claims division shall become a lien on both the real and personal property of a defendant, regardless of where such property is situated within the state. Said judgment shall become a lien at the time an execution based upon such judgment is filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court for said county and the entry thereof is made by the clerk in the general execution docket for said county. 
(n)  Appeals may be had from judgments returned in the Small Claims Division of the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County to the superior court and the same provisions now provided for by general law for appeals, contained in O.C.G.A. title 5, to the superior court, shall be applicable to appeals from the small claims division to the superior court, the same to be a de novo appeal. 
(o)  Until otherwise provided by the rules of the court, the statement of claim, verification, and notice shall be in the following form, or equivalent form, and shall be in lieu of any forms now employed and of any form of summons now provided by law: 
"Small Claims Division of the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County 
_______ Georgia 
_____ Plaintiff 
_____ Address 
vs. 
_____ Defendant 
Statement of Claim 
(Here the plaintiff or, at his request, the court will insert a statement of the plaintiff's claim and, if the action is on a contract, either express or implied, the original statement of the plaintiff's claim which is to be filed with the court may be verified by the plaintiff or his agent as follows:) 
State of Georgia 
County of _______ 
___________ being first duly sworn on oath, says the foregoing is a just and true statement of the amount owning by defendant to plaintiff, exclusive of all setoffs and just grounds of defense. 
_____ Plantiff (or Agent) 
Sworn and subscribed before me 
this ___ day of ________ 20___. 
_____ Notary Public (or Attesting Official) 
Notice. 
TO: _____ Defendant 
   _____ Home Address   or 
   _____ Business Address 
You are hereby notified that _______ has made a claim and is requesting judgment against you in the sum of _______ dollars ($_______), as shown by the foregoing statement. The court will hold a hearing upon this claim on _______ at _______.m. at (address of court). 
You are required to be present at the hearing in order to avoid a judgment by default against you. 
If you have witnesses, books, receipts or other writings bearing on this claim, you should bring them with you at the time of hearing. 
If you wish to have witnesses summoned, see the court at once for assistance. 
If you admit the claim, but desire additional time to pay, you must come to the hearing in person and state the circumstances to the court. 
You may come with or without an attorney. 
_______  Judge-Clerk of the Small Claims Division of the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County. (Seal)." 
(p)  All office space, courtroom facilities, forms, docket books, file jackets, filing cabinets, materials, equipment and supplies required by this act [article], or necessary for the efficient operation of said court, shall be furnished by the board of county commissioners. They shall also provide a suitable room in the courthouse for the holding of said court. 
(q)  Said small claims division shall have no designated terms at state periods. The judge thereof shall, in each instance, set dates for all hearings and trials in each type of case. He shall also designate the time or times for the return of attachments and executions. A garnishee shall be required to file his answer not sooner than thirty (30) days and not later than forty-five (45) days after he is served with summons. Whenever a garnishee shall fail or refuse to answer as provided above, the judge may render a default judgment as provided in O.C.G.A. § 18-4-90; but no judgment shall be rendered against a garnishee before a final judgment shall have first been rendered against the defendant. 
(r)  A summons of garnishment may be served by the sheriff or his deputies or by a lawful constable. Whenever service is made in person by a court officer, as aforesaid, such officer shall enter his return of service either on the back of the original garnishment affidavit or the attachment writ, as the case may be, or such entry of service in the case of attachment may be made on a separate paper and attached to the writ of attachment. 
(s)  The fees of the bailiff or sheriff for the execution of a fi. fa. shall be five dollars ($5.00), plus a reasonable amount for drayage, to be determined by the judge of the small claims division. The rate of commission on all judicial sales shall be ten (10) percent of the first two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and five (5) percent on all sums over than amount, with a minimum of five dollars ($5.00). 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 31; 1983 Ga. Laws, page 3651, § 3) 
Sec. 6-212. - Operations; funds. 
Funds for operation of court shall be paid out of the general funds of Rockdale County. All expenses necessary for the efficient operation of said court, including but not limited to the salary of the judge and solicitor, salaries of clerical assistants, salaries of the court reporter when authorized by the judge of said court, supplies, materials, furniture, furnishings, equipment, and any other expenditure necessary or needful for carrying into effect and maintaining this court shall be paid by the governing authority of Rockdale County. 
(1978 Ga. Laws, page 3907, § 32) 
Secs. 6-213—6-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC DEFENDER[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Legal defense of indigents, O.C.G.A. § 17-12-1 et seq. 

Sec. 6-241. - Office created; appointment; term. 
The senior judge of the Rockdale Judicial Circuit, or in his absence, the acting senior judge, is hereby authorized and directed to appoint a Public Defender for Rockdale County to represent indigent persons of said county in criminal proceedings involving the violation of state laws. The public defender must be licensed to practice law in this state and must be competent to counsel and defend a person charged with crime. The public defender shall be appointed for an initial term to serve until July 1, 1975, and until his successor is appointed and qualified, and thereafter the public defender shall be appointed for subsequent terms of two (2) years, beginning from the date of his appointment, and until his successor is appointed and qualified. The person appointed as public defender shall be authorized to engage in the private practice of law, both civil and criminal, while serving as public defender. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2685, § 1) 
Sec. 6-242. - Compensation; expenses; county to pay. 
(a)  The Public Defender for Rockdale County shall be compensated in the amount [as prescribed by law] which shall be payable monthly from the funds of Rockdale County. The public defender shall not be authorized to receive any fees provided by law for the defense of indigent defendants in addition to the compensation provided for herein. 
(b)  The necessary operating expenses of the office of the Public Defender of Rockdale County, expressly including the compensation of all personnel and employees, shall be paid from any of the funds of Rockdale County available for such purposes. All supplies, materials, furnishings, furniture and utilities as may be reasonably required in the discharging the official duties of said office shall be furnished by the county and paid from any funds of the county available for such purposes. The determination of such requirements shall be at the sole discretion of the governing authority of Rockdale County. 
(c)  For each fiscal year the governing authority of Rockdale County shall include in the annual budget of said county for the operation of the courts of said county an amount sufficient to pay the compensation and other expenses of the public defender as provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2685, § 2; 1977 Ga. Laws, page 2846) 
Sec. 6-243. - Indigency defined; perjury. 
(a)  As used in this act [sections 6-241 through 6-245], indigent person means a person who is unable, without undue hardship, to employ the legal service of an attorney or defray the necessary expenses of legal representation, determined as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The Superior Court of Rockdale County shall prescribe a standard of indigency to, govern the determination of indigency by the courts within said county. Said superior court shall also prescribe the requirements for a proper showing of material factors relating to ability to pay for legal services and the proper form and authentication thereof. In establishing a standard of indigency, said superior court shall consider such factors as income, property owned, expenses, outstanding obligations, and the number and ages of dependents. Release on bail shall not necessarily preclude a person from being indigent nor shall it be necessary that a person be destitute or a pauper to be indigent. The determination of indigency under this section should be made at the time of arraignment or prior thereto if requested by said indigent. 
(c)  If, in a proceeding to determine indigency under this section, any person makes a false statement, under oath, concerning any material factor related to his or another's ability to pay for legal services, it shall constitute the crime of perjury and be punishable as such. 
(d)  To the extent that a person covered hereunder is able to provide for the employment of an attorney, the other necessary services and facilities of representation and court costs, the said superior court may order him to provide for this payment or reimbursement. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2685, § 3) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-244. - Reports. 
The public defender shall submit an annual report to the governing authority of Rockdale County showing, the number of persons represented under this act, the crime involved and the outcome of each case. A copy of the report shall also be submitted to each court having criminal jurisdiction in said county. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2685, § 4) 
Sec. 6-245. - Construction. 
The protections provided by this act [sections 6-241 through 6-245] shall not be construed to exclude any other protections otherwise required for the defense of indigent defendants. 
(1975 Ga. Laws, page 2685, § 5) 
Editor's note— The Rockdale-Newton Counties Public Defender's Office was abolished by 1975 Ga. Laws, page 2699, and all cases, papers, records and other property were transferred to the Public Defender of Rockdale County. 
Chapter 10 - GAME AND FISH 

Sec. 10-1. - Seine fishing and wire fish baskets allowed. 
(a)  It shall be lawful for the citizens of Rockdale County to use wire fish baskets in the waters and streams of said county, during the months of July and August of each year, provided, that such baskets are constructed of wire of not less than one and one-half (1½) inch mesh. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and impermissible for citizens of said county to seine in the waters and streams of Rockdale County, during the months of July and August of each year. 
(1933 Ga. Laws, page 654, §§ 1, 2) 
State Law reference— Use of minnow seines, O.C.G.A. § 27-4-6. 
Chapter 18 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 18-1. - Confinement of minors in private institutions. 
(a)  No minor from a county or jurisdiction other than Rockdale County shall be placed in any private institution in Rockdale County, unless the written consent of the judge of the juvenile court of Rockdale County shall have first been obtained. 
(b)  Any person in charge of any such institution who accepts custody or guardianship of a minor in violation of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(1962 Ga. Laws, page 3170, §§ 1, 2) 
Chapter 22 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SENIOR CITIZENS' HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION 

Sec. 22-31. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Act [article], the term: 
(1)  Ad valorem taxes for educational purposes means all ad valorem taxes for educational purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the Rockdale County School District, but not including taxes to retire school bond indebtedness. 
(2)  Homestead means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
(3)  Senior citizen means a person who is 65 years of age or over. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 5351, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-32. - Grant of exemption. 
(a)  Each resident of the Rockdale County School District who is a senior citizen or who is permanently disabled is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Rockdale County School District ad valorem taxes for educational purposes in the amount specified in this section. The exemption granted by this section shall not exceed the following amounts of the assessed value of the homestead for the taxable years beginning with the following dates: 

 
(b)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided for in subsection (a) of this section as being permanently disabled, the person claiming such exemption shall be required to obtain a certificate from not more than three physicians licensed to practice medicine under O.C.G.A. § 43-34-3 et seq., relative to medical practitioners, as now or hereafter amended, certifying that in the opinion of such physician or physicians such person is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (a) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an affidavit with the tax commissioner of Rockdale County giving the person's age, or if permanently disabled, the certificate or certificates required by subsection (b) of this section, and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such owner is entitled to such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 5351, § 2) 
Sec. 22-33. - Application forms. 
The tax commissioner of Rockdale County or the designee thereof shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by this Act [article] and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 5351, § 3) 
Sec. 22-34. - Renewal of exemption. 
The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper affidavit and certificate or certificates, if disabled, as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of section 2 of this Act [subsections 22-32(b) and (c)], it shall not be necessary to make application and file such affidavit and certificate thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act [article] to notify the tax commissioner of Rockdale County or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 5351, § 4) 
Sec. 22-35. - Exemption not to apply to or affect state taxes, municipal taxes or county taxes. 
The exemption granted by this Act [article] shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, municipal taxes, or county taxes for county purposes. The homestead exemption granted by this Act [article] shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption applicable to Rockdale County School District ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 5351, § 5) 
Sec. 22-36. - When applicable. 
The exemption granted by this Act [article] shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1993, in the manner and in the amount specified in section 1 of this Act [section 22-31]. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 5351, § 6) 
Sec. 22-37. - Eligibility of certain persons. 
Any person who as of January 1, 1992, has applied for and is eligible for the $20,000.00 homestead exemption from Rockdale County taxes for school purposes granted by that local constitutional amendment found at 1980 Ga. Laws, page 2215; Resolution Act No. 227; House Resolution No. 578-1550 shall be eligible for the exemption granted by this Act [article] without applying therefor. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 5351, § 7) 
Sec. 22-38. - Repeal of constitutional amendment. 
That local constitutional amendment found at 1980 Ga. Laws, page 2215; Resolution Act No. 227; House Resolution No. 578-1550, granting a $20,000.00 homestead exemption from Rockdale County taxes for school purposes, which local constitutional amendment was continued in effect as statutory law pursuant to Ga. Const. art. VIII, § II, ¶ IV is repealed in its entirety effective at the last moment of December 31, 1992. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 5351, § 8) 
Sec. 22-39. - Election. 
Unless prohibited by the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, the election superintendent of Rockdale County shall call and conduct an election as provided in this section for the purpose of submitting this act [article] to the electors of the Rockdale County School District for approval or rejection. The election superintendent shall conduct that election on the date of and in conjunction with the statewide general election in November 1992, and shall issue the call therefor not less than 30 nor more than 45 days prior to that date. The superintendent shall cause the date and purpose of the election to be published once a week for two weeks immediately preceding the date thereof in the official organ of Rockdale County. The ballot shall have written or printed thereon the words: 

 
All persons desiring to vote for approval of the Act shall vote "Yes," and those persons desiring to vote for rejection of the Act shall vote "No." If more than one-half of the votes cast on such question are for approval of the Act, then Sections 1 through 7 [sections 22-31 through 22-37] shall become of full force and effect immediately and shall be applicable to the taxable years specified in Section 1 [section 22-31] of this Act and Section 8 [section 22-38] shall become effective as specified in that section. If Section 1 through 8 of this Act [sections 22-31 through 22-38] are not so approved or if the election is not conducted as provided in this section, Sections 1 through 8 of this Act [sections 22-31 through 22-38] shall not become effective and this Act shall be automatically repealed on the first day of January immediately following that election date. 
The expense of such election shall be borne by Rockdale County. It shall be the superintendent's duty to certify the result thereof to the Secretary of State. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 5351, § 9) 
Sec. 22-40. - Effective date. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 9 of this Act [section 22-39], this Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
(1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 722), page 5351, § 10) 
Chapter 26 - WATERWAYS 

Sec. 26-1. - Obstructions in streams; removal; penalties; whose duty. 
(a)  All landowners and [land]holders in Rockdale County, Georgia, shall, during the months of July, August and September in each year, remove from the running streams of water upon or through their respective lands, all obstructions, including trash, trees, timber, rafts and other obstructions, except dams erected for the purpose of running machinery, or fish ponds, which are excepted from the operation of this act [section]. 
(b)  Should any landowner in said county refuse to remove the obstructions provided for in the first section of this act [subsection (a) above], by the first day in October in each year, then and in that event it shall be lawful for any adjoining landowner, after first giving said landowners so failing or refusing to comply with this act [section] 10 days' notice of his intention to do so, to enter upon the lands of the owner so failing and refusing to do so, and to remove such obstructions, or have the same removed, and that the owner of such lands shall be liable to pay the party removing or having such obstructions removed reasonable compensation for such labor, for which he shall have lien on all of the property of the party so refusing, to rank as and be in force as other laborer's liens are now in force under the law, and be enforced in the same way. 
(c)  Whenever a running stream is the dividing line between two (2) landowners, and either of said landowners shall fail or refuse to join the other in removing the obstructions provided for in the first section of this act [subsection (a) above] or shall fail or refuse to remove them from his half of said stream, it shall be lawful for the other, after giving the notice required in the second section of this act [subsection (b) above], to enter and remove, or have removed such obstructions, and shall be entitled to reasonable compensation for one-half of such labor, to be collected as provided in the second section of this act [subsection (b) above], and shall have the same lien as is herein provided for. 
(d)  Whenever the owner of any land in the said County of Rockdale shall cut or dig any ditch or drain to the line of an adjoining landowner, and it shall be necessary to extend such ditch or drain through the lands of such adjoining landowner to a proper outlet in order to drain his lands, and such adjoining landowner refuses to extend such ditch or drain or to allow the same to be extended through his or her lands, then and in that event it shall be lawful for the parties desiring to extend such drain through the lands of such adjoining landowner to a proper outlet, to do so at his expense, and if the lands of such landowners be injured or decreased in value by reason of such ditch or drains, the party so injured shall be paid reasonable compensation by the party ditching or draining through said lands, the amount to be determined by three (3) freeholders of said county, to be appointed by the ordinary [judge of the probate court] thereof. 
(e)  This shall not apply to any stream where it is the dividing line between Rockdale and another county. 
(1908 Ga. Laws, page 346, §§ 1—5) 
State Law reference— Diversion, obstruction or pollution of steam as trespass, O.C.G.A. § 51-9-7. 
Sec. 26-2. - Yellow River a lawful fence. 
The Yellow River, beginning at Brown's Bridge, in Newton County, and continuing through Rockdale County to the DeKalb line, shall be a lawful fence. 
(1876 Ga. Laws, page 341) 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLES - ACTS/ORDINANCES 
These tables show the location of the sections of the Related Laws and any amendments thereto. 

 

 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Construction of statutes, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as " The Code of Rockdale County, Georgia," and may so be cited. 
(Code 1978, § 10-1001) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the county commissioners: 
Commissioners, board, board of commissioners, commission. The terms "commissioners," "board," "board of commissioners" and "commission" shall mean the Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County. 
Code, this code. Whenever the terms "Code" and "this Code" are referred to without further qualification, they shall mean the Code of Rockdale County, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
County. The term "county" shall mean the unincorporated area of Rockdale County unless otherwise specifically provided. 
County chairperson. The term "county chairperson" shall mean the chairperson of the board of commissioners. 
County clerk. The term "county clerk" shall mean the county executive assistant or a designee thereof. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
Governing authority, governing body. The terms "governing authority" and "governing body" shall mean the county board of commissioners. 
May. The term "may" is always directory and not mandatory. 
Number. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words used in the plural shall include the singular number. 
Oath. Oath includes affirmation. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." shall mean the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read as the term "and," and the term "and" may be read as the term "or," if the sense requires it. 
Other officials or officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officers, officials, employees, boards, commissions, departments, agencies, etc., by title only, i.e., "county clerk," "sheriff," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officers, officials, employees, boards, commissions, departments, agencies, etc., of Rockdale County, Georgia. 
Person The term "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, societies, trusts, companies, trustees, and bodies politic and corporate, other legal entities, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Shall. The term "shall" is always mandatory and not directory. 
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State. The term "state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall mean the entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense shall include the future as well as the past and present. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1978, § 10-1002) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions regarding definition of street, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of the sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of the sections including the catchlines are amended or reenacted. No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any such catchline or in any heading or title to any part, chapter or article. 
(Code 1978, § 10-1003) 
Sec. 1-4. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the sections. 
Sec. 1-5. - Editor's notes and references. 
The editor's notes, cross references and state law references, and any other reference notes in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to assist the user of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1978, § 10-1004) 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the county commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code, or its application to any persons or circumstances, shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, or their application. The board hereby declares that it would have passed this Code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared illegal, invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Code 1978, §§ 6-3007, 10-1005) 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, the repealed portion may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending the provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: 
"That section _______ of the Code of Rockdale County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: (Set out new provisions in full)." 
(c)  When the board of commissioners desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the Code, which the board of commissioners desires to incorporate into the Code, a section in substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance: 
"Section _______. It is the intention of the governing body and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Rockdale County, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish that intention." 
(d)  When necessary, sections and subsections to the Code may be renumbered by the official codifier for the county to fulfill the intent of the board of commissioners, but all such changes shall be immediately brought to the board of commissioners' attention and approved in advance by the county attorney. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this Code desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1978, § 10-1006) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive parts of permanent and general ordinances passed by the board during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them in a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings, and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated in the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinance sections inserted in the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally change, or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1978, § 10-1007) 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance, rule, regulation or order of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, or whenever in the Code or any ordinance, rule, regulation or order the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of that provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule, regulation or order may be punished by the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County, for each single violation, by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(b)  Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Notwithstanding all other provisions previously established for punishment of violations of this Code, this provision shall prevail. 
(Code 1978, § 10-1008) 
Sec. 1-12. - Applicability of Code. 
The provisions of this Code, unless otherwise clearly specified, shall apply only to the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 1978, § 10-1009) 
Sec. 1-13. - Miscellaneous actions and ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution of the county promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county, or any evidence of the county's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the county; 
(3)  Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners to any person, firm or corporation; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the county; 
(5)  Any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing charges, fees or taxes now due or accrued; 
(6)  Any ordinance or resolution or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance or resolution which is repealed by this Code; 
(7)  Any temporary, special or other uncodified ordinance; 
(8)  Any rezoning ordinance or any ordinance amending a zoning map; 
(9)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the county; 
and all such actions, resolutions and ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect, or as continuing to be repealed, to the same extent as if set out at length in, or repealed by, as the case may be, this Code. 
(Ord. of 10-10-1978, § 3) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Civil emergencies, ch. 26; courts, ch. 30; elections, ch. 34; human relations, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; fees and charges for wastewater system, § 98-91 et seq.; administration of flood damage prevention, § 106-35; administration and enforcement of zoning, § 130-22. 
State constitution references— Counties and municipal corporations, Ga. Const. art. IX; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I. 
State Law reference— County government, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; emergency interim successors to officials, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50; board of commissioners of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20 et seq.; workers' compensation for employees of political subdivisions, O.C.G.A. § 34-9-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS 

Sec. 2-31. - Closed meetings. 
(a)  This section shall apply to the county board of commissioners or any board, commission or other body of the county. 
(b)  Members of any body covered by this section shall be allowed to bring with them in closed meetings of the body any county employees or officers each may deem necessary; provided such persons shall not divulge any information so gained without the permission of the full membership of that body, and to divulge such information otherwise shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1978, § 1-1001) 
State Law reference— Open and public meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Annotation— Legislative committees do not take "official action" and therefore are exempt from the requirements of the "sunshine" law. Coggin v. Davey , 233 Ga. 407, 211 S.E. 2d 708(1975). 
Sec. 2-32. - Procedure for adoption of ordinances. 
(a)  A proposed ordinance may be introduced by any commission member and shall be introduced and read at a regular or special meeting only if the ordinance is listed on the agenda for that meeting; however, this requirement may be waived by a motion unanimously adopted by all commission members. 
(b)  No ordinance may be adopted at the same meeting at which it is introduced; however, this requirement may be waived by a motion unanimously adopted by all commission members in attendance. 
(Code 1978, § 1-1002) 
Secs. 2-33—2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation director, powers and duties, § 70-1. 

Sec. 2-61. - Chief of staff. 
(a)  There is created the position of chief of staff. The chief of staff shall be responsible for internal and external communications aimed at achieving the objectives of the chairperson and the board of commissioners. The chief of staff shall, subject to the direction of the board of commissioners, coordinate departmental functions involved in implementing initiatives and special projects and in such capacity shall: 
(1)  Serve as the liaison between members of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Facilitate internal communications between department directors and throughout all levels of the organization to focus department efforts on the overall goals and objectives of the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Assist the board of commissioners with strategic planning and assist with outlining and communicating the board's priorities. 
(4)  Monitor and evaluate progress toward goals and objectives of the administration and for the administration; provide members of the board of commissioners with information on the status of county initiatives and projects. 
(5)  Represent the board of commissioners in relationships with various civic or governmental organizations, task forces, boards and commissions. 
(6)  Serve as the designee of the chairperson during his absence. 
(7)  At the request of a member of the board of commissioners conduct research, provide information and facilitate communication concerning matters of concern and interest of the members of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The chief of staff shall be appointed by the board of commissioners and shall be directly responsible to them. The chief of staffs compensation shall be fixed by the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall have exclusive authority to remove the chief of staff. 
(Code 1978, § 1-3001; Ord. No. 0-2006-19, § 1, 6-27-2006; Ord. No. 0-2009-01, § 1, 1-6-2009; Ord. No. 0-2012-08, § 1, 7-10-2012) 
Sec. 2-62. - County attorney. 
(a)  The county attorney, or a designee thereof, shall be the legal advisor and representative of the county and in such capacity shall: 
(1)  Advise any commissioner, the county chairperson or the executive assistant, when thereby requested, upon all legal questions arising in the conduct of county business; 
(2)  Prepare or revise ordinances when so requested by any county commissioner, the county chairperson or the executive assistant and keep the Code of the county up to date and properly indexed; 
(3)  Give official opinions upon any legal matter or question submitted by majority vote of the board of commissioners; 
(4)  Unless otherwise requested by the board, attend all meetings of the board of commissioners, in their entirety for the purpose of giving any legal advice requested by its members; 
(5)  Prepare, or review as to form, all contracts and instruments to which the county is a party and approve, as to form, all bonds required to be submitted to the county; 
(6)  Prepare, when authorized by the board of commissioners, charges and citations or accusations against, and appear in the magistrate court in the prosecution of persons charged with a violation of the county Code or of any county regulations and see to the full enforcement of all civil judgments or decrees rendered or entered in favor of the county; 
(7)  Prepare and file any civil suit or action at law or in equity to secure or protect the county's best interest when so ordered by a resolution of the board of commissioners; 
(8)  Defend any and all suits and actions at law or in equity brought against the county, unless otherwise directed by the board of commissioners; 
(9)  Make immediate report to the board of commissioners of the outcome of any litigation in which the county has an interest; 
(10)  Keep complete and accurate records of the following, which records shall remain the property of the county: 
a.  All suits in which the county had or has an interest, giving the names of the parties, the nature of the action, the disposition of the case or its status, if pending, and the briefs of counsel; and 
b.  All written opinions prepared by the county attorney and all certificates or abstracts of titles furnished by the county attorney to the county, or any department or official thereof; and 
(11)  Render such other legal services as may be required by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  No county official or employee, other than the county attorney or a designee thereof, shall make any offers for the county in settlement of any lawsuit or threatened lawsuit in which the county is a named party or in which a majority of the members of the board of commissioners are named parties in their official capacities. Neither shall any county official nor employee provide any voluntary testimony or information, involving any such lawsuit or threatened lawsuit without the prior approval of the county attorney unless such information is a matter of public record. 
(c)  Unless specifically authorized and otherwise provided by the board of commissioners, no contract or agreement of any kind, including but not limited to leases, deeds, purchases or franchises shall be binding on the county unless the contract or agreement is reduced to writing and approved in advance as to form by the county attorney or a designee thereof. The requirements of this section may be met for form contracts, such as purchase orders, by prior approval of such form by the county attorney or a designee thereof rather than requiring individual approval of each completed form contract. 
(d)  Unless specifically authorized and otherwise provided by the board of commissioners, no ordinance or resolution of the board of commissioners shall be presented for adoption by the board of commissioners without prior approval as to form by the county attorney or a designee thereof. 
(Code 1978, § 1-3002) 
Sec. 2-63. - Judicial papers; procedure upon service. 
(a)  Upon the service of any pleading, complaint, garnishment, summons or any other judicial process upon any appointed or elected official of the county or any of its agents, wherein the interests of the county are at stake in such controversy, the following procedures shall be followed: 
(1)  The person receiving such summons, complaint, pleading, garnishment or other judicial paper shall promptly deliver the summons, complaint, pleading, garnishment or other judicial paper to the executive assistant of the county. The delivery shall be in person and not later than 24 hours after service. The executive assistant shall maintain a log of such papers and shall record therein the style of the pleading process, the date served, the number and nature of the case and the court in which the case is pending. 
(2)  The executive assistant shall then within 24 hours hand deliver the judicial process or papers to the county attorney and shall have the county attorney initial the log evidencing such receipt. 
(b)  Any failure by any elected official or agent of the county to follow the procedures set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall constitute a violation of this Code and such official or agent shall be punished by the magistrate court of the county as provided in section 1-11. 
(c)  The enforcing officer for this section shall be the county attorney. 
(Code 1978, § 1-3003) 
Sec. 2-64. - Rockdale County Civil Service System. 
There shall be a Rockdale County Civil Service System for employees of the county, other than elected officials or persons appointed to positions for specified terms. Said system shall be administered pursuant to such rules and regulations as the board of commissioners may adopt from time to time by ordinance or resolution. Said rules and regulations shall be followed by all county employees except those specifically exempted therein, and said rules and regulations shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amending ordinance of the board of commissioners. Once positions are made subject to the Rockdale County Civil Service System, such positions shall not be removed thereafter from the coverage of the system. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-11, § 2, 3-14-2006) 
Sec. 2-65. - County clerk. 
(a)  There is created the position of county clerk. The county clerk shall be the custodian of the official seal of Rockdale County and all records and official documents of the county which are not assigned to the custody of some other official or employee. Without limitation, the clerk shall maintain the following records: 
(1)  Minutes of all regular and special meetings of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Copies of all current ordinances, as required by subsection (d) of this section. 
(3)  An original, fully executed copy of each contract and other agreement to which the county is a party and which has been approved or ratified by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  An original or copy of each instrument by which the county receives or conveys an interest in real property. 
(5)  A current list of all members of commissions, committees, boards and other authorities appointed by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  On all official documents and instruments executed on behalf of the county, the clerk shall attest the signature of the chairperson or vice-chairperson of the board of commissioners and shall place the official seal of the county thereon. In addition, the clerk shall certify as to the authenticity of copies of the following documents and instruments and shall place the official seal of the county on such certification: 
(1)  Minutes of any meetings of the board of commissioners. 
(2)  An ordinance or resolution duly passed by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Any contract or agreement to which the county is a party, other than real property instruments recorded in the records of the clerk of superior court. 
(c)  The clerk shall prepare an agenda for each regular meeting of the board of commissioners. The clerk shall attend each regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners and shall record on the agenda for such meeting the board's action on each agenda item. 
(d)  The clerk shall maintain a current and complete compilation of the ordinances of the county and shall update such compilation upon each adoption of a new ordinance or amendment of an existing ordinance. 
(e)  The clerk shall be appointed by the chairperson of the board of commissioners and confirmed by the commission. The clerk's compensation shall be fixed by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-19, § 2, 6-27-2006) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 0-2006-19, § 2, adopted June 27, 2006, supplied provisions to be added to the Code as § 2-61. In order to preserve the numbering system of the Code, these provisions have been redesignated as § 2-65 to read as set out herein. 
Sec. 2-66. - Executive assistant to the chairman. 
(a)  There is created the position of executive assistant to the chairman. The executive assistant to the chairman shall be the chief administrative aide to the chairman and shall be responsible to the chairman for the proper administration of the affairs of the county at the direction of the chairman. 
(b)  The executive assistant to the chairman shall be appointed by the chairman and confirmed by the board of commissioners. The executive assistant to the chairman's compensation shall be fixed by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-02, § 1, 2-14-2017) 
Secs. 2-67—2-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Departments and agencies of the county may be created by general state law (see § 2-91), by special state law (see part I, § 2-201), or by ordinance (see grant of authority, part I, § 2-201(b)). Departments of public safety and water and sewer have not been activated. 
Cross reference— Agency and existing departments of emergency management, § 26-36. 
State Law reference— Juvenile proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 15-11-1 et seq.; county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq.; interstate compact on juveniles, O.C.G.A. § 39-3-1 et seq.; probation, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-1 et seq.; county and district departments, boards and directors of family and children services, O.C.G.A. § 49-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-91. - State-established departments and agencies. 
The county departments and agencies established by general state law are: 
(1)  Health department; 
(2)  Department of family and children services; 
(3)  Adult probation agency; and 
(4)  Juvenile agency. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5001) 
Sec. 2-92. - Department of transportation. 
This department shall be composed of a director and any other employees as may be deemed necessary. Subject to the direction of the county chairperson, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the director. Said department shall be responsible for traffic engineering, roads and drainage and the sign shop. 
(Code 1978, §§ 1-5002, 1-5011; Ord. No. 1997-16, § 1, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 3-10-2009; Ord. No. 0-2010-18, § 1, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 2-93. - Emergency services. 
(a)  The existing department of emergency services is hereby renamed the department of fire and rescue. 
(b)  All references in the Code of Ordinances, wherever and in whatever context they may occur, to the emergency services department is hereby amended to read "department of fire and rescue." 
(c)  The functions of performing the services of fire prevention and protection, and communications inclusive of 911 service shall continue to be assigned to and/or performed by the department under its new department designation "the department of fire and rescue." 
(d)  All functions of the county's government previously assigned to and/or performed by the assistant director of the emergency services department are hereby assigned to the director of emergency services. 
(e)  All employees of the emergency services department shall be assigned to the department of fire and rescue, with the exception of the division of animal care and control. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5003; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 2, 3-10-2009; Ord. No. 2015-04, § 1, 4-14-2015) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 46. 
State constitution references— Supplementary powers as to fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1). 
Sec. 2-94. - Department of recreation and maintenance. 
This department shall be composed of a director and any other employees as may be deemed necessary. Subject to the direction of the county chairperson, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the director. Said department shall be responsible for maintenance of facilities, maintenance of vehicles and equipment, parks and recreation, senior services, recycling center, special projects, and animal care and control. All references in the Code or ordinances, wherever and in whatever context they may occur, to the "parks and recreation department" are hereby amended to read "department of recreation and maintenance." 
(Code 1978, § 1-5004; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 3, 3-10-2009; Ord. No. 0-2010-18, § 4, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 2015-04, § 2, 4-14-2015) 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, ch. 70. 
State constitution references— Supplementary powers as to parks and recreation, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 
Sec. 2-95. - Department of planning and development. 
The department [of planning and development] shall be composed of a director and any other employees as may be deemed necessary. Subject to the direction of the county chairperson, the supervision and control of the department is vested in the director. Said department shall be responsible for duties as defined in the unified development ordinance (subpart B of the Code of Rockdale County, Georgia) such as, but not limited to, planning, zoning, business and development relations, permits and licenses, forestry, building and development inspections and code enforcement. This section is hereby further amended to include the division of community compliance that was previously assigned to the department known as recreation and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 0-2010-18, § 2, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 2-96. - Law department. 
A law department is hereby created for the county. The law department shall be composed of a county attorney and any other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the county chairperson, the supervision and control of the law department is vested in the county attorney. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5006) 
Sec. 2-97. - Department of finance. 
A department of finance is hereby created for the county. The department of finance shall be composed of a director and any other employees as may be necessary. Subject to the direction of the county chairperson, the supervision and control of the department of finance is vested in the director. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5007) 
Sec. 2-98. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-05, § 6, adopted Mar. 10, 2009, deleted § 2-98 in its entirety. Former § 2-98 pertained to department of senior services and derived from Code 1978, § 1-5008; and Ord. No. 1997-16, § 3, adopted Oct. 14, 1997. 
Sec. 2-99. - Department of water resources. 
(a)  A department of water resources is hereby created for the county. The department of water resources shall be composed of a director and any other employees as may be deemed necessary. Subject to the direction of the county chairperson, supervision and control of the department of water resources is vested in the director. 
(b)  All references in the Code or ordinances, wherever and in whatever context they may occur, to the "water department" or "water and wastewater department" are hereby amended to read "department of water resources." 
(c)  All functions of the county's government previously assigned to and/or performed by the water department or water and wastewater department are hereby transferred to the department of water resources, and all employees of the department herein abolished are deemed to be employees of the department of water resources with effect from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(d)  All references in the Code, whenever and in whatever context they may occur, to the director of the water department or water and wastewater department are hereby amended to read "director of the department of water resources." 
(Code 1978, § 1-5009; Ord. No. 1997-16, § 4, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 2-100. - Emergency management agency. 
(a)  An emergency management agency is hereby created for the county. The emergency management agency shall be composed of a director and any other employees as may be deemed necessary. Subject to the direction of the county chairperson, supervision and control of the emergency management agency is vested in the director. 
(b)  All references in the Code or ordinances, wherever and in whatever context they may occur, to the "civil defense agency" are hereby amended to read "emergency management agency." 
(c)  All functions of the county's government previously assigned to and/or performed by the civil defense agency are hereby transferred to the emergency management agency, and all employees of the department herein abolished are deemed to be employees of the emergency management agency with effect from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(d)  All references in the Code, whenever and in whatever context they may occur, to the director of the civil defense agency are hereby amended to read "director of the emergency management agency." 
(Code 1978, § 1-5010; Ord. No. 1997-16, § 5, 10-14-1997) 
Sec. 2-101. - Department of human resources. 
(a)  A department of talent management is hereby created for the county. The department of talent management shall be composed of a director and any other employees as may be deemed necessary. Subject to the direction of the county chairperson, supervision and control of the department of talent management is vested in the director. 
(b)  All references in the Code or ordinances, wherever and in whatever context they may occur, to the "department of human resources" are hereby amended to read "department of talent management." 
(c)  All functions of the county's government previously assigned to and/or performed by the department of human resources are hereby transferred to the department of talent management, and all employees of the department herein abolished are deemed to be employees of the department of talent management with effect from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived. 
(d)  All references in the Code, whenever and in whatever context they may occur, to the director of the human resources are hereby amended to read "director of the department of talent management." 
(Code 1978, § 1-5012; Ord. No. 1997-16, § 6, 10-14-1997; Ord. No. 2017-14, § 1, 6-13-2017) 
Cross reference— Human resources, ch. 58. 
Sec. 2-102. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-05, § 7, adopted Mar. 10, 2009, deleted § 2-102 in its entirety. Former § 2-102 pertained to communications department services and derived from Code 1978, § 1-5013. 
Sec. 2-103. - Department of technology services. 
A department of technology services is hereby created for the county. The department of technology services shall be composed of a director and any other employees as may be deemed necessary. Subject to the direction of the county chairperson, supervision and control of the department of technology services is vested in the director. 
(Ord. No. 0-1997-21, § 1, 12-19-1997; Ord. No. 2018-02, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 2-104. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-105. - Department of public relations. 
(a)  The existing department of community affairs and innovative programs is hereby renamed the department of public relations. 
(b)  All references in the Code of Ordinances, wherever and in whatever context they may occur, to the department of community affairs and innovative programs is hereby amended to read "department of public relations." 
(c)  The functions of performing the services of the department of community affairs and innovative programs shall continue to be assigned to and/or performed by the department under its new department designation "the department of public relations". 
(d)  All functions of the county's government previously assigned to and/or performed by the director of community affairs and innovative programs are hereby assigned to the newly designated public information officer and communications director. 
(e)  All employees of the department of community affairs and innovative programs shall be assigned to the department public relations. 
(Ord. No. 0-2005-30, § 1, 12-13-2005; Ord. No. 0-2010-18, § 3, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 0-2017-03, § 1, 3-14-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-03, § 1, adopted March 14, 2017, renamed § 2-105 to read as herein set out. Former § 2-105, was entitled "Department of community relations and innovative programs." 
Sec. 2-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-05, § 4, adopted Mar. 10, 2009, deleted § 2-106 in its entirety. Former § 2-106 pertained to department of geographic information systems and derived from Ord. No. 0-2005-31, § 1, adopted Dec. 13, 2005. 
Secs. 2-107—2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND AUTHORITIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Board of zoning appeals, § 130-23. 
Related laws reference— Boards, commissions and authorities, part I, § 2-231 et seq. 

Sec. 2-131. - State-established boards, commissions and authorities. 
The county boards, commissions and authorities established by general state law and activated in the county are: 
(1)  Board of family and children services; 
(2)  Hospital authority; 
(3)  Board of health; 
(4)  Board of tax assessors; 
(5)  Board of equalization; 
(6)  Board of jury commissioners; 
(7)  Board of registrars; and 
(8)  County development authority. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5021) 
State Law reference— County voter registrars, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-212; county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq.; county and municipal hospital authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-70 et seq.; development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; county boards of tax assessors, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-290; county boards of equalization, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-311; county and district departments, boards and directors of family and children services, O.C.G.A. § 49-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-132. - Medical review board. 
(a)  There is hereby established a medical review board for assisted clients to review cases and procedures for handling cases of indigent patients financially assisted by the county for medical care and to otherwise advise the county chairperson and board of commissioners on indigent patient care. 
(b)  The medical review board shall be composed of five members appointed by the board of commissioners to serve for one year from December 31 or until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  The medical review board members shall serve without pay but shall be paid from county funds their actual and necessary expenses in the performance of their duties. 
(d)  If for any reason a vacancy occurs, the board of commissioners may appoint a new member of the medical review board for the remainder of the term. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5022) 
State Law reference— Supervision and support of paupers, O.C.G.A. § 36-12-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-133. - Board of zoning appeals. 
The county board of adjustment is hereby established. The board of adjustment shall consist of five members appointed and serving pursuant to the provisions of subsection 237-7(b) of the UDO. The powers and duties, officers, meetings, quorum and voting, and other matters governing the board of adjustment shall be as set forth in section 238-7 of the UDO. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5023; Ord. No. 0-2006-32, § 4, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2015-09, § I, 10-13-2015) 
Sec. 2-134. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-35, § 1, adopted December 12, 2017, repealed § 2-134, which pertained to parks and recreation commission and derived from Code 1978, § 1-5024; Ord. No. 0-1999-16, § I, 8-10-1999; Ord. No. 2005-26, § 1, 11-8-2005; Ord. No. 0-2010-18, § 4, 12-14-2010. 
Sec. 2-135. - Planning commission. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Conyers, Georgia. 
Planning commission means the Conyers-Rockdale County Planning Commission. 
(b)  Composition. The planning commission shall consist of seven members. 
(c)  Appointment. Three of the members of the planning commission shall be residents of the unincorporated areas of the county appointed by the county commissioners. Three of the members of the planning commission shall be residents of the city appointed by the city council. The seventh member of the planning commission shall be appointed by the county commissioners one term and then by the city council the following term. 
(d)  Terms. 
(1)  The city council or board of commissioners, in alternate years, shall appoint two members, one of which shall be for a four-year term and the other for a three-year term. The seventh member shall be appointed as in subsection (c) and shall serve a three-year term. 
(2)  No member of the planning commission will be eligible for more than two consecutive terms. 
(3)  Appointments shall expire on July 1 in the last year of the term. 
(e)  Filling vacancies. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the planning commission shall be filed for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. 
(f)  Compensation. All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses, as set forth in a resolution adopted by the city and county, incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(g)  Officers. The planning commission shall elect its chairperson from among its members, the term to be one year with eligibility for reelection. The director of the department of public services and engineering shall designate a secretary from said department. 
(h)  Procedures, meetings. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. Such rules shall be subject to approval of the county board of commissioners. Except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3, all meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public, and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. 
(i)  Staff. The planning commission may work with the state department of community affairs and with city planners and other consultants for such service as it may require. 
(j)  Finances. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing authorities of the city and the county. 
(k)  Powers and duties. From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers, the planning commission shall have the powers, duties and responsibilities to conduct public hearings, request and receive studies and reports from staff, review and make recommendations to the board of commissioners and city council concerning matters brought before them, review and take action on, as appropriate, subdivision plats, and perform those duties and functions set forth in the UDO. The planning commission shall also work within the framework of the joint resolutions regarding the planning commission adopted by the city and county. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5025; Ord. No. 0-2006-32, § 5, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 2-136. - Library board of trustees. 
There is hereby established a city-county library board of trustees. The number of trustees, their terms of office, and manner of appointment shall be provided by agreement with any and all participants therein. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5026) 
Sec. 2-137. - Board of tax assessors; number and term. 
There shall be three members of the board of tax assessors, each of whom shall serve six-year terms and shall be appointed as provided by state law. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5027) 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 86. 
Sec. 2-138. - Animal control board. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Conyers, Georgia. 
(b)  Board created. There is hereby created an animal control board pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(d) of the Dangerous Dog Control Law (O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.). 
(c)  Appointment. Four members of the animal control board shall be residents of the unincorporated areas of the county appointed by the board of commissioners. One member of the animal control board shall be a resident of the city appointed by the city council. 
(d)  Terms. The members of the animal control board shall hold their respective office from July 1 following their appointment. The members of the animal control board shall serve for overlapping terms of three years each. 
(e)  Officers. The animal control board shall elect one of its members as presiding officer, who shall serve for one year or until reelected or a successor is elected and qualified. The animal control board shall appoint a secretary, who may be a county official. 
(f)  Meetings. Meetings of the animal control board shall be held at the call of the presiding officer and at other times as the board may determine. The presiding officer of the animal control board, or a member elected to preside in his absence, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. Except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3, all meetings of the animal control board shall be open to the public. 
(g)  Minutes. The animal control board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the animal control board and shall be a public record. 
(Code 1978, § 1-5028) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
Secs. 2-139—2-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution of the county promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county, or any evidence of the county's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-13(2); any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing charges, fees or taxes now due or accrued saved from repeal, § 1-13(5); taxation, ch. 86. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-171. - Travel expenses and reimbursement. 
(a)  Application of section. This section shall be considered a part of a limitation on each annual county budget and appropriations, and no county budget and appropriations, and no county funds appropriated for travel shall be encumbered or spent in violation of this section. 
(b)  Reimbursement generally. All county officials and employees shall be entitled to reimbursement of any travel expenses personally incurred while on county business provided that such travel expenses are provided for in the county budget and appropriations and the terms and conditions of this section are fulfilled. 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
Authorized travel means travel approved by the authorizing party. 
Authorizing party means the elected official, director, deputy director or department head shall be authorized to approve or disapprove all travel-related requests. 
Business travel means travel for the purpose of conducting official county business. 
Metro-Atlanta area means the counties of Cobb, Douglas, Fayette, Fulton, Gwinnett, DeKalb, Clayton, Rockdale, Henry, Newton and Walton. 
Mileage report statement means a form used to authorize payment for the reimbursement of mileage incurred by use of county employee's personal vehicle. 
Professional/educational travel means travel for the purpose of attending meetings, conferences and training programs for professional growth and development as well as for the mutual benefit of the county. 
Requesting party means any individual who will be reimbursed for those costs incurred while conducting business travel and/or professional/educational travel. 
Travel expense statement means a form used to authorize payment for the reimbursement of professional/educational travel-related expenses. 
Travel-related expenses means expenses incurred for mileage, meals and lodging during professional/educational travel. 
(d)  Guidelines. 
(1)  Decisions as to which travel is authorized begin with the budgetary process. Travel needs must be anticipated and submitted in the budget each year for approval by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  The authorizing party's responsibility is to stay within his budget's travel allocation as approved by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Prior to approving a travel request, the authorizing party is responsible for determining that a sufficient unexpended/unencumbered appropriation remains in the travel budget to reimburse all expected costs of the travel. 
(4)  Requests for travel, travel advances, and actual expense reimbursement shall be authorized as follows: 

 
(5)  Personal items, alcoholic beverages and expenses of family members are not authorized. Travel expense statement must be prepared to reflect only actual expenses essential to the conduct of county business. 
(e)  Professional/educational travel reimbursement. Reimbursement shall be made for actual expenses incurred for conventions, seminars, or other registration fees; reasonable expenses incurred at meetings related to official county business; phone calls, transportation to destination and return or mileage, single occupancy lodging and automobile rental or taxicab expense when overnight lodging is required; and incidentals, such as personal phone calls limited to $5.00 per day. Employees and officials of the county are expected to spend funds prudently. 
(f)  Authorized meal expense reimbursement. The following are provisions for authorized meal expense reimbursement: 
(1)  Meals in connection with authorized attendance at meetings, conventions or conferences. 
(2)  Reimbursement for meals for single-day trips that require the employee to begin their travel before 7:00 a.m., provided that the employee/official returns after 7:00 p.m., and the round trip, supported by odometer readings, is at least 100 miles will be reimbursed for the cost of breakfast and/or dinner at a reasonable amount and not to exceed $25.00 in total. 
(3)  Generally no reimbursement for lunch will be authorized for a single-day trip. 
(4)  Meals for employees engaged in authorized emergency repair or operations substantially beyond their normal duty hours. 
(5)  The requesting party must provide receipts to support expenses incurred for expenses for meals. 
(6)  For trips involving overnight travel, meals will be reimbursed at a reasonable amount and not to exceed $40.00 per day. 
(7)  Meals included in registration fees for professional/educational travel will be subtracted from the amount allowed. 
(8)  Gratuity up to 15 percent of the base cost of the meal is allowed. 
(9)  Some county officials are required to meet with persons of other organizations from whom an exchange of information can be obtained that will prove beneficial to the county. When, in the opinion of the county officials, there has been such an exchange, they may deem it appropriate to pay for the meal. Such meals may be reimbursed pursuant to the following stipulations: 
a.  The requesting party is a county official or department head. 
b.  A receipt is provided. 
c.  An entertainment expense statement is provided with supporting receipts. 
d.  Restaurant name and location is provided. 
e.  Name and affiliation of the person for whom the meal was purchased is provided. 
f.  The purpose of the business discussion. Under no circumstances shall the explanation "business discussion or working lunch" be allowed. The requesting party must make reference to the specific topic/project discussed. Under no circumstances shall expenses accrued as a result of a business meal include costs otherwise prohibited under the terms of this section. 
(g)  Lodging. 
(1)  Lodging shall be allowed for official county business that takes an employee over 50 miles from the Rockdale County Courthouse in Conyers, Georgia. Reimbursements shall be made for expenses incurred for lodging as follows: 
a.  The purpose of the meeting is to conduct official county business or to provide formal training to county employees or county officials. 
b.  The lodging is an integral part of the meeting or training session. 
1.  The meeting or training session takes place away from the employee's or official's regular workplace. 
2.  The chairperson and the director or deputy director approve payment in advance for the lodging. 
3.  Employees are responsible for obtaining all tax exempt certificates prior to travel. The certificates are to be presented to the hotel/motel at the time of check in. 
(2)  When two employees/officials share a room, one employee shall pay and request reimbursement for the full lodging charge. The second employee shall not be entitled to any reimbursement since he did not incur any expense. 
(h)  Travel. 
(1)  Air, rail and bus fare: 
a.  Receipts are required for reimbursement of transportation costs. 
b.  Transportation reservations shall be obtained at the most economical fare available. Any expenses for first class travel or upgrade from the most economical fare shall not be reimbursed. 
(2)  Personal vehicles: 
a.  Any county officials and employees who are required or authorized to use their private automobiles in the performance of their official duties shall be allowed a reimbursement equal to the standard mileage rate allowed by the Internal Revenue Service for income tax deduction purposes. 
b.  All mileage payments are for each mile of necessary travel, provided that: 
1.  Reimbursement for mileage shall not exceed the roundtrip coach airfare of a common carrier; and 
2.  Reimbursement for mileage shall be prohibited for travel by county officials or employees between their usual place of residence and their usual place of work. Parking expenses may be claimed under the category of incidentals and shall include official county automobiles. 
3.  Requested mileage reimbursement must be supported by odometer readings. 
4.  Employees who use their personal vehicles on county business and request mileage reimbursement must prepare a mileage reimbursement statement on at least a monthly basis. 
c.  Rental cars: 
1.  Car rental fees are reimbursable for out-of-state trips only. 
2.  A rental car may be used when it is determined that no other mode of transportation is as economical or practical, (i.e., taxi, subway). 
3.  Rentals shall be limited to "mid-size" auto with standard accessories unless special circumstances dictate a larger vehicle. 
4.  Rentals shall be covered by appropriate insurance as required by applicable state law. 
5.  All county policies/procedures governing the use of vehicles shall apply to rentals. 
6.  Receipts are required for the reimbursement of any rental car costs, including gas. 
(i)  Local ground transportation. 
(1)  Local transportation costs incurred while on out-of-town business will be reimbursed. 
(2)  Receipts for the transportation costs services incurred while on out-of-town business services must be obtained and provided to support reimbursement. 
(j)  Approval of expense reimbursement. 
(1)  Upon returning from an authorized trip, the requesting party shall present to the authorizing party a complete itemization of all weekly trip expenses on a travel expense statement. 
(2)  The authorizing party shall forward the travel expense statement to the department of finance within five working days of receipt. 
(3)  Gas, oil and emergency repairs on county vehicles will be reimbursed when supported by receipts. 
(4)  No claim for reimbursement for travel expense shall be paid unless approved by the responsible official or designee. 
(k)  Expenses for which reimbursement is not available. Expenses for which reimbursement is not available shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fines, penalties and/or forfeitures. 
(2)  Tobacco, alcoholic beverages or other like personal items. 
(3)  Meals or lodging in lieu of other meals and/or lodging the expense of which is included in a convention or other registration fee. 
(4)  Meals or other expenses for persons not employed by the county, except as provided. 
(5)  Any unreasonable or unnecessary expense which may be otherwise permitted under this section as determined by the appropriate elected official or designee. 
(l)  Penalty for false submissions. Any person who knowingly approves or pays or causes to be approved or paid a false or untrue claim shall be punished and civilly liable. 
(m)  Advance allowances; authorization. Officials and employees of the county may receive advance cash allowances covering anticipated, reimbursable expenses to be incurred in the course of all authorized travel on county business. Such advance allowances shall be made upon the prior request of such officials and employees when approved by the appropriate department head where the nature and duration of travel justify such advance or where the failure to make such advance would result in economic inconvenience to such official or employee. Requests for such advances shall be made on a request for voucher form. 
(n)  Advance allowances; accounting, repayment, and liability for failure to repay. Travel advances shall be accounted for by submission of a proper claim and any excess shall be repaid within ten days following the completion of travel. Failure to do so shall render the official or employee receiving such advance personally liable for the full unpaid amount and the county shall thereupon have a prior lien against and a right to withhold all funds payable or to become payable by the county to such official or employee. No advance shall be made to any official or employee who is delinquent in accounting for or repaying a prior advance. Under no circumstances shall any advance be considered as a personal loan to any official or employee and any unauthorized expenditure of any such advance shall be deemed a misappropriation of public funds. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-23, §§ 1, 2, 6-21-2001; Ord. No. 0-2014-01, § 1, 3-11-2014) 
Secs. 2-172—2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BONDS; LOANS 

Sec. 2-191. - General obligation bonds. 
The board of commissioners shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this code or general state law. This bond authority shall be exercised in accordance with the state laws governing bond issuances by counties in effect at the time the issue is undertaken. 
(Code 1978, § 3-3001) 
Sec. 2-192. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the board of commissioners as state law now or hereafter provides. These bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program or venture for which they are issued. 
(Code 1978, § 3-3002) 
Sec. 2-193. - Shortterm notes. 
The county must repay any shortterm loans during the calendar year obtained or as otherwise provided by present or future state law. 
(Code 1978, § 3-3003) 
Secs. 2-194—2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-211. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division shall be: 
(1)  To seek lower costs, better quality and purchase terms for acquisition of goods and services for the county by: 
a.  Seeking standardization of purchasing procedures and processes; 
b.  Encouraging the reduction and eventual elimination of small orders and emergency purchases; 
c.  Encouraging advanced planning; 
d.  Reducing paperwork through combined purchases; 
e.  Encouraging competitive purchasing; and 
f.  Encouraging cooperative, intergovernmental purchasing by departments. 
(2)  To provide budget control and ensure the financial stability of the county. 
(3)  To ensure that the greatest value is received for the tax dollar expended. 
(Code 1978, § 3-5001) 
Sec. 2-212. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency purchases means those purchases made necessary by situations which could not be anticipated by the department or elected official, usually involving life-threatening circumstances or risks of injury, or resulting in work stoppages, undue delay or occurring during nonbusiness hours when the ordinary purchase procedures cannot be followed. 
Equipment means automotive equipment, machinery, construction contracts or other items of a permanent or semipermanent nature, both real and personal. 
Materials and supplies means such items as are normally used or consumed during the current year, and for which a general appropriation has been made. 
Purchasing office means the office designated and maintained pursuant to this Code and the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, §§ 3-5002, 3-5005(a)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-213. - Purchases through purchasing office only; exceptions. 
No officer or employee of the county shall purchase for or on behalf of the county any materials or supplies, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or character or make any contract for materials or supplies or equipment or for services except through the purchasing office. Purchases contrary to this method shall be deemed unauthorized purchases. The county will not be responsible for the payment of any bills submitted for unauthorized purchases. It shall be considered a breach of duty on the part of any officer or employee of the county to make any purchase, or aid and abet the making of any purchase in any other manner than through the purchasing office; however, this section shall not apply to the provision of medical services for prisoners under the care of the sheriff's department or for emergency purchases as defined in section 2-212. 
(Code 1978, § 3-5003) 
Sec. 2-214. - Purchase orders required; exceptions. 
No officer or employee of the county shall request any merchant, dealer or other vendor to deliver goods to the county except on a purchase order from the purchasing office, except in the case of the provision of medical services for prisoners under the care of the sheriff's department or for emergency purchases as defined in section 2-212. 
(Code 1978, § 3-5004) 
Sec. 2-215. - Emergency purchases. 
(a)  Negligence on the part of the department head or elected official to plan properly is not justification for an emergency purchase. 
(b)  If an emergency requiring a purchase occurs during business hours, the department head or elected official shall contact the purchasing office and obtain an emergency purchase order number. The item sought may then be acquired using that number. The emergency purchase order number will be stated to the vendor as evidence that the purchase has been approved, and that number shall be noted on any vendor invoice for the item receiving emergency approval. If the emergency occurs during nonbusiness hours, the department head or elected official shall make the purchase and, immediately upon the resolution of the emergency, a requisition shall be prepared stating the nature of the emergency. The requisition shall be forwarded to the purchase office on the next business day. The requisition shall be accompanied by the purchase receipt and a memorandum from the department head or elected official setting forth the details of the emergency. 
(Code 1978, § 3-5005) 
Sec. 2-216. - Open market purchases. 
Except in cases of emergency, no order shall be issued for the delivery on a contract or open market purchases until it has been determined that there exists a sufficient unencumbered appropriation balance for the budget line item to be charged. 
(Code 1978, § 3-5006) 
Sec. 2-217. - Purchasing procedures. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, all provisions for purchasing materials, supplies, service or equipment to be paid for from county funds shall be contained in either this Code or in the policy for purchasing procedures for the county, which document is fully incorporated herein by reference, copies of which are available to the public in the purchasing office of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 3-5007; Ord. No. 1998-3, § I, 2-24-1998) 
Sec. 2-218. - Approved vendors. 
(a)  The purchasing office shall maintain a file of all qualified vendors who desire to do business with the county, which file shall be maintained according to the nature of goods and materials offered and shall contain a description of the vendors' goods and services. 
(b)  Purchases on behalf of the county shall be made only from the list of approved vendors. 
(Code 1978, § 3-5008) 
Sec. 2-219. - Discretion for certain purchases. 
The purchasing office shall exercise discretion in making purchases where quality as well as price and service are factors for consideration. In circumstances in which brand name items are requisitioned by any department or official, the purchasing office has the authority to determine whether similar products of equal quality are available to the county at a lower price. If so, such products shall be ordered in lieu of the brand name items. 
(Code 1978, § 3-5009) 
Sec. 2-220. - Cooperative purchasing. 
The purchasing office shall have the authority to join with other governmental units in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the county would be serviced thereby. 
(Code 1978, § 3-5010) 
Secs. 2-221—2-239. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COUNTY ISSUED GOVERNMENT PURCHASING AND CREDIT CARDS 

Sec. 2-240. - Intent and scope. 
This division is intended to comply with the policy requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24 regarding the use of County issued government purchasing cards and credit cards. 
(Ord. No. 0-2015-10, § 2, 11-24-2015) 
Sec. 2-241. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Authorized elected official means an elected official designated by public vote of the board of commissioners to receive a county issued government purchasing card and/or credit card. 
Cardholder means the authorized elected official who is issued and is the holder of a county issued government purchasing card and/or credit card. 
County means the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. 
County purchasing card, county p-card or county credit card means a financial transaction card issued by any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, used by a county official to purchase goods, services and other things of value on behalf of the county. 
Financial transaction card means an instrument or device as the term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-9-30(5). 
Purchasing card administrator means the purchasing card and/or credit card administrator designated by the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. 
Purchasing card user's manual means the official policy and procedures for the use and issuance of county purchasing cards. 
User agreement means the required written agreement between the board of commissioners and the authorized elected officials which sets forth the authorized and unauthorized uses of a county purchasing card and/or credit card. 
(Ord. No. 0-2015-10, § 3, 11-24-2015) 
Sec. 2-242. - Designated elected officials. 
The Rockdale County Board of Commissioners, in its discretion, may authorize specific county elected officials to use a county purchasing card or credit card by adoption of a resolution in a public meeting. 
No authorized elected official may use a county purchasing card and/or credit card until and unless he or she has executed the user agreement. The county will not make payments to any business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, for amounts charged by an elected official to any purchasing cards and/or credit cards that are not issued pursuant to this ordinance or for any purchases that are not authorized by this division. 
(Ord. No. 0-2015-10, § 4, 11-24-2015) 
Sec. 2-243. - Purchasing card administrator. 
The finance director or their designee shall serve as the county purchasing card administrator. The responsibilities of the purchasing card administrator include: 
(1)  Manage county issued purchasing cards and/or credit cards. 
(2)  Serve as the main point of contact for all county purchasing card and/or credit card issues. 
(3)  Serve as liaison to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card and/or credit card and their staff, as well as to the issuer of the purchasing card and/or credit card. 
(4)  Provide training on card policies and procedures to the elected officials authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card and their staff. 
(5)  Develop internal procedures to ensure timely payment of cards. 
(6)  Assist authorized elected officials to dispute transactions when necessary. 
(7)  Establish internal procedures to ensure compliance with this ordinance, county procurement ordinances and policies, county purchasing card and credit card user agreements, applicable agreements with the business organization, financial institution, or any duly authorized agent of such organization or institution, issuing card, and state law, specifically, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-9-37 and 36-80-24. 
(8)  Document internal controls, audits and other measures to prevent and detect misuse or abuse of the cards. 
(9)  Audit and reconcile transactions monthly. 
(10)  Maintain records as provided by the county's record retention policy. 
(Ord. No. 0-2015-10, § 5, 11-24-2015) 
Sec. 2-244. - Use of cards. 
(a)  Authorized purchases. 
(1)  County purchase cards and /or credit cards may be used to purchase goods and services directly related to the public duties of the authorized elected official only. All purchases are subject to the terms of this division, the county purchasing card and/or credit card user agreement, purchasing card user's manual, county procurement policies and ordinances, and the adopted budget. 
(2)  Only authorized elected officials may use a county purchase card and/or credit card for purchases or payments. The cards, and use of the cards, are not transferrable to employees. The authorized elected official shall use care to ensure that others do not have access to the card account number, expiration date and security code. 
(3)  The transaction limits shall be as established in the user agreement. 
(b)  Unauthorized purchases. County purchasing cards and/or credit cards shall not be used for entertainment or cash, or to purchase alcoholic beverages, or goods and/or services not directly related to the official responsibilities of the authorized elected official. Additionally, cards shall not be used to avoid compliance with the county's ordinances, policies and/or procedures to purchase goods and/or services that are not approved in the county's budget, to purchase goods and/or services exceeding the per transaction or per month limit, or to make purchases not in compliance with the user agreement. 
(c)  Receipts and documentation. Receipts, invoices and other supporting documentation of all purchases made with a county purchasing card and/or credit card shall be obtained and maintained by the Authorized county elected official for five years or as otherwise provided by the county's record retention policy. If an original or duplicate cannot be produced, a sworn affidavit of the authorized elected official may be substituted. The documentation must include the supplier or merchant information (i.e., name and location), quantity, description, unit price, total price, price paid without sales tax and an explanation of the purchase sufficient to show that the expense was in the performance of official county duties. 
(d)  Public records. All receipt and other documentation of purchases are public records and subject to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 0-2015-10, § 6, 11-24-2015) 
Sec. 2-245. - Review of purchases and audit. 
(a)  Review of purchases. Proper documentation of purchases, internal controls and other measures prevent and allow detection of misuse or abuse of county issued purchasing cards and/or credit cards. Authorized elected officials and staff that process payments under this program shall cooperate and comply with the purchasing card user's manual to ensure purchases are for legitimate business purposes only. All purchases shall be reviewed as set forth in the purchasing card user's manual. 
(b)  Audits. The purchasing card administrator shall perform an annual review of the card program to ensure adequacy of internal policies and procedures, cardholder spending limits, monthly reconciliation procedures and documentation for transactions. Elected officials and staff shall cooperate with such review. 
(Ord. No. 0-2015-10, § 7, 11-24-2015) 
Sec. 2-246. - Violations. 
(a)  An authorized elected official shall reimburse the county for any purchases made with a county purchasing card and/or credit card in violation of this ordinance, the purchasing card user's manual or the user agreement. 
(b)  In the discretion of the board of commissioners, failure to comply with the procedures outlined in this ordinance may result in: 
(1)  A warning; 
(2)  Suspension of the elected official's authority to use a county purchasing card and/or credit card; or 
(3)  Revocation of the elected official's authority to use a county purchasing card and/or credit card. 
(c)  Nothing in this division shall preclude the board of commissioners from referring misuse of a purchasing card and/or credit card for prosecution to the appropriate authorities. 
(Ord. No. 0-2015-10, § 8, 11-24-2015) 
Secs. 2-247—2-249. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-250. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this Code of Ethics is to establish ethical standards of conduct for the chairperson and the members of the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners by identifying acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the community. 
The citizens and businesses of Rockdale County are entitled to have fair, ethical and accountable local government which has earned the public's full confidence for integrity. Further, it is essential to the proper administration and operation of the county that the members of the board of commissioners are independent and impartial; that public office or position not be used for private gain; that there be public confidence in the integrity of the board of commissioners; and that the public interest requires protection against conflicts of interest by establishing and adopting appropriate ethical standards to govern the conduct of the board of commissioners. 
Persons best qualified to serve in positions of public trust are essential to the efficient operation of government. This article is intended to be construed to accomplish this purpose and is to be interpreted and understood so as not to unreasonably frustrate or impede the desires or inclination to seek and serve in public office by those persons best qualified to serve. 
The purpose and intent of this article, therefore, is to make clear those standards of ethical conduct that shall be applicable to the members of the board of commissioners in the discharge of their official duties and to implement the objective of protecting the integrity of Rockdale County's government and to prescribe only such essential restrictions against conflicts of interest as will not impose unnecessary barriers against public service. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-251. - Definitions. 
Commissioner means the chairperson and the individual members of the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. 
Financial interest means: 
(1)  Any source of income from which a commissioner or the immediate relative of a commissioner has received more than $500.00 in any calendar year during the term of office of the commissioner; or for the calendar year immediately preceding the commencement of the commissioner's term of office; 
(2)  Ownership of an interest, legal or equitable, of a commissioner or of the immediate relative of a commissioner of more than ten percent of the total assets or capital stock of a business entity; or 
(3)  Ownership of any interest, legal or equitable, by a commissioner or the immediate relative of a commissioner having a fair market value of more than $20,000.00. 
Gift means the transfer of anything of economic value, regardless of form, without adequate and lawful consideration. Such term does not include the solicitation, acceptance, receipt or regulation of political campaign contributions. 
Immediate relative means the spouse, children, stepchildren, siblings, parents, mother in-laws, father in-laws, grandparents, and grandchildren of a commissioner. 
Official act or action means any legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of the board of commissioners. 
Private party means any person, company, firm or organization of any kind other than governmental bodies, school boards, and development authorities. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-252. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to the commissioners. Employees of Rockdale County shall be subject to the ethical policies and procedures promulgated pursuant to chapter 58 and section 2-64 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-253. - Impartiality. 
A commissioner shall not: 
(1)  Use his or her position as a commissioner to induce, coerce or influence any person or an employee of Rockdale County in a way that would provide any financial benefit to the commissioner, an immediate relative, or any business in which he or she has a financial interest. 
(2)  Use or disclose confidential information concerning the property, governing operations, policies or affairs of the county to advance the financial interest of himself or herself or an immediate relative, or use or disclose such confidential information for the financial benefit of any third party. 
(3)  Fail to disclose prior to any discussion during a meeting or vote that he or she has a financial interest in any matter before the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Use his or her position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or for others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than the discharge of his or her official responsibilities. 
(5)  Use county facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public or otherwise provided by state law, county ordinance or policy. 
(6)  Use his or her position to grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-254. - Abstention to avoid conflicts of interest. 
(a)  A commissioner shall not vote, or participate in the discussion or deliberation on, an ordinance, resolution or amendment for which the commissioner or his or her immediate relative has a financial interest. Provided, however, that regarding matters of general or county-wide application, such as code text amendments impacting a group or class of properties or individuals, such commissioner, shall disclose such financial interest and, following such disclosure, shall be allowed to discuss, deliberate, and vote on such matter and such discussion, deliberation, and vote shall not constitute violations of this ordinance and shall not be the subject matter of an ethics complaint hereunder. 
(b)  A commissioner shall not vote or participate in the discussion or deliberation on any administrative proceeding, appeal, request for ruling, or claim in which the commissioner or his or her immediate relative has a financial interest. 
(c)  A commissioner shall not vote upon any matter involving an organization of which he or she is a board member or director. Provided however, that this prohibition shall not apply to any matter involving any boards or authorities on which the commissioner serves by virtue of his or her elected office or by appointment of the board of commissioners or the governor or an agency of the State of Georgia. 
(d)  A commissioner who has a conflict of interest as described in subsections (a), (b) or (c) of this section, shall, prior to the matter being deliberated and voted upon by the board of commissioners, disclose the conflict of interest in writing to the clerk of the board of commissioners, or on the record if such disclosure occurs during the course of a meeting. In the event of a conflict of interest the commissioner shall not discuss, debate, deliberate about, vote, act upon or otherwise participate or influence the decision making process pertaining to the matter. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-255. - Avoidance of conflict of interest in contracting. 
(a)  The county shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a commissioner or with a business in which the commissioner has a financial interest. Provided that if the provisions of subsection 2-254(d) are followed, the prohibitions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for county funds; 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers competitive rates for such loans; 
(3)  Contracts entered into under circumstances which would constitute an emergency situation, provided that such emergency is documented and submitted to the board of ethics to be kept on file; or 
(4)  Contracts which are entered into as a result of a competitive bid process conducted pursuant to the purchasing and procurement policy of the county. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall also apply to formal proposals to contract which are, or are proposed to be, the subject of an official act or action of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-256. - Incompatible employment. 
(a)  No commissioner shall engage in or accept employment with or render services to any private business or professional activity when such employment or service is adverse to the proper discharge of the commissioner's official duties. This section shall not apply to a commissioner who is appointed to a regulatory or licensing authority pursuant to a statutory requirement that persons subject to the jurisdiction of the authority be represented in appointments to it. 
(b)  No commissioner shall advocate for or cause, directly or indirectly, the hiring, advancement, promotion, or transfer of any of such commissioner's immediate relatives to any office or position with the county or a county agency. 
(c)  No commissioner having authority to appoint or recommend for appointment members of any county board, commission, or authority shall appoint or recommend for appointment any of such commissioner's immediate relatives. 
(d)  No commissioner shall, after the termination of service with the county, accept remuneration of any kind for any appearance before any board, commission, committee, agency or authority of the county on behalf of any private party in relation to any case, proceeding, or application in which he or she personally participated during the period of his or her service, which was under his or her active consideration during the period of his or her service, or as to which he or she could have acquired knowledge or information not readily available to a member of the public, during the period of his or her service. This prohibition shall have a duration of three years commencing on the date of the commissioner's termination of service. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-257. - Holding dual positions prohibited. 
A commissioner shall not during his or her term of office hold any other local government or municipal position except where it is provided by state law or local ordinance that a commissioner shall be appointed, nominated or continue to serve in such position. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-258. - Solicitation or acceptance of gifts. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no commissioner, either for himself or herself or for any other person, may knowingly solicit, receive, benefit from, accept, or agree to accept any gift, for himself or herself, or for any other person. This prohibition shall also include any gift received by any commissioner if: 
(1)  It could reasonably be considered to influence the commissioner in any official act or action which results in a pecuniary benefit for the donor which is not available to the public at large; 
(2)  The commissioner recently has been or is now involved in any official act or action which results in a pecuniary benefit for the donor which is not available to the public at large. 
(b)  The above prohibitions shall not apply to the following, provided that there is no intent to influence any official act or action: 
(1)  Occasional nonpecuniary gifts of insignificance or trinkets or gifts received in the normal course of business with a value of less than $25.00; 
(2)  Awards publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
(3)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such loan or financial transaction; 
(4)  Honorariums or awards for professional achievement; 
(5)  Gifts received from relatives or members of the household of the donee; 
(6)  Courtesy tickets or free admission to educational seminars, or educational or informational conventions, directly pertaining to official duties or responsibilities; or 
(7)  Hospitality, or meals, extended for a social, charitable, non-profit, convention, conference, or business purpose unrelated to the official business of the county, not to exceed $250.00 annually from any one source. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-259. - Financial disclosures. 
Commissioners shall file with the clerk of the board of commissioners the financial disclosure statement required by O.C.G.A. § 21-5-50 and any supplement or amendment thereto no later than 30 days from the date of submission by the commissioner in compliance with the applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. § 21-5-50. All disclosures with regard to rezoning applications shall be governed in their entirety by O.C.G.A. § 36-67A.1, et seq., as amended. No additional financial disclosures by a commissioner, other than those required by federal and state law, shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-260. - Elections. 
No commissioner shall direct any person employed by the county to undertake political activity on behalf of that commissioner, any other commissioner, or any other individual or political party or group or business organization, during such time that the county employee is required to conduct county business. This section does not prohibit incidental telephone calls made for the purpose of scheduling a commissioner's daily county business. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-261. - Board of ethics: creation; composition. 
There is hereby created a three-member county board of ethics, which shall consist of the following members: 
(1)  One appointee selected by majority vote of the Rockdale Coalition of Homeowners and Civic Associations (RCHCA), which shall be a current member of the RCHCA. 
(2)  One appointee of the county bar association; and 
(3)  One appointee selected by majority vote of the board of the Conyers-Rockdale Chamber of Commerce. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 0-2014-14, § 1, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 0-2015-03, § 1, 3-24-2015) 
Sec. 2-262. - Board of ethics: appointment procedures. 
(a)  The initial appointments of the members of the board of ethics shall be accomplished as follows: Within five business days of the effective date of this article, the county clerk or his or her designee shall notify the respective appointing body or individuals of the duty to appoint or vote upon a member for placement on the board of ethics. The body or individuals so notified shall have 60 days in which to conduct their appointment process and provide the county clerk with the name of the appointment. The board of commissioners shall confirm the three persons so identified at the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners following receipt of the names of the appointees from the county clerk. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c), members of the board of ethics shall each serve a term of three years, without compensation. 
(c)  The member of the board of ethics initially appointed to position (2), as set forth in section 2-261, shall serve a two-year term, without compensation. The member of the board of ethics initially appointed to position (3), as set forth in section 2-261, shall serve a one-year term, without compensation. 
(d)  All appointments following the expiration of the initial terms and all appointments made in the cases of vacancies created during a particular term shall be made by the applicable body or individuals as indicated in section 2-261. The county clerk or his or her designee shall notify the applicable body or individuals responsible for making an appointment at least 45 days prior to the expiration of the respective term or immediately upon knowledge of a vacancy created during a term. Upon such notification, the appointment process shall proceed as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 0-2015-03, § 2, 3-24-2015) 
Sec. 2-263. - Qualifications of members. 
A person is eligible to serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person, while serving: 
(1)  Resides in the county and is a registered voter. 
(2)  Is not an employee of the Rockdale County government or of any political party. 
(3)  Does not hold any elected or appointed office and is not a candidate for office of the United States, Georgia, or Rockdale County. 
(4)  Has not been convicted of a felony, which shall be confirmed by the consent to a criminal history background check to be performed by the county. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 0-2014-14, § 2, 12-9-2014) 
Sec. 2-264. - Removal of member. 
The board of commissioners may remove a member of the board of ethics on the grounds of neglect of duty, misconduct in office, a disability rendering the member unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office as specified in this article, or engagement in political activity in violation of section 2-269. Before initiating the removal of a member from the board of ethics, the board of commissioners shall give the member written notice of the reason for the intended action, and the member shall have an opportunity to reply. Thereafter, the board of commissioners shall afford such member an opportunity for a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-265. - Organization of board of ethics. 
(a)  Members of the board of ethics shall not be compensated. 
(b)  The ethics board shall elect one of its members to act as chairperson for a term of one year, or until a successor is duly elected. At the same time, the ethics board shall elect one of its members to act as vice-chairperson for the same term and to act for the chairperson in his or her absence because of disqualification or vacancy. If the office of chairperson or vice-chairperson is vacated in any manner before the expiration of the term, the ethics board shall elect a temporary successor. It shall elect a permanent chairperson or vice-chairperson only after any vacancy on the ethics board is filled. Vacancies shall be filled by immediately requesting a nominee from the applicable body or individuals that originally nominated the terminated board member. 
(c)  Upon its initial meeting, and yearly thereafter, the ethics board shall select a qualified individual to serve as an alternate in the event of a conflict of interest or disqualification of an ethics board member under section 2-268. The alternate shall be appointed for a period of one year or until a successor is duly appointed. 
(d)  By majority vote, or by call of the chairperson, the board of ethics may call a meeting, as necessary. All meetings of the board of ethics shall be open to the public, including those portions of meetings devoted to deliberation, and duly publicized as required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 0-2015-03, § 3, 3-24-2015) 
Sec. 2-266. - Staffing and expense. 
The board of ethics shall be provided sufficient meeting space, staff support and other supportive services to carry out its duties required under this article. The county clerk shall serve as the filing clerk for the board of ethics and shall be authorized to receive all filings before the board of ethics, and to publish notices of all ethics board meetings and elections upon request of the board of ethics chairperson. The ethics board filing clerk shall not be required to serve as the recording clerk for the board of ethics. The budget for the board of ethics shall be a subpart of the budget for the department of finance. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008; Ord. No. 0-2014-14, § 3, 12-9-2014) 
Sec. 2-267. - Counsel. 
The board of ethics shall be represented and assisted in carrying out its responsibilities by an attorney appointed by the board of ethics, such attorney to meet the same qualifications of members as set forth in section 2-263 and prohibitions against political activity as set forth in section 2-269. Such attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the board of ethics as needed at the hourly rate currently approved by the board of commissioners for the county attorney. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-268. - Adherence to ethics code; disqualification of member. 
The board of ethics and its counsel shall be governed by and subject to this article, except as to any requirements related to financial disclosure. If a member of the board of ethics has a conflict of interest or must disqualify himself or herself under this ethics code or by law, the alternate chosen by the board pursuant to subsection 2-265(c) shall hear that matter. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-269. - Prohibition against political activity. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Member of the board of ethics means an individual who occupies the position of a member of the board of ethics or a prospective member of the board of ethics. 
(2)  Political party means a national political party, a state political party, a political action committee and/or any affiliated organization. 
(3)  Election includes a primary, special and general election, including elections at which the candidates are not identified with a political party and including elections involving a question or issue which is not specifically identified with a political party, such as a constitutional amendment, referendum, approval of a governmental ordinance, or any question or issue of a similar character. 
(4)  Political fund means any fund, organization, political action committee or other entity that, for purposes of influencing in any way the outcome of any election, receives or expends money or anything of value or transfers money or anything of value to any other fund, political party, candidate, organization, political action committee or other entity. 
(5)  Contribution means any gift, subscription, loan, advance, deposit of money, allotment of money or anything of value given or transferred by one person to another, including in cash, by check, by draft, through a payroll deduction or allotment plan, by pledge or promise, whether or not enforceable, or otherwise. 
(b)  Permissible activities. All members of the board of ethics are free to engage in political activity to the widest extent consistent with the restrictions imposed in this article. Each member of the board of ethics retains the right to: 
(1)  Register and vote in any election; 
(2)  Participate in the nonpartisan activities of a civic, community, social, labor, or professional organization or of a similar organization; 
(3)  Be a member of a political party or other political organization and participate in its activities to the extent consistent with law; 
(4)  Sign a political petition as an individual; 
(5)  Make a financial contribution to a political party or organization; 
(6)  Serve as an election judge or clerk or in a similar position to perform nonpartisan duties as prescribed by state or local law; and 
(7)  Otherwise participate fully in public affairs in a manner which does not materially compromise his or her efficiency or integrity as a member of the board of ethics or the neutrality, efficiency or integrity of the board of ethics. 
(c)  Prohibited activities. 
(1)  A member of the board of ethics may not take an active part in political management or in a political campaign, except as permitted by subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  A member of the board of ethics shall not take part in or be permitted to do any of the following activities: 
a.  Serve as an officer of a political party, a member of a national, state or local committee of a political party, an officer or member of a committee of a political club, or be a candidate for any of these positions; 
b.  Organize or reorganize a political party organization or political club; 
c.  Directly or indirectly solicit, receive, collect, handle, disburse or account for assessments, contributions or other funds for a political purpose; 
d.  Organize, sell tickets to, promote or actively participate in a fundraising activity of a candidate in an election or of a political party or political club; 
e.  Take an active part in managing the political campaign of a candidate for public office or a candidate for political party office; 
f.  Become a candidate for, or campaign for, an elective public office; 
g.  Solicit votes in support of or in opposition to a candidate for public office or a candidate for political party office; 
h.  Act as recorder, watcher, challenger or similar officer at the polls on behalf of a political party or a candidate in an election; 
i.  Drive voters to the polls on behalf of a political party or a candidate in an election; 
j.  Endorse or oppose a candidate for public office or a candidate for political party office in a political advertisement, broadcast, campaign literature, or similar material; 
k.  Serve as a delegate, alternate or proxy to a political party convention; 
l.  Address a convention, caucus, rally or similar gathering of a political party in support of or in opposition to a candidate for public office or political party office; or 
m.  Initiate or circulate a nominating petition. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-270. - Duties and powers. 
The board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish any procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs, including, but not limited to, scheduling meetings as needed. 
(2)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of standards required by this ethics code. 
(3)  To make investigations as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated this ethics code. 
(4)  To issue subpoenas to compel the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence germane to its jurisdiction and to apply to any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce such subpoena, including applying to the court to punish the disobedience of any such order as contempt of court. 
(5)  To take such action as provided in this ethics code as deemed appropriate because of any violation of this ethics code. 
(6)  To make proposals or recommendations to the board of commissioners for the adoption of any revisions or amendments to this ethics code. 
(7)  To perform any other function authorized by this ethics code. 
(8)  To issue advisory opinions as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-271. - Advisory opinions. 
The board of ethics shall render an advisory opinion based on a real or hypothetical set of circumstances when requested in writing by a commissioner or the board of commissioners subject to the provisions of this article, and it shall be a responsibility of the board of ethics to interpret this article. Such advisory opinion shall be rendered pursuant only to a written request, fully setting forth the circumstances to be reviewed by the ethics board. The proceedings of the ethics board pursuant to this section shall be held in public, as provided by subsection 2-265(c) and Georgia law, and the opinions of the ethics board shall be made available to the public to examine and for the press to publish. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-272. - Complaints. 
The board of ethics shall be responsible for hearing and deciding any complaints filed regarding alleged violation of this article by any person. The following procedure shall be followed when filing a complaint: 
(1)  Any person may file a complaint alleging violation of any of the provisions of this Article by filing it with the county clerk, who shall immediately deliver such complaint to the chairperson of the board of ethics or his or her designee. A copy of such complaint shall immediately be forwarded by registered mail to the person against whom the complaint was filed. The complaint must be supported by affidavits based on personal knowledge, shall set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence, and shall show affirmatively that the affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein. All documents referred to in an affidavit(s) shall be attached to the affidavit(s). A complaint must be filed within six months of the date the alleged violation is said to have occurred, or in case of concealment or nondisclosure, within six months of the date the alleged violation should have been discovered after due diligence. In the event the ethics board makes an initial determination that a complaint is technically deficient, the board shall submit a list of deficiencies to the complainant and offer the complainant the opportunity to correct the deficiencies within seven days prior to the ethics board's investigatory review of the complaint. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a complaint alleging misconduct, the person against whom the complaint was filed may reply to the complaint within 30 days, unless such time for reply is shortened or extended by the ethics board. The person's response must be supported by affidavits based on personal knowledge, must set forth such facts as would be admissible in evidence, and must show affirmatively that the affiant is competent to testify to the matters stated therein. All documents referred to in an affidavit(s) shall be attached to the affidavit(s). 
(3)  Within 60 days of receipt of a complaint, the ethics board shall conduct an investigatory review to determine whether specific substantiated evidence from a credible source(s) exists to support a reasonable belief that there has been a violation of this article. If after reviewing the complaint the ethics board by majority vote determines that no specific, substantiated evidence from a credible source(s) exists to support a reasonable belief that there has been a violation of this article or determines that no violation occurred, it may dismiss the complaint. In the event a complaint is dismissed on the basis of a deficiency in the form of the complaint, rather than upon the merits of the complaint, the complaint may be re-filed within 15 days of said dismissal if the deficiency in the form and pleading has been cured. 
(4)  If the ethics board determines that specific, substantiated evidence from a credible source(s) exists to support a reasonable belief that there has been a violation of this article, certified written notice of a hearing, containing the time, date and place of such hearing, shall be given to each party by the ethics board, and a formal public hearing shall be conducted and both parties afforded an opportunity to be heard. Any formal public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of due process. The board of ethics is authorized to swear witnesses. Any final determination resulting from the hearing shall include findings of fact and conclusions of law. The board shall determine if clear and convincing evidence shows any violation of this Code. 
(5)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit or encumber the right of the board of ethics to initiate an investigation on its own cognizance as it deems necessary to fulfill its obligations under this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-273. - Penalties. 
(a)  A commissioner shall be subject to the following penalties or actions upon the determination of a violation of this article: 
(1)  Written reprimand or censure; 
(2)  Recovery of the value transferred or received by the county; 
(3)  Voiding of the action for which the violation was determined; or 
(4)  A monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(b)  A person filing a complaint may be subject to a monetary penalty not to exceed $500.00 in the event the ethics board determines by unanimous vote that the complaint lacked substantial justification or was made for purposes of delay or harassment. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-274. - Other remedies. 
In addition to any other remedy provided by this article or permitted by law, upon direction of the board of ethics, a petition may be filed for injunctive relief, or any other appropriate relief, in the county superior court, or in any other court having proper venue and jurisdiction, for the purpose of requiring compliance with the provisions of this article. In addition, the court may issue an order to cease and desist from the violation of this article. The court also may void an official action taken by any official which action was prohibited by this article, provided that the legal action to void the matter was brought within 90 days of the occurrence of the official action, if the court deems voiding the action to be in the best interest of the public. The court, after hearing and considering all the circumstances in the case, may grant all or part of the relief sought. However, the court may not void any official action appropriating public funds, levying taxes or providing for the issuance of bonds, notes or other evidences of public obligation. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Sec. 2-275. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Any party against whom a decision of the board of ethics is rendered may obtain judicial review of the decision by writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county. The application for the writ must be filed within 30 days from the date of the decision. Judicial review shall be based upon the record. No party shall be entitled to a de novo appeal. 
(b)  Upon failure to timely request judicial review of the decision by writ of certiorari as provided in this section, the decision shall be binding and final upon all parties. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-14, § 1, 10-28-2008) 
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Outdoor advertising near state roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

Sec. 6-1. - Handbills and advertising matter. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to place in or on any private property any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard or other literature, except with the prior permission, expressed or implied, of the owner of the property or intended recipient. 
(b)  Distribution of any literature shall be lawful without the prior permission of the property owner or intended recipient if the literature is sent by mail or if the organization or individual distributing the literature has registered with the county department of buildings and inspections on a form approved by the board of commissioners and a permit is issued thereto for each person distributing the literature. That person shall carry the permit with him when distributing the literature and shall exhibit the permit to any person requesting it. Civic, political and religious organizations shall be exempt from the permit requirement but registration shall still be required. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4009) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 0-2017-20, §§ 1, 2, adopted September 19, 2017, repealed the former ch. 10, §§ 10-1—10-174, and enacted a new ch. 10 as set out herein. The former ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1978, §§ 3-2021—3-2023, 7-1001, 7-2001—7-2017, 7-2018(a)—(e), 7-2019—7-27, 7-2036—7-2042, 7-2044—7-2050, 7-2061—7-2063, 7-2065, 7-2066, 7-2076—7-2080, 7-2082, 7-2083—7-2085, 9-1003; Ord. No. 0-1998-1, §§ 2—5, 7—12, 1-13-1998; Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 2(7-2025), 11-9-1999; Ord. No. O-2000-10, § 1, 6-13-2000; Ord. No. O-2001-22, §§ 1, 2, 10-9-2001; Ord. No. 0-2001-33, §§ 1, 2, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. O-2003-20, §§ 1—4, 12-30-2003; Ord. No. 0-2006-07, § 7, 2-28-2006; Ord. No. 2008-12, §§ 1, 2, 4, 10-14-2008; Ord. No. 0-2010-20, §§ 1, 2, 3, 12-14-2010; Ord. No. 2012-03, §§ 1, 2, 3-13-2012; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 1, 7-23-2013. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Local alcoholic beverage license, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2 et seq.; local regulation of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-40 et seq.; local regulation of malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-40 et seq.; local regulation of wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-40; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Drunkenness in public places. 
(a)  Drunkenness in public prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear on the streets or roads in the county or on any county-owned property and be in an intoxicated condition. It shall be unlawful for any person to be in any public place of business patronized by the public in an intoxicated condition. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
Secs. 10-2—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SALE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
The definitions used in section 86-31 shall likewise apply to this article. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverages means and includes malt beverages, beer, fortified wine or wine, and distilled spirits as defined in this section. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, strong beer, and hard cider as may be defined by state law. 
Building code means and includes all building, plumbing and electrical codes and any other similar technical code of the county. 
Church means any permanent building set apart for the regular assembly of religious worship. 
College means only such state, county, city, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Courtyard means an area open or partially open to the sky and enclosed or surrounded on all sides by buildings, walls, fences or other such structures, or a combination thereof. 
Distance means a measurement in lineal feet by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured from the main entrance of the proposed establishment from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale, in a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route, thence along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route to: 
(1)  The main entrance of a church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship, an alcoholic treatment center, or any public library; 
(2)  The property line of any school or educational grounds or college campus; or 
(3)  The zoning district line of the nearest specified zoning classification. 
Distilled spirits means all beverages containing alcohol, obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including fortified wines. 
Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests whether transient, permanent, or residential, in which 25 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of guests. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge, restaurant, or nightclub in their premises; and the holder of a franchise shall be included in the definition of "hotel" thereunder. 
Indoor commercial recreational establishment shall mean and is limited to an indoor establishment: 
(1)  In which the sale of food (including nonalcoholic beverages) and alcoholic beverages is incidental to its primary activity on the premises and which shall derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from its primary activity; 
(2)  In which meals are served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining equipment and a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its customers. Said establishment shall be prepared to serve food every hour they are open; and 
(3)  In which the primary activity on the premises of the indoor commercial recreational establishment shall be family oriented in nature, generally meaning a use that attracts a range of individuals from all age groups. Uses may specifically include, but are not limited to, bowling centers, billiard parlors, video arcades, skating arenas and other similar uses. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in hotels as defined in this section with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 50. A lounge, as defined in this definition, which is operated on a different floor in the premises, or in a separate building, or is not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant shall be considered a separate establishment and shall pay an additional license fee therefore. 
Malt beverages. See beer or malt beverage. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Minor means any person below the age at which alcoholic beverages may be legally purchased in the state. 
Moral turpitude shall include any misdemeanor criminal offenses involving fraud, theft, identity theft or dishonesty, misdemeanor drug offenses, and any felony offense. However, all applicants shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq. relating to first offender status if they were sentenced under the First Offender Act by the sentencing court. 
Nightclub shall mean a place of business that is authorized to supply live entertainment for the amusement needs of the public generally, and shall exclude persons under 18 years of age, and where the preparation and sale of food (including nonalcoholic beverages) and/or alcoholic beverages may be incidental to the provision of such live entertainment. 
Patio means an open area adjoining the premises which has a floor made of cement, brick, tile, wood, or other similar material. 
Performing arts facility shall mean and is limited to an establishment: 
(1)  That has as its principal objective or business the presentation of live music, mainline dramatic arts, plays, theatre productions and stand-up comedy; 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed and may include a courtyard or patio as defined in this section. 
Private club means a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the state actively in operation within the limits of the county, and having members paying regular monthly, quarterly, semiannual or annual dues. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one or more than three families customarily reside and shall not include a manufactured home, a boardinghouse where there are five or more boarders or roomers, or any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application. 
Responsible Alcohol Sales and Services (RASS) workshop shall mean a workshop to educate alcoholic beverage handlers on legal issues, restrictions, and regulations related to the responsible sales and service of alcoholic beverages. 
Restaurant shall mean a place of business that is authorized to prepare, cook and sell food (which shall include nonalcoholic beverages) for immediate consumption on the premises, and where the preparation and sale of alcoholic beverages for immediate consumption on the premises, may be incidental to the sale of such food, for adequate pay, without a minimum charge or cover charge. Restaurants shall not exclude any person, and shall derive at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the preparation and sale of food. Entertainment customarily incidental and subordinate to the traditional operations of a restaurant such as karaoke, individual or small group vocalists and/or instrumentalists that provide background music, recorded music, televised programming, etc., may be supplied for its guests; but in no circumstance shall chairs and/or tables be rearranged for the viewing of such entertainment. Restaurants may include, but shall not be limited to: fast-food restaurants, full-service restaurants or limited-service restaurants. 
Retail means retail sales packages to go and not for consumption on the premises. 
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of the state and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Wine shall mean any alcoholic beverages containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-32. - License is a privilege. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the county and state law. 
(b)  All licenses issued under this article shall have printed on the front these words: 
"THIS LICENSE IS A MERE PRIVILEGE SUBJECT TO REVOCATION AND ANNULMENT, AND IS SUBJECT TO ANY AND ALL ORDINANCES NOW IN EFFECT OR WHICH MAY BE ENACTED." 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-33. - License required; time limit for commencement of operation. 
(a)  No malt beverage, wine, distilled spirits or any other alcoholic beverage shall be sold or manufactured in the county except under a license issued under this article by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The requirements of this article shall be in addition to any other requirements for business licenses under this Code; and if other provisions of this Code conflict with this article, this article shall control. 
(c)  Licenses which may be issued under this article include: 
(1)  Manufacturing alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Wholesale: 
a.  Malt beverages and wine. 
b.  Distilled spirits. 
(3)  Retail: 
a.  Malt beverages and wine. 
b.  Distilled spirits. 
(4)  Consumption on the premises: 
a.  Malt beverages and wine. 
b.  Distilled spirits. 
(5)  Any combination under subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(6)  Any combination under subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(7)  Any combination under subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
(d)  All licenses issued under this article must, within 90-days after the issuance of a county license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute a forfeiture and cancellation of the issued license, and no refund of license fees or business taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make written request to the board of commissioners for an extension of time for good cause not to exceed 90-days, and the board of commissioners at its discretion may grant or deny the request. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-34. - Applications for license. 
(a)  The provisions of this Code on general business licensing shall apply in addition to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  All applications for licenses under this article shall be accompanied by payment in full for all the fees and taxes provided for in this Code for the classification into which the applicant falls. 
(c)  The county application shall be a photostatic or other copy of all the appropriate state applications and forms along with a county supplemental application form approved by motion of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Any false statement or material misrepresentation in any application under this article shall be grounds for the revocation of any license granted under this article. 
(e)  Should an existing license holder wish to upgrade an existing valid license to include license combinations authorized in section 10-33, the county official reviewing such applications shall be authorized to waive duplicative application procedural requirements and fees when to do so will equally serve and protect the public health, safety, morality and welfare. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-35. - Notice of intention to secure license for sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  No application for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be acted upon until after the applicant has published in the newspaper, which publishes the legal advertisements of the county, a notice of his intention to secure a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages. Such notice shall be submitted on forms provided by the county and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The type of license for which application has been filed. 
(2)  The exact location of the place of business for which a license is sought. 
(3)  The names and addresses of each owner of the business. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and titles of all corporate officers. 
(b)  Proof of publication of the notice required by this section shall be attached to an application for a license for sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  An applicant for a renewal license shall not be subject to the notice requirements of this section. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-36. - Application forms. 
(a)  All persons, firms, corporations or partnerships desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on a form prescribed by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The application shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The proposed business to be carried on. 
(3)  If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners. 
(4)  If a corporation, the names of the officers, the name of the manager, and the names of all shareholders holding more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the Director of the department of planning and development or his designee the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten days of such change. 
(c)  A separate processing fee of $50.00 to cover the expense of an investigation and processing the application must be paid, which fee shall not be refundable. 
(d)  Proof that the location of the proposed premises complies with all zoning and planning requirements must be furnished. 
(e)  All applicants shall furnish data, information, and records as required by the board of commissioners and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. Failure to furnish data as requested shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(f)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(g)  The county shall require no more than 30 days for processing any completed application for a license under the terms of this division, provided that the 30 days may be extended by agreement of the applicant and the county. A completed application is the county application fully completed and all the required documents and approvals on the "Documents and Procedure" List. 
(h)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this article, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(i)  The director of the department of planning and development shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provisions of this article. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. 
(j)  If the applicant is denied a license by the state, any business tax paid shall be refunded; but all other fees shall be retained by the county. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-37. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale. 
A separate application must be made for each location, and a separate license must be issued. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-38. - Preliminary approval required. 
All applications shall be approved or disapproved by the sheriff or his designee as a condition to action thereon and issuance of a license by the board of commissioners. Before the sheriff approves or disapproves an application, he shall make or cause to be made a complete and exhaustive investigation of the police record and character and reputation of the applicant. If the sheriff determines that the applicant has no record that is in violation of this article and is of good character and reputation, he shall approve the application. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-39. - Denial of license application; granting. 
(a)  The director of the department of planning and development may deny a county license under this article on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure to meet state requirements for state license. 
(2)  Failure to pay required fees and taxes. 
(3)  Failure to provide required valid information and documents. 
(4)  False information in the application or attached documents. 
(5)  Failure to pass review by the sheriff. 
(6)  Improper residency of the applicant, owner, or registered agents. 
(7)  Prior convictions as provided in this article. 
(8)  Failure to meet any other requirements in this article for a license of the class applied for. 
(b)  Otherwise, the director of the department of planning and development may issue any county license provided for in this article after a motion to that effect is approved by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  If the director of the department of planning and development denies a license application, such denial shall be in written form, addressed to the applicant at the application address, and shall state the grounds upon which the denial is based. Within ten days of the date of issuance of such notice, the applicant may appeal the denial by submitting a written notice of appeal to the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and shall provide written notice thereof to the appellant. At the hearing, the appellant and the board of commissioners may each present evidence relating to the grounds of denial. The appellant may be represented by counsel at such hearing or may appear in his own behalf. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-40. - Residence requirements. 
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued in the name of any individual who is not a citizen of the United States or has not been a resident of the state for at least one year prior to the filing of an application for the license. Where the applicant is a corporation, partnership or association, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation, partnership or association, and an officer or agent or the corporation, partnership or association who meets the requirement in this section. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-41. - Moral character of licensee. 
No person, partnership or corporation shall be granted a license under this article unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners that the person applying, the partner applying on behalf of the partnership, or the agent applying on behalf of the corporation, shall be of good moral character. If an applicant, inclusive of the partner applying on behalf of the partnership or the agent applying on behalf of the corporation, has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude or an offense involving the sale of narcotics or the sale of alcohol to a minor within a period of two years prior to the filing of the application, the application for a license under this article may be denied. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-42. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
If the building in which an applicant for a license proposes to operate under the provisions of this article is not, at the time of application for the license, in existence, or not yet completed, a license may be issued for the location provided the plans and specifications for the proposed building are filed with the department of planning and development and show clearly a compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable provisions of this Code. No sales of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in the establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications and in conformity with all other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-43. - State regulations. 
All licenses issued under this article shall be subject to O.C.G.A. title 3 and the rules and regulations prescribed by the state department of revenue relating to alcoholic beverages. Violations of such rules and regulations shall be additional grounds for revocation or suspension of any license under this article. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-44. - Open to inspection. 
Any establishment holding a license issued under this article shall at all times, during the period allowable by law for operation of the business, be open to inspection by any officer of the sheriff's office, any licensed inspector of the county, or to any person designated by the sheriff's office or the board of commissioners. In addition, if the premises are being used after hours by employees or the owners or their agents, the premises may be inspected at this time by the designated persons in this section. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-45. - Audits. 
If the board of commissioners or its designee deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, the licensee shall be notified of the date, time, and place of the audit. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-46. - Brown bagging. 
It is prohibited for any person to bring their own alcoholic beverage (brown bag) into any establishment either licensed or unlicensed to serve alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-47. - Sale or possession for purpose of sale without license beyond boundaries. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverages where the person does not have a license from the county to sell or possess for sale alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-48. - Minors—Prohibited practices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to buy or allow to be bought for him any alcoholic beverage from any place where these liquors are kept. It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of or employed in any place of business where alcoholic beverages are kept to knowingly permit any minor to buy or to allow to be bought for a minor any alcoholic beverages in or from the place of business. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly furnish or serve any minor with any alcoholic beverage. Any attempt to commit any act made unlawful by this section shall be itself unlawful and subject to punishment in the court. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to falsely misrepresent his age in any manner whatever for the purpose of illegally obtaining any alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage; however, the provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores or drugstores from selling or handling malt beverages or vinous liquors which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to have in his possession, or under his control, at any place whatever in the county, any alcoholic beverages, with the exception of those individuals identified in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-49. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  All holders of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages regulated by this article shall be required to post a sign in a conspicuous location in their place of business which reads as follows: 
(1)  It is against the law for a person under the age of 21 years to have in his possession or under his control any alcoholic beverage. It is also a violation of the law for such a person to misrepresent his age in any manner for the purpose of obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(2)  Any person who conspires, aids, abets, or assists any other person under the age of 21 years to obtain an alcoholic beverage shall be guilty of violating these provisions. 
(b)  The printed portion of the sign shall be at least nine inches wide by 11 inches tall. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-50. - Duration and renewal of license. 
(a)  The duration of licenses under this article shall be for no more than one calendar year in accordance with the procedures and limitations set forth in subsection (c) of this section and all other provisions of this article. No licensee shall have any vested right to the renewal of any county license. 
(b)  No licenses under this article may be renewed if the licensee could be denied a new license under this article. 
(c)  All licenses issued under this article shall expire at 11:59 P.M. on December 31 of the calendar year of issuance. Applications for renewals for licenses under this article shall be subject to all of the provisions of this article and all other relevant provisions of this Code. All renewal applications shall be received by the county by November 1 of the calendar year of the existing license. All renewal applications received by the county after November 1 of the calendar year of the existing license but prior to expiration of the license shall be assessed a late penalty of 50 percent of the required annual fee for such license, which late penalty shall be paid in addition to the required annual fee for such license and all other required fees. No renewal applications shall be accepted by the county after December 31 of each calendar year. Existing permit holders that fail to submit a timely renewal application shall be required to reapply for a new license. Under no circumstances shall any license holder manufacture, sell, or serve alcoholic beverages without a current, valid license to do so issued and posted in accordance with this article. 
(d)  Any new license granted hereunder during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without proration; provided however, that one-half of a full license fee shall be paid for a license application filed on or after July 1 of the license year. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-51. - Transfer of licenses prohibited; change of location. 
(a)  Licenses under this article may not be transferred to another person except as otherwise provided in this article. All persons desiring licenses shall make application to the county for a new license and pay any appropriate fees and business taxes, and that person must otherwise meet the requirements under this article for a new license. 
(b)  A change of location shall be allowed for any license under this article provided the licensee files with the director of the department of planning and development the following information on the new location: 
(1)  Proof of planning and zoning compliance. 
(2)  Proof of building code compliance. 
(3)  Legal description of the property upon which the new premises is located. 
(4)  Affidavit from a registered surveyor stating that the establishment complies with any distance or location requirements contained within this article. 
(c)  Any change of location allowed under this section may be denied or revoked on the same basis as for an application for license under this article. 
(d)  In case of death of any person owning a license, or any interest therein, the license may, with the approval by the board of commissioners, and subject to the terms of this article, be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or to the heirs at law of the deceased person, if such heirs meet all of the other qualifications contained in this article. The license of the deceased person shall be held by the administrator, executor, or personal representative of the deceased person only for time necessary to complete administration of his estate and to dispose of the license or the interest therein, but in no event to exceed 12 months. 
(e)  If a license is surrendered, or a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined to be the date of severance. Provided, however, no such sale shall be authorized until such time as a new application for a license is made, such application indicating that no change of ownership has occurred, except as excepted in this article. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(f)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate ownership at the time of issuance of the license. 
(g)  A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders; however, any additional partners or new stockholders must be approved by the board of commissioners as provided under this article. 
(h)  Should a transfer of location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(i)  Except as provided in this section, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license under this article automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. 
(j)  Any violation of this section shall constitute an offense against the county as set forth in section 1-11. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the county for one year from the date of the violation. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-52. - Special provisions on revocation or suspension. 
(a)  When a license is suspended or revoked, the county shall not be required to refund any portion of the business tax to the holder of such suspended or revoked license. 
(b)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell any alcoholic beverages, the county license to manufacture or sell any such product within the county shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any further action by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  When any license for selling alcoholic beverages is revoked, all signs indicating that such beverage may be sold or purchased shall be removed from the place of business, both outside and inside. Upon receipt by the sheriff's office of notice of such revocation, the sheriff's office shall take the necessary steps to see that this provision is enforced. 
(d)  If the board of commissioners revokes or suspends any license for the sale of alcohol granted under this article, no new license under this article shall be granted by the county for the sale of malt beverages, wine and/or distilled spirits for the period of six months after the date of revocation or suspension to that licensee. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-53. - Sale of alcohol on election days permitted. 
Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to the County by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b)(2)(A), the sale by licensees of alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; however, nothing in this section shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Cross reference— Elections, ch. 34. 
Sec. 10-54. - Collection of sums due. 
If any person, firm, partnership or corporation shall fail to pay the sum due under this article, the finance director shall issue an execution against the person, firm, partnership or corporation so delinquent, and his or its property for the amount of the delinquent fees or tax. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-55. - Prohibition of alcoholic beverages with nudity or in adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  The regulations that follow and that otherwise are contained in this Code regarding adult entertainment establishments constitute content-neutral requirements that have been carefully designed to minimize adverse impacts caused by secondary effects of these establishments. The county finds that studies in other jurisdictions demonstrating a correlation between these establishments and such negative secondary effects as diminishing market values in neighboring residential and related areas, increasing crime rates, difficulty in securing residential and related financing, an influx of patrons to these establishments from outside the immediate neighboring areas, and similar negative effects, are pertinent and relevant to the situation that exists in the county. These studies, as well as other evidence from the public and professional staff, have been carefully reviewed by the county prior to adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives. The county further finds that there is evidence considered by the county prior to adoption of these and other county regulations regarding the combined effects of adult entertainment establishments and alcohol, and showing that the combination of such activities create additional pernicious secondary effects upon surrounding communities. The county finds that adoption of regulations restricting these establishments to certain districts, barring alcohol sales within such establishments, and imposing distance and development standards is consistent with the general comprehensive planning standards and policies of the county, will reduce the negative secondary effects caused by these establishments, and will afford protection to residential uses and other uses consistent with residential uses so as to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morality while respecting and protecting the free speech rights of these establishments. The regulations in this section are adopted pursuant to, inter alia, Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, VII. 
(b)  The definitions contained in this article and in section 22-142 shall apply to this section. 
(c)  No person, association, partnership or corporation holding a license under chapter 22, article V, shall serve, sell, distribute or allow the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage or illegal controlled substance upon the premises of any such licensed establishment. 
(d)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, including but not limited to employees or an independent contractor engaged in the sale or service of food or beverages, or promotions, contests, sales, or special events, in which such person, whether an employee, or an independent contractor, patron, customer, or otherwise, exposes any portion of his specified anatomical areas as defined in section 22-142, shall be prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages within the county. Such conduct shall constitute grounds for suspension and revocation of the alcoholic beverage license of any establishment licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  This section shall not apply or prohibit the live performance of legitimate plays, operas, musicals, or ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums or licensed educational institutions, which derive less than 20 percent of yearly gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Cross reference— Amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; adult entertainment, § 22-141 et seq. 
Sec. 10-56. - Hearings; appeal. 
(a)  No license which has been issued or which may be issued by the county to any licensee shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause as defined in subsection (d) of this section, and after an opportunity for a hearing as provided in this section. 
(b)  The licensee shall be given written notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing along with a statement of the charge, or charges, upon which such hearing shall be made. 
(c)  Written notice shall be given at least three days prior to any hearing; however, shorter periods of notice shall be authorized as the board of commissioners may deem the circumstances to justify. 
(d)  The term "due cause" for the suspension or revocation of such license shall be defined as the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such business or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business, or any reason which would authorize the governing body to refuse the issuance of a license. 
(e)  The director of the department of planning and development may suspend a license issued under this article when there is cause to believe that grounds exist for revoking the license. At the request of the license holder, a hearing shall be held at a special meeting of the board of commissioners to be called within seven days after such request is filed with the county. The board of commissioners shall affirm or reverse the suspension, suspend for a definite period, or revoke the license permanently after hearing the evidence at the next regular meeting of the board of commissioners. If the decision of the director of the department of planning and development is reversed, then the license shall be returned to the licensee immediately. A license shall not be revoked except upon action by the board of commissioners. 
(f)  The following minimal penalties shall apply to suspension actions taken by the director and to suspension and/or revocation actions taken by the board of commissioners: 
(1)  For the first violation involving the licensed establishment in question for violations of county, state or federal law regarding the sale, furnishing or distribution of beer, wine or liquor by the owner or an employee of such establishment licensed by the county, the license in question shall be suspended for six continuous days, and a fine of $1,200.00 shall be imposed. 
(2)  For the second violation involving the licensed establishment in question within two years prior to the current citation for violations of county, state or federal law as enumerated in this section by the owner or an employee of such establishment licensed by the county, the license in question shall be suspended for 30 continuous days, and a fine of $3,000.00 shall be imposed. 
(3)  For a third violation involving the licensed establishment in question within two years prior to the current citation for violations of county, state or federal law as enumerated in this section by the owner or an employee of such establishment licensed by the county, the license in question shall be revoked, and a fine of $5,000.00 shall be imposed. 
(g)  Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any malt beverages or wine, the county license to manufacture or deal in any such products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the board of commissioners. 
(h)  No person whose license has been suspended or revoked shall be entitled to a rebate of fees, taxes, or other expenses paid in conjunction with issuance of the license. 
(i)  An individual that works on the licensed premises beyond ten calendar days after their first work day without securing an alcoholic beverage handling permit shall be subject to a $100.00 fine. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-57. - Notice. 
For the purpose of this article, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-58. - Exterior advertisement prohibited. 
(a)  No placard or sign which is visible from the exterior of the licensed premises shall make reference to the price of any distilled spirits sold therein, except that tags showing the prices of individual bottles or containers may be affixed to the bottles or containers or to the edge of the shelf whereon the bottles or containers are located. 
(b)  Advertisement of malt beverages or wines cannot be affixed or displayed in the window of any establishment licensed for retail sale. Any placards or advertisements of malt beverages or wines must be displayed from inside the location. There shall be no advertisements to the price of any malt beverages or wines visible from the outside of such establishment. 
(c)  No show-window advertising or display shall be visible from the exterior of the primary use structure, and no sign shall be erected anywhere within the county advertising the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-59. - Prohibition on service of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to serve, dispense, or sell an alcoholic beverage while under the influence of alcohol. 
(b)  Inasmuch as the alcoholic beverage handling permits granted within this chapter are not a right, but a mere grant of privilege, all persons who are granted an alcoholic beverage handling permit under this chapter shall be deemed to consent to a breathalyzer test in the event that the sheriff or his/her designee has a reasonable basis to believe that such person is serving, dispensing or selling alcoholic beverages while under the influence of alcohol. 
(1)  In the event that such person is found to have an alcohol concentration of 0.05 grams or more, then such person will be deemed to have been serving, dispensing or selling alcoholic beverages while under the influence of alcohol, which shall be grounds for the revocation of such person's alcoholic beverage handling permit and the imposition of administrative penalties. 
(2)  A refusal by such person to submit to a breathalyzer test shall be grounds for the revocation of such person's alcoholic beverage handling permit and the imposition of administrative penalties. 
(c)  If an employee violates this section, then the licensee shall be subject to administrative penalties. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-60. - Drive-in window or curb service. 
It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic beverages from a "drive-in" or "service" window. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-61. - Gift baskets. 
It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic beverages in gift baskets at retail shops that do not have county and state licenses to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-62. - Alcohol beverage handling permit. 
(a)  Managers and employees; responsibilities. 
No licensee shall allow any manager or employee who is required under this chapter to secure an alcoholic beverage handling permit to work beyond ten calendar days after their first work day unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid alcoholic beverage handling permit of each such manager or employee. An individual working on the premises beyond ten calendar days after their first work day in an establishment holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages without the required permit shall be considered in violation of this chapter, and the employee and licensee shall be subject to administrative penalties. An individual that works on the licensed premises beyond ten calendar days after their first work day without securing an alcoholic beverage handling permit shall be subject to the penalty provisions contained in section 10-56. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverage handling permit application process. 
(1)  All persons involved in the selling of alcoholic beverages at package stores and all persons involved in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages at businesses which hold a license to sell alcoholic beverages for on premises consumption shall not work more than ten calendar days after the date of their first work day without first securing an alcoholic beverage handling permit. 
(2)  In order to apply for an alcoholic beverage handling permit, the applicant must submit an application which shall include, but shall not be limited to, the applicant's full legal name, date of birth, and social security number. In the event that the applicant has already secured employment where an alcoholic beverage handling permit is required, the applicant shall also list the name and address of the licensee on the application. The applicant shall also certify that he or she has read and understands the legal restrictions related to the handling and sales of alcoholic beverages and the consequences that may be imposed if the applicant does not comply with such restrictions. 
(3)  A complete set of fingerprints of each applicant for a new alcoholic beverage handling permit shall be required. 
a.  Authority. This subsection is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35(a)(1.2), the Georgia Umbrella Statute entitled "Dissemination of information to public agencies, political subdivisions, authorities, and instrumentalities." 
b.  Fingerprinting required. An individual seeking to receive an alcoholic beverage handling permit shall be required to be fingerprinted as a condition of submitting an application for a new alcoholic beverage handling permit. By filing such application, the applicant consents to the county obtaining their criminal history record information (CHRI) from the Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). At the time of the renewal, the applicant shall authorize the county to request a new criminal history record information (CHRI) from the Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI). 
c.  Access authorized; usage regulations. 
(1)  The county is hereby authorized to access national criminal history record information pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35(a)(1.2). 
(2)  Information obtained and handled for any purposes pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all Georgia laws and the Federal Privacy Act. 
(3)  No information given as part of the request for a criminal history and no record obtained pursuant to this section may be entered on any database. 
(4)  No information given or obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
d.  Administration; fees; procedures. 
(1)  Applicant shall provide his/her fingerprints, which shall be taken by the Sheriff's Office of Rockdale County. 
(2)  The applicant shall bear the cost of the electronic fingerprinting performed by the Rockdale County Sheriff's office, which shall be the maximum allowed by statute. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fees, the sheriff's office will transmit said fingerprints and appropriate fees to the GCIC. As provided by law, the GCIC will compare the subject's fingerprints against its criminal file and submit the fingerprints to the FBI for a comparison with nation-wide records, unless submission to the FBI is automatic pursuant to the use of live-scan. The results of the FBI check will be returned based on its current procedure, presently being directed to the county sheriff's office. 
(4)  In compliance with Federal Law 95-544, which provides for the rendering of a "fitness determination," the county will decide whether the applicant has been convicted of, or is under pending indictment for enumerated disqualifiers, as set forth within this chapter. 
(5)  A person who has consented to the county for a criminal history based on fingerprinting record may request and receive a copy of the criminal history record report from the sheriff's office. Should the person seek to amend or correct the record, he or she shall be responsible for contacting the GCIC as to Georgia records and/or the FBI concerning records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(6)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-63. - Considerations for granting applications for alcoholic beverage handling permits. 
(a)  The board of commissioners or his/her designee shall have the discretion to grant or refuse to grant any application for an alcoholic beverage handling permit hereunder; however, the board of commissioners or his/her designee shall consider the following matters in connection with each application for an alcoholic beverage handling permit, which said considerations are deemed to be in the public interest and welfare, as follows: 
(1)  Whether the applicant has had any alcoholic beverage handling permit issued by the county or by any other licensing authority in the state relating to the sale or service of alcoholic beverages suspended within the past five years or revoked within the past ten years; 
(2)  Whether the applicant has been dishonorably discharged from the armed services of the United States; 
(3)  Whether the applicant is 18 years of age or older; 
(4)  Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or a resident of Georgia; 
(5)  Whether the applicant's reputation, character, and mental and physical capacity indicate an ability to competently fulfill the functions and duties performed by those holding alcoholic beverage handling permits; 
(6)  Whether the applicant has been convicted of, pled guilty to, or entered a plea of nolo contendre to, or is presently charged with any felony, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, any criminal offense related to lottery rules or regulations, any offense related to illegal gambling, soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting of premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, any offense related to the illegal possession or sale of illegal drugs or alcoholic beverages, any sex offense found in O.C.G.A. Title 16, Chapter 6 or any similar violation found in any other State or federal statute, any charges related to the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages, or a second offense of driving under the influence of alcohol within the last five years; 
(7)  Whether the applicant has been found to have violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to the sales or service of alcoholic beverages within a five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application for an alcoholic beverage handling permit; and, 
(8)  Whether the applicant has failed to meet any other criteria specified by this chapter or state law. 
(b)  The board of commissioners or his/her designee has the discretionary authority to consider any other objective criteria that is rationally related to the application, including any extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, when making a decision to approve or deny an alcoholic beverage handling permit. If, in the judgment of the board of commissioners or his/her designee, circumstances are such that granting the alcoholic beverage handling permit would not be in the best interest of the general health, safety, and public welfare, such circumstances shall be grounds for denying the application. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-64. - Denial of applications for alcoholic beverage handling permits. 
(a)  If an application for an alcoholic beverage handling permit is denied, the board of commissioners or his/her designee shall notify the applicant that the applicant's application was denied. The applicant will be provided an explanation in writing as to the basis for the denial of the application. 
(b)  All alcoholic beverage handling permits issued hereunder shall remain the property of the county and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the sheriff or his/her designee. Such permits shall be present on the premises at all times while the permittee is working. Any permit that is issued through administrative error may be rescinded by the Board of commissioners or his/her designee. 
(c)  No person shall be issued an alcoholic beverage handling permit if it is determined that the person knowingly and willfully falsified, concealed, or covered up any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application to the director of planning and development or his/her designee or to the sheriff or his/her designee for an alcoholic beverage handling permit under this chapter. Any such act on the part of an applicant shall also be a violation of this chapter and shall be punishable as set forth elsewhere within this chapter. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-65. - Continuing duty to report criminal convictions. 
All alcoholic beverage handling permit holders shall have a continuing duty to notify the department of planning and development in writing in the event that the alcoholic beverage handling permit holder is charged with, is convicted of or pleads guilty or nolo contendre to any criminal offense under the laws of this state or any other state or other jurisdiction after an alcoholic beverage handling permit has been granted. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-66. - Alcoholic beverage handling permit; renewal. 
Any alcoholic beverage handling permit issued hereunder shall expire one year from the date of issuance, unless earlier rescinded by the board of commissioners or his/her designee. All persons holding alcoholic beverage handling permits and seeking to renew such permits shall submit an application to renew their permits in advance of the expiration date on forms prescribed by the department of planning and development. Upon receipt of the background check information, the county shall have 30 calendar days to review such completed renewal application. Handling alcohol without a valid permit is expressly prohibited. In the event that the county does not issue a decision on the completed renewal application within this time period, then the application fee shall be refunded to the applicant and shall be waived with respect to the present renewal application only. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-67. - Required workshop. 
(a)  Within 90 calendar days of obtaining an alcoholic beverage handling permit, all employees involved in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages at package stores or for consumption on the premises will be required to provide proof of satisfactory completion of a Responsible Alcohol Sales and Services (RASS) workshop. Such certificate shall be maintained at the licensed premises and available for inspection during normal business hours. A copy of such certificate for every employee who was involved in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages during the prior year shall be attached to the licensee's yearly renewal application. A licensee's failure to require such employees to obtain such certification shall be grounds for the imposition of administrative penalties. In addition, each employee shall attach a copy of his or her certificate to any renewal application for his or her alcoholic beverage handling permit. The failure of a permitted alcoholic beverage handler to obtain such certification shall also be grounds for the imposition of administrative penalties on the licensee. 
(b)  All employees involved in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages at package stores or for consumption on the premises will be required to provide proof of satisfactory completion of a RASS workshop once every three years. In the event that said employee has not satisfactorily completed a RASS workshop within the last three years, then that employee shall be deemed to be in violation of this section and shall be subject to administrative penalties. Further, the alcoholic beverage handling permit of such employee shall not be renewed until such time as the employee satisfactorily completes a RASS workshop. The failure of a permitted alcoholic beverage handler to comply with this requirement shall also be grounds for the imposition of administrative penalties on the licensee. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-68. - Off-premises sale of alcoholic beverages for catered functions. 
(a)  In addition to the occupation tax requirements, the following requirements shall apply to the licensing and operations for sales of alcoholic beverages off-premises for catered functions. Should this section conflict with any other provisions of this chapter or the occupation tax requirements of chapter 86, then this section shall control. 
(b)  Any applicant who holds a license issued by the county under the terms and conditions set forth in section 10-131 to sell malt beverages or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises may be issued an off-premises license that authorizes such applicant to sell malt beverages or wine by the drink off-premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. For purposes of this section, the term "authorized catered function" may include a function held inside a publicly or privately owned building or structure that is located within the unincorporated areas of Rockdale County. 
(c)  Any applicant who holds a license issued by the county under the terms and conditions set forth in section 10-131 which authorizes the applicant to sell distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises may be issued an off-premises license which authorizes such applicant to sell distilled spirits by the drink off-premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. For purposes of this section the term "authorized catered function" may include a function held inside a publicly or privately owned building or structure that is located within the unincorporated areas of Rockdale County. 
(d)  In order to distribute or sell distilled spirits, malt beverages or wine at an authorized catered function, an applicant shall be required to: 
(1)  Apply to the department of planning and development for an alcoholic beverage special event permit. The application shall include the name of the applicant; the date, address and time of the event; and the applicant's alcoholic beverage license number. 
(2)  If applicable, provide satisfactory reports as required to the state on forms provided by the state, stating the quantity of any and all alcoholic beverages transported from the applicant's primary premises to the location of the authorized catered function and such other information as may be required by the state. 
(3)  If applicable, maintain original event permits and documents in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverage to the catered function at all times. 
(4)  Pay an alcoholic beverage special event permit fee according to the fee schedule approved by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  The sheriff's office and the department of planning and development or their designees shall review the applicant's application and supporting documentation. Based upon the requirements set forth in this section, the board of commissioners or his/her designee shall either approve or deny, in writing, said alcoholic beverage special event application. 
(f)  All alcoholic beverage special event license applications must be submitted at least 30 calendar days prior to the planned special event. 
(g)  No limitations will be applied as to the number of alcoholic beverage special event license applications made by a retail consumption dealer in any one calendar year. 
(h)  The restrictions set forth in the section 10-135, hours of operation, shall apply to all sales of alcoholic beverages at authorized catered functions. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Secs. 10-69—10-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 10-81. - Scope of division. 
In addition to the general business license requirements of this Code and division 1 of this article, the following sections of this division shall apply to the licensing and operation of retail and wholesale distilled spirits establishments and the manufacturing of distilled spirits in the county; and should any section of this division conflict with other provisions in this article or the general business license requirements of this Code, then this division shall control. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-82. - Additional application requirements. 
All applicants for a license to sell distilled spirits for off-premises consumption shall submit as part of the application a scaled drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church or school and a plat of survey signed by a registered surveyor that such location complies with the distance requirements of section 10-94. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-83. - Issuance of license limited to designated areas. 
(a)  Manufacturer's license. No manufacturer's license shall be issued to a manufacturer engaged in distilling or blending alcoholic beverages except where such business is to be located in an area of the county which is zoned M-2 (general industrial). 
(b)  Wholesaler's license. No license shall be issued to a wholesaler of alcoholic beverages except where the wholesale business is to be located in any area of the county which is zoned M-1 (limited industrial) or M-2 (general industrial). 
(c)  Packaged distilled spirits. No license to engage in the sale of packaged liquors at retail shall be granted except in an area zoned C-1 (local commercial) or C-2 (general commercial). 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-84. - Number of licenses per person limited. 
No person shall hold a beneficial interest in more than two licenses issued under this division. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-85. - Restrictions on other mercantile establishments. 
A licensee of a retail establishment under this division shall not operate the business in connection with any other mercantile establishment. No retailer under this division shall sell, offer for sale, display, or keep in stock at his place of business where packaged distilled spirits are offered for sale any other commodity except the following, all of which may be sold by the retailer at his option: 
(1)  Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits, but no beverages of any kind may be opened or consumed in the place of business. 
(2)  Wines, malt beverages or beer, when properly licensed. 
(3)  Tobacco products. 
(4)  Packaged ice. 
(5)  Paper, styrofoam or plastic cups. 
(6)  State-approved lottery tickets and related state-approved lottery materials, but only if the retail dealer is a state-approved retail lottery dealer location. 
(7)  Bar supplies, subject to state regulatory limitations. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-86. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Retail distilled spirits. The exterior entrances of retail licensed stores under this division must be locked no later than 12:00 a.m. (midnight). Licensees shall not engage in the sale of any liquors except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. (midnight), Monday through Saturday and 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
(b)  Wholesalers. The business hours of any wholesale distilled spirits licensee shall be from 7:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(c)  Sundays. A license for the sale of distilled spirits at retail shall permit the place of business to be open for the sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-87. - Retail sale or delivery to unlicensed premises. 
It shall be unlawful for any retail licensee under this division to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverages by the package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-88. - Allowing minors on licensed premises. 
No person who holds a license to sell distilled spirits shall allow any minor to frequent or loiter about the premises of the licensee unless such minors are accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-89. - Requirements of wholesalers generally. 
All wholesale dealers or distributors shall be licensed by the state revenue department and shall comply with all laws and regulations of the state revenue department before they sell or deliver any distilled spirits in the county. Deliveries and sales shall be made only to retailers licensed under the provisions of this division, and all deliveries shall be made in conveyances owned and operated by the wholesale dealers or distributors. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-90. - Retailers to purchase from licensed wholesalers only. 
Retail dealers in distilled spirits licensed under the provisions of this division shall not buy or accept deliveries of distilled spirits from wholesalers, dealers, or distributors except such as are licensed by the state revenue department. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-91. - Regulations governing retail storage. 
All licensed retailers under this division shall store all distilled spirits on the premises for which the license was issued and at no other place. All distilled spirits stock shall be available at all times for inspection by the director of the department of planning and development or his designee. Any distilled spirits found in any retailer's stock that is sold or distributed by a wholesaler who is not licensed in accordance with state law shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-92. - Invoices. 
(a)  Upon each delivery by a licensed wholesaler to a licensed retailer under this article, an invoice in triplicate shall be prepared, showing the quantities and brands of distilled spirits delivered, together with the price thereof and the excise tax due and collected thereon. The original of such invoice shall be delivered by the wholesaler to the retailer simultaneously with such delivery. The wholesaler shall retain the second copy of such invoice and shall keep it for a period of 12 months after the date of delivery; and during the 12-month period, such invoices shall be made available for inspection by the director of the department of planning and development or his designee. Upon request, a copy of the invoice shall be attached to any reports requested or required by the county. 
(b)  Each retail licensee under this division shall keep and maintain the original invoice of each sale to or purchase by the licensee from any wholesaler of distilled spirits for at least 12 months after the date of the purchase and shall maintain records to show the sales of distilled spirits and any other records required by the county. The county officials mentioned in subsection (a) of this section shall have the right to inspect the records of each licensee at any time. Failure of a licensee to properly maintain records showing receipt of distilled spirits, payment therefor, and payment records, which clearly show the sales, the amount of sales, and the types of sales of each licensee may result in the revocation or suspension of the license. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-93. - Posting of chapter provisions. 
All holders of distilled spirits licenses under this division shall keep a copy of this article posted in the licensed premises and shall thoroughly familiarize themselves and thoroughly instruct each employee of the establishment with respect to the terms hereof. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-94. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits for off-premises consumption: 
(1)  Within 200 yards of any school or educational grounds, or college campus; 
(2)  Within 100 yards of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government in the state; or 
(3)  Within 100 yards of any church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship. 
(b)  No new or relocating business shall receive a license to sell distilled spirits for off-premises consumption if such business is within 500 yards of any other business licensed to sell distilled spirits for off-premises consumption, as measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground; provided, however, that this limitation shall not apply to any hotel licensed under O.C.G.A. Tit. 3 Ch. 4. The restriction provided for in this subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license was issued and continuously renewed prior to July 1, 1997, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall the restriction of this subsection apply to any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of distilled spirits was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Secs. 10-95—10-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BEER AND WINE 

Sec. 10-111. - Scope of division. 
In addition to the general business license requirements of this Code and division 1 of this article, the following sections of this division shall apply to the licensing and operation of retail and wholesale malt beverages or vinous liquor establishments in the county; and should any section of this division conflict with other provisions in this article or the general business license requirements of this Code, then this division shall control. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-112. - Additional application requirements. 
All applicants for a license to sell malt beverages or vinous liquor for off-premises consumption shall submit as part of the application a scaled drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church or school and a plat of survey signed by a registered surveyor that such location complies with the distance requirements of section 10-115. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-113. - Licenses limited to certain locations. 
No licenses under this division, except as may be authorized elsewhere in this article, shall be issued to any applicant who is not the owner or operator of an established business engaged in the retail sales of staple groceries and who does not carry a current inventory of at least $2,000.00 in retail value of such grocery items in stock for retail sale to the general public. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-114. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Retail malt beverages and wine. Licensees in the sale of retail malt beverages and vinous liquors shall be allowed to engage in the sale of such beverages for 24 hours a day Monday through Friday, on Saturday until 12:00 midnight, and on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. 
(b)  Wholesalers. The business hours of any wholesaler of malt beverages and vinous liquors shall be from 7:00 a.m. until 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-115. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell for off-premises consumption any malt beverages or vinous liquors within 100 yards of the following: 
(1)  Any school or educational grounds, college campus; or 
(2)  Any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government in the state. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Secs. 10-116—10-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 10-131. - Scope of division. 
In addition to the general business license requirements of this Code and division 1 of this article, the following sections of this division shall apply to the licensing and operation of all establishments selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-132. - Additional application requirements. 
All applicants for a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall submit as part of the application a scaled drawing of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein and a plat of survey signed by a registered surveyor that such location complies with the distance requirements of section 10-138. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-133. - License limited to certain businesses. 
(a)  With the exceptions of the County Auditorium, the Black Shoals Retreat House, and Costley Mill Park, licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be limited to restaurants, indoor commercial recreational establishments, golf courses, private clubs, hotels, nightclubs, lounges, and performing arts facilities, as defined in section 10-31. 
(b)  In addition to the requirements in subsection (a) above, businesses licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises must either: 
(1)  Derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served; or 
(2)  Derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-134. - Right to multiple licenses. 
A licensee for the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall also have the right to serve malt beverages or wine, provided he or she shall secure a license therefor. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-135. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Malt beverages, vinous liquors or distilled spirits may be sold for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 3:00 a.m. of the following morning on Monday through Friday, 
(2)  Between the hours of 7:00 a.m. on Saturday and 1:00 a.m. of the following Sunday morning with each and every customer being required to vacate the premises by 2:00 a.m. of said Sunday morning, and 
(3)  Between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on Sunday. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-136. - Courtyard and patio areas. 
(a)  For the purposes of this division, an establishment may include a courtyard and/or patio area subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The courtyard and/or patio shall be used merely as an extension of the seating area, and the serving area shall be contained wholly within the principal premises or establishment. 
(2)  Service shall be only by waiter or waitress or by customer self-service at an interior selling location (i.e., no outside bar or service window). 
(3)  No outside entertainment or amplified music shall be allowed, and the establishment shall be subject to such other reasonable noise and nuisance regulations as deemed advisable by the county or its departments. 
(4)  No additional license shall be required for service on a courtyard or patio area; however, the licensee must apply for an amendment to his consumption-on-the-premises license to reflect the additional service area, and such application shall be accompanied by two copies of plans of the proposed courtyard or patio area and be subject to the approval of the inspection department, the fire department, and any other interested department. 
(5)  The courtyard and/or patio area shall be adequately illuminated for the safety of the patrons. 
(6)  Setback lines and buffer requirements in the county zoning ordinance of chapter 130 must be observed. 
(7)  All courtyards, patios, or combinations thereof shall be completely enclosed by a fence that is at least four feet in height from existing grade. Such fence shall be designed so as to ensure that no person can enter such courtyard or patio area from the exterior of the licensed establishment. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-137. - Certain practices prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage. 
(2)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price. 
(3)  Selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person or persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than half the price customarily charged for such alcoholic beverage, provided, nothing contained in this division shall be construed to prohibit reducing the price of a drink or drinks by up to half the price customarily charged; 
(4)  Increasing the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage. 
(5)  Selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person or persons, any alcoholic beverage made with more than three ounces of distilled spirits. 
(6)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall: 
(7)  Offer any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons; 
(8)  Deliver more than one alcoholic beverage to one person at one time; with the exception of any one and one-half ounce serving of a distilled spirit at such time the customer is in possession of a malt beverage. 
(9)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(10)  Require or allow the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the previous alcoholic beverage has been consumed or otherwise discarded; with the exception of any one and one-half ounce serving of a distilled spirit at such time the customer is in possession of a malt beverage. 
(11)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a). 
(12)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the delivery of a bottle of wine to the patrons of a restaurant for consumption during the course of a meal. 
(13)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall sell, offer to sell or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, in any container that holds more than 32 fluid ounces at any one time to one person. 
(14)  A consumption on the premises licensee may sell, offer to sell or deliver alcoholic beverages, including malt beverages, in a pitcher containing not more than 64 fluid ounces to a group of persons consisting of at least two or more persons. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "customarily charged" shall mean the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-138. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  With the exceptions of the County Auditorium, the Black Shoals Retreat House, and Costley Mill Park, no person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  Within 200 yards of any school or educational grounds, or college campus; 
(2)  Within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government in the state; 
(3)  Within 100 yards of any church, synagogue, mosque or other place of worship; 
(4)  Within 200 yards of certain residential districts, to wit, zoning districts defined as W-P, A-R, R-1, R-1B, CRS, R-2 and M-H, however, golf course clubhouses located within residential developments shall be excluded from this distance provision; 
(5)  Within 200 yards of any public library; or 
(6)  Within 100 feet of zoning districts defined as RM or R-3 multifamily. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-139. - Sale of alcoholic beverages by certain nonprofit organizations. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application and payment of a fee established by the board of commissioners and, after review by the director of the department of planning and development or his designee, the board of commissioners may issue a temporary license authorizing a nonprofit civic organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only, for a period not to exceed three days, subject to any law regulating the time for selling such beverages. 
(b)  No more than four temporary licenses may be issued to any nonprofit organization in any one calendar year pursuant to this section. 
(c)  Temporary licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the place specified in the temporary license. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-140. - Sale or delivery off premises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee of a retail establishment permitted to sell distilled spirits hereunder to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverages by the package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Secs. 10-141—10-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Taxation, ch. 86. 
State Law reference— Tax authorized for distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 

Sec. 10-171. - Levy and computation. 
(a)  In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon retail dealers selling any malt beverages, wine or spirituous liquors for retail package or by-the-drink sales in the unincorporated areas of the county, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each such retail dealer the following excise taxes: 
(1)  Upon the sale of any malt beverages, there is imposed an excise tax of $0.05 per 12-ounce container and $6.00 for each container of tap or draft beer of 15½ gallons and in similar proportion for bottles, cans and containers of various sizes as follows: 

 
(2)  Upon the sale of any wine there is imposed an excise tax of $0.22 per liter. 
(3)  Upon the sale of any spirituous liquors there is imposed an excise tax of $0.22 per liter. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-172. - Reports; payment; records. 
(a)  Each wholesale dealer selling to any retail dealer in the county to whom the taxes in this article apply shall file a report with the county by the tenth day of each month, itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of all beverages by size and type of container sold within the county. The report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer with which the wholesaler did business in the county and any other information as may be required by the county chairperson for the administration of this article. 
(b)  Each wholesale dealer under this article shall collect from the retail dealers in the county under this article, at the time of delivery of any alcoholic beverages, any tax due the county under this article and hold the tax in trust for the county until the tax is remitted to the county as provided in this article. 
(c)  The report shall be accompanied by remittance to the county of all taxes due under this article for the preceding month. 
(d)  Each wholesale dealer under this article shall keep true and correct records, including invoices, of all sales, shipments or deliveries of beverages to retail dealers in this county. These records shall be preserved for at least one year and shall be made available on request for inspection by any authorized representative of the county. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-173. - Violations; penalty; revocation of license. 
(a)  Purpose and penalty. The excise tax levied in this article is hereby levied upon the retailer licensed to do business in the county and it is the intent of this section to so levy this tax but require the payment of the tax at the time of delivery by the wholesaler to the retailer, who shall have the responsibility of remitting the tax to the county on behalf of the retailer on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, as required in this article. If the tax due under this article is not paid on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, a 15 percent penalty on the gross tax shall be levied by the county against each defaulting retailing licensee for whom the tax is not paid on or before the tenth day of the month. An additional 15 percent penalty shall be levied for each successive 30-day period after the first such period for nonpayment. 
(b)  Noncompliance by wholesale dealer. If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports required in this article, the county shall notify the dealer or distributor in writing and if the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of the notice, the wholesale dealer or distributor shall be prohibited from making any further deliveries in the county and the retail licensees served and the wholesale dealer or distributor from whom the taxes have not been paid shall be subject to having their license suspended or revoked as provided in this article. 
(c)  Unlawful retail sales. It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm, or corporation to sell at retail within the unincorporated areas of the county any alcoholic beverages on which the taxes provided for in this article have not been paid. 
(d)  Unlawful deliveries. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesale dealer or distributor, person, firm or corporation to deliver any alcoholic beverages to any retail dealer in the unincorporated areas of the county without at the time of the delivery collecting the excise taxes provided for in this article. 
(e)  Violation and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article or who shall assist any retail dealer in alcoholic beverages in the county to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes provided in this article shall be guilty of a violation of this section and on conviction thereof in the magistrate court shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. Any such person so convicted shall also be subject to having any business license of the county issued to the person suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 10-174. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the definitions in article II of this chapter shall apply. In addition, the term "wine" shall be synonymous with "vinous liquors" as defined in section 10-31, and the term "spirituous liquors" shall be synonymous with "distilled spirits" as defined in section 10-31. 
(Ord. 0-2017-20, § 1(Exh. A), 9-19-2017) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Chapter 14 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Prohibition of alcoholic beverages with nudity or in adult entertainment establishments, § 10-55; businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Control of mass gatherings, O.C.G.A. § 31-27-1 et seq.; coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The definitions used in section 86-31 of this Code shall likewise apply to this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Game devices. 
(a)  An annual business license tax of $25.00 is hereby levied upon each game device commercially operated by any person, firm, partnership or corporation licensed or doing business under the provisions of this section, with the total amount that would be collected per year per premises not to exceed $500.00. Such tax shall be levied in addition to that business license fee and occupational tax provided under section 22-31. For purposes of this section, the owner or lessee of the business premises in which a game device is located shall be considered doing business and shall be responsible for payment of the tax imposed under the provisions of this section. 
(b)  A game device, as used in this section, shall include but shall not be limited to pool tables, billiard tables, pinball machines, electronic Ping-Pong, electronic tennis, video games and other similar devices. 
(c)  Application, registration, collection and enforcement of the tax levied in this section shall be governed by all applicable provisions of chapter 22, article II. 
(d)  The license tax levied under this section shall be calculated based upon the total number of game devices maintained on the business premises, and an additional tax shall not be required where one game device operated on the business premises is replaced by another game device provided the total number of devices operated does not exceed the total number of devices for which a license tax has been levied and paid for the applicable annual period. 
(e)  The license tax shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year. A penalty of ten percent of the license tax shall be assessed against any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity described in this section who shall fail to pay the license tax by March 1 of each year when the tax is due, or within 30 days after the device is placed on the premises. 
(f)  Any game device placed in a business premises after January 1 of the year shall be taxed at the full fee for the remainder of the year without proration. 
(g)  Upon payment of the license tax levied under this section, a game device permit shall be issued which shall indicate in bold letters the number of game devices registered for that particular business premises. Such permit shall be prominently displayed at or near the location of the game devices. 
(h)  Section 1-11 shall apply as a penalty for the violation of this section. 
(Code 1978, § 7-6001) 
Chapter 18 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animal control board, § 2-138; environment, ch. 42; livestock at large, § 42-77; health and sanitation, ch. 50. 
State constitution reference— Power of county to provide animal control services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 
State Law reference— Dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; removal of identifying item from animal, O.C.G.A. § 16-9-71; destroying or injuring police dog or police horse, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-107; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; inspection of animals, carcasses, meat, and meat food products, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-100 et seq.; game and fish, O.C.G.A. title 27; technical assistance for control or elimination of wild or abandoned dogs, O.C.G.A. § 27-1-7; hunting with dogs, O.C.G.A. § 27-3-16 et seq.; killing of dogs pursuing or killing deer, O.C.G.A. § 27-3-49; guide dogs, service dogs, O.C.G.A. § 30-4-2 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; civil liability for damage done by animals, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6 et seq. 

Sec. 18-1. - Animals creating nuisances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal or the individual in possession of the property upon which the animal is located at the time of the offense to allow that animal to bark, whine, howl, crow, or cause other sound or noise for a sustained period of time which is plainly audible to a person of ordinary hearing ability provided, however, that no conviction of this offense shall occur if the evidence demonstrates that, at the time the animal is emitting such sound or noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon property in or upon which the animal is situated or if the noise is the result of an intentional provocation by another person. An animal for the purposes of this section shall include but not be limited to dogs, cats and fowl. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the term "sustained period of time" shall be defined as a period of time during which the animal barks, whines, howls, crows or makes noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 15 minutes or more, or makes such noise intermittently for 30 minutes or more. 
(c)  No person shall be found guilty of a violation of subsection (a) of this section unless such person shall have been given notice of the disturbing noise in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Upon determination by any person that a violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section has occurred or is occurring, such person or his agent shall file a report to animal care and control which shall include the name, address, and phone number of the person filing the report; violators address, animal description and detailed complaint. An animal control officer shall respond to the complaint by leaving written or verbal warning with the violator. 
(2)  Subsequent to filing a complaint as set out in subsection (c)(1) of this section, the complainant video the animal making such disturbances for a period of 15 minutes or longer or intermittently for 30 minutes or more. This video is recommended that complainant take recording from deck or window of the complainant's home. The complainant cannot provoke the animal during the video recording. Audio proof will not be accepted. 
(3)  Along with the video proof of the disturbances the complainant shall keep a log over a period of seven days detailing the animal disturbances. The complainant or his agent shall bring video proof and copy of the log to animal control for review. 
[(4)]  Once animal control reviews video proof and log it will be up to the shelter manager or his/her designee to determine if proof will be substantial to issue citation for the violation. If animal control finds the proof to be substantial then a citation will be issued to the violator/animal owner and a subpoena will be issued to the complainant. Animal control cannot stand trial or serve as a witness for this violation. 
(d)  The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-06, § 1, 2-26-2002; Ord. No. 0-2010-08, §§ 1, 2, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 0-2011-04, § 1, 1-18-2011) 
Cross reference— Nuisances generally, § 42-71 et seq. 
Sec. 18-2. - When collar and tag required. 
For each dog three months of age or older, it shall be the duty of the dog owner or custodian to provide a collar and affixed current rabies inoculation tag issued by a veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state. The collar and tag shall be worn at all times; except that the wearing of collar and tag is not required for dogs participating in a dog show and dogs living or boarded in licensed kennels or in veterinary clinics. 
(Code 1978, § 9-3002) 
Sec. 18-3. - Duty of owner to keep dog under control. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or anyone having a dog in his possession and control to permit the dog to be out of control and unattended off the premises of the owner, or upon the property of another person without permission of the owner or person in possession thereof. 
(b)  A dog is under control if he is controlled by a leash, is at heel or is beside a competent person and obedient to that person's commands, or within the property limits of its owner or custodian under the immediate supervision of a responsible party. Dogs left on the owner's or custodian's property unsecured, unconfined or unattended are not deemed to be under control and are subject to impoundment. Hunting dogs shall be deemed under control while engaged in normal hunting activity for the particular type of hunt involved. 
(Code 1978, § 9-3003) 
Sec. 18-4. - Impounding of violators. 
(a)  Any and all dogs found running at large in violation of this chapter or which by reasonable means would be deemed to be out of control shall be impounded by the county or its duly authorized officers or agents. 
(b)  An animal control officer may pursue onto private property a dog that has been seen by that officer running at large, in order to capture and impound that animal. 
(Code 1978, § 9-3004) 
Sec. 18-5. - Redemption; adoption; disposition. 
(a)  Redemption. It shall be the responsibility of the department of animal care and control to notify the owner of each dog impounded if the owner of the dog is known or can be reasonably ascertained. The owner of any dog impounded may, within 72 hours, reclaim the dog by the payment of a reasonable administrative impoundment fee and boarding fee as set by the governing authority of the county for each day the dog was impounded and the cost of rabies inoculation if the dog impounded was not wearing a current rabies inoculation tag or if the owner of the animal does not have a current rabies inoculation certificate. 
(b)  Adoption. The department of animal care and control may offer for adoption to any person any dog unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after 72 hours upon compliance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Payment of the adoption fee as set by the governing authority of the county and cost of rabies inoculation. 
(2)  All animals adopted from the department of animal care and control shall be neutered or spayed. Upon completion of neutering or spaying within the period specified by the department of animal care and control, the veterinarian performing such operations shall submit to animal control certification of such operation. In the event, and for whatever reason, the animal is no longer in the possession of the adopter on the date specified for spaying or neutering, the adopter shall sign an affidavit as to the whereabouts of the animal. 
(3)  No persons residing in the same household, nor any corporation, institute or other entity, may adopt more than four animals within any 12-month period; however, nothing shall prohibit the director of animal care and control to donate more than four animals in a 12-month period if the donation is in the best interest or welfare of the animal or is in the best interest of public safety. 
(c)  Disposition. If a dog is not claimed by the owner within the time prescribed or adopted, then it shall be the duty of the department of animal care and control to dispose of it in as humane and painless manner as possible. 
(Code 1978, § 9-3005; Ord. No. 0-1999-25, § I, 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 2009-10, §§ 1, 2, 7-14-2009) 
Sec. 18-6. - Interference with animal control officer. 
It shall be unlawful to interfere with any animal control officer by taking or attempting to take any animal from any vehicle used to transport an impounded animal, to take or attempt to take an animal from the animal control impounding areas, or by any other method which would block or hinder any officer from performing his duties. 
(Code 1978, § 9-3006) 
Sec. 18-7. - Enforcement procedure for handling violations. 
The primary responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the department of animal care and control or other authorized and designated agent who may call upon such officers and employees of the health department or sheriff's department as may be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 9-3007) 
Sec. 18-8. - Humane treatment of animals. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "animal" shall be defined to mean any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. 
(b)  No person, corporation or other entity having an animal in its possession and/or control shall fail to provide such animal sufficient food, a constant source of potable water, sanitary living conditions, shelter and adequate protection from the elements. Veterinary care, when needed to prevent suffering to such animal, shall be provided; and such animal shall be treated with humane care at all times. 
(c)  No person shall beat, ill treat, torment, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal or cause, instigate, or permit combat between animals. 
(d)  No person or corporate entity having an animal in its possession and/or control shall abandon such animal on public or private property. 
(e)  No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the poisonous substance shall be liable to be eaten by any animal. It shall not be unlawful for a person to expose, on his own property, common rat and insect poisons. 
(f)  When an owner or other responsible person receives a citation pursuant to this section the animal(s) whose condition provided the basis for the citation may be impounded immediately by animal control officers for the purpose of seeking veterinary care for such animal(s). The animal(s) may remain impounded pending disposition of the citation by the court, and any incurred veterinary or related expenses may be ordered paid as restitution by the court. 
(g)  Violations of this section shall be subject to fines and penalties as set out in section 1-11. 
(Code 1978, § 9-3008; Ord. No. 2007-20, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
State Law reference— Cruelty to dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5; destroying or injuring police dog, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-107; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; grounds for revocation or suspension of veterinarian licenses or for other disciplinary action, § 43-50-27. 
Sec. 18-9. - Tethering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or anyone having a dog in his possession and control to restrain or anchor a dog to a stationary object by means of a tether, chain, cable, rope or cord. A dog shall not be considered tethered when the dog is attached to a stationary object, as long as the owner or custodian is physically within reach of the dog. 
(b)  As a secondary means of restraint to a proper enclosure, a dog may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system providing that: 
(1)  A running cable line or trolley system is set inside an enclosed fence or other proper enclosure; 
(2)  Only one dog may be attached to each running cable line or trolley system; 
(3)  No dog may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system for more than 12 hours in a 24-hour period; 
(4)  No dog may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(5)  Tethers and cables attaching the dog to the running cable line or trolley system must be made of a substance which cannot be chewed by the dog and shall not weigh more than five percent of the body weight of the dog tethered; 
(6)  A running cable line or trolley system must have a swivel installed at each end and be attached to a stationary object that cannot be moved by the dog; 
(7)  The running cable line or trolley system must be at least ten feet in length and mounted at least four feet and no more than seven feet above ground level; 
(8)  The length of the tether from the running cable line or trolley system to the dog's collar should allow access to the maximum available exercise area and allow the dog free access to food, water, and shelter; 
(9)  Be attached to a properly fitted harness or collar not used for the display of a current rabies tag and other identification; and with enough room between the collar and the dog's throat through which two fingers may fit. Choke collars and pinch collars are prohibited for the purpose of tethering a dog to a running cable line or trolley system; and 
(10)  Be tethered at sufficient distance from any other objects to prohibit the tangling of the cable, fron extending over an object or an edge that could result in injury of strangulation of the dog and be of sufficient distance from any fence so as to prohibit the dog access to the fence. 
(Ord. No. 2007-20, § 2, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 18-10. - Dangerous dogs. 
(a)  The animal control officers of the county are hereby designated dog control officers pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c). 
(b)  The animal control board, created asset forth in section 2-138, shall hear appeals pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(d). 
(c)  an annual registration fee for dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25(f) shall be $150.00 for the initial year and $25.00 each year thereafter. Such annual fee shall include one sign as described in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25(b)(2) designed by the department of natural resources and furnished by the county. Replacement signs shall be available at the department of community compliance and legal affairs for a charge of $15.00 each. 
(d)  The insurance policy or surety bond required of owners of dangerous dogs pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25(c) shall be in the amount of at least $100,000.00. 
(e)  For purposes of enforcement of the dangerous dog law within the county, the terms: 
(1)  Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
a.  Inflicts a sever injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property; or 
b.  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
c.  Such term shall not include a dog that inflicts an injury upon a person when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out that officer's official duties. 
(2)  Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that: 
a.  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation on public or private property; 
b.  Inflicts a severe injury on another dog, cat, or other domestic animal or livestock without provocation on public or private property; or 
c.  Based on competent evidence, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack without provocation. 
d.  Such term shall not include a dog that inflicts an injury upon a person or animal when the dog is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out that officer's official duties. 
(3)  Competent evidence means: 
a.  Personal observations of an animal control officer, law enforcement officer, or other public safety official; or 
b.  Sworn testimony by any person, provided that such testimony is based on personal observation and is found to be credible by the finder of fact in the prosecution of any violation of chapter 18 of this Code. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dot to violate any of the registration requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dot to violate any of the restraint requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26. 
(h)  A potentially dangerous or dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by an animal control or law enforcement officer upon a violation of the requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of the Dangerous Dog Control Law within 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, then it shall be the duty of the shelter manager or his/her designee to euthanize the dog pursuant to Section 4.15 of the Rockdale County Animal Control Shelter Services Procedure Manual. 
(i)  The owner of a dog which has been declared as potentially dangerous or dangerous; or which has been found by a courts of competent jurisdiction to be a "vicious dog" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-41(6) shall, at his/her own expense and prior to placing the dog on the property, have the dog permanently identified by insertion of a microchip by a licensed veterinarian. Said chip must be registered with the chip parent company and the animal control officer. 
(Code 1978, § 9-3010; Ord. No. 2007-20, § 3, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 18-11. - Training guard or protection dogs. 
(a)  It is unlawful to train a guard or protection dog, unless the trainer holds a state kennel license, a county business license, and maintains at all time either a policy of insurance or a surety bond in a minimum amount of $100,000.00 to cover claims for any personal injuries inflicted by the dog or dogs being trained, which policy or surety bond shall be issued by an insurer or surety, as the case may be, authorized to transact business in this state. 
(b)  It is unlawful to train a guard or protection dog on public property including but not limited to public parks. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, "guard or protection dog" means any dog trained for the purpose of protecting individuals from assault and/or preventing property loss or damage. 
(Ord. No. 2007-20, § 4, 9-25-2007) 
Sec. 18-12. - Penalty. 
The following minimal penalties shall apply to any person who violates the provisions of sections 18-10 or 18-11: 
(1)  For the first conviction a fine of not less than $350.00 shall be imposed. 
(2)  For the second conviction a fine of not less than $700.00 and three days incarceration in the Rockdale County Jail shall be imposed. 
(3)  For the third and subsequent convictions a fine of not less that $1,000.00 and ten days incarceration in the Rockdale County Jail shall be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-20, § 5, 9-25-2007) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; emergency services, ch. 38; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 74; taxation, ch. 86; occupation tax, § 86-31 et seq.; hotel/motel occupancy tax, § 86-91 et seq.; telecommunications, ch. 90; utilities, ch. 98. 
State Constitution reference— General powers of counties as to taxation and other revenues, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV. 
State Law reference— Commerce and trade, O.C.G.A. title 10; certain persons prohibited from investigating business for issuance of county license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-9; professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. title 43; specific, business, and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
The definitions used in section 86-31 shall likewise apply to this chapter. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 22-2—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 22-31. - License required. 
Every business in the unincorporated area of the county required to pay an occupation tax under this Code is hereby required to have a business license from the county for the privilege of engaging in a business, profession or occupation within the county if such licensing is not prohibited by state law. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1002) 
Sec. 22-32. - Application. 
Every person required to procure a license under the provisions of this Code shall submit an application for the license to the department of public services and engineering, which application shall conform to the following requirements, in addition to any other provisions of this Code: 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the county and submitted before January 1 of each year or ten days prior to opening a new business. 
(2)  Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name and home address of the applicant if an individual, or home office address if a corporation or partnership; 
b.  Place where the proposed business is to be located; 
c.  Kind of business to be carried on; 
d.  Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership; 
e.  Names and home addresses of the officers and directors, if a corporation; 
f.  Complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the county, state or federal government other than minor traffic violations; and 
g.  Any additional information which the county chairperson may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Each application shall be sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer if a corporation. 
(4)  All information furnished or secured under the authority of this Code shall be kept in strict confidence by the county, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the county responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  False statements on any application for a license shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the license. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1003) 
Sec. 22-33. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  If any provision of this chapter provides for the review of an application for a license by a county officer designated therein, the department of public services and engineering shall forward a copy of the application to that officer. The officer charged with the duty of reviewing the application shall make a recommendation thereon, favorable or otherwise, and shall return the recommendation to the department of public services and engineering after receiving a copy of the application. 
(b)  No license shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with all minimum standard building codes adopted by the county. 
(c)  The provisions of article II, chapter 86 regarding occupation tax shall also apply to this chapter, and violations of such provisions shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of the business license pursuant to the terms of section 22-36. 
(d)  Upon a finding that the application is in order and that all requirements of this article and article II of chapter 86 have been met, the department shall issue a business license to the applicant therefor, which license shall state the nature of the business authorized and bear the date of issuance. The department may impose reasonable conditions on any business license when deemed necessary to clarify any limitations on the scope or duration of the license and/or assist in proper enforcement of the license. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as granting any person whose business is subject to county regulation any legal right to engage in the business. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall entitle a person, firm, corporation or entity to a business license unless the entity has previously met and is in compliance with all federal, state or county laws or ordinances, including, but not limited to, the following: health, zoning, professional and/or occupational qualifications, payment of all local governmental taxes, fees and charges owed by such entity, purchase of any other required permits or licenses. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1004; Ord. No. 0-2008-03, § 1, 2-12-2008) 
Sec. 22-34. - Display of license. 
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the county to keep the license posted in a conspicuous place on the premises used for the business at all times. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1005) 
Sec. 22-35. - Termination and renewal of licenses. 
(a)  All annual licenses shall terminate on the last day of the year when no provision to the contrary is made. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided, each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on forms supplied by the county no later than January 1 of each calendar year, which application shall contain substantially the same information as the initial application. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1006) 
Sec. 22-36. - Revocation; suspension. 
The board of commissioners, after affording the licensee notice of the charges and an opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation proceedings, may, if it finds this Code to have been violated by the licensee, agent, or employee, revoke the license in its entirety, suspend the license for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the board of commissioners may deem necessary. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1007) 
Sec. 22-37. - Transfer of licenses; change of location. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, a license may not be transferred to another person, new owner, or location except as follows: 
(1)  If the ownership and business type remains the same and only the address or business name has changed, then upon a ten-days' notice to the county and compliance with all building and zoning requirements the change shall be allowed. 
(2)  Any other change or transfer may be allowed at the discretion of the board of commissioners on a case-by-case basis with any restrictions as may be necessary to assure compliance with the intent of this chapter. 
(b)  A transfer of a business license shall not alter any liability for additional business taxes required under this Code. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1008) 
Sec. 22-38. - Health certificate required. 
(a)  A business license shall not be issued or renewed to a business that does not have a current, valid health certificate if a health certificate is required for the operation of the business, provided that a conditional license may be issued for a period of 60 days so as to allow compliance with the rules and regulations of the health department. 
(b)  The revocation of a health certificate shall authorize the revocation or suspension of a business license. The representation that the business has a valid health certificate when such representation is false shall authorize the revocation or suspension of the business license. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1009) 
Sec. 22-39. - Grounds for revocation; suspension by board of commissioners. 
Whenever a person doing business under a county license shall violate any law or ordinance of the United States or of the state or of this county, in pursuance of that business and involving the operation of that business, or when it shall be proven before the board of commissioners that the health, morals, interest and convenience of the public demand the revocation of that license, the board of commissioners shall suspend or revoke that license. 
(Code 1978, § 7-1010) 
Sec. 22-40. - Garage sales exempted. 
(a)  Garage sales shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this article provided that such garage sales: 
(1)  Shall only be conducted by a private individual or group of individuals or a non-profit or charitable group; 
(2)  Shall be held no more than four times per calendar year per parcel of land; 
(3)  Shall be limited to three consecutive days per event and subject to any relevant health, zoning or other regulatory ordinances as may be in effect; 
(4)  Are only for the sale of used personal items and/or goods that are the property of the person(s) holding the sale and not merchandise purchased for the purpose of resale; 
(5)  Are not conducted as part of any for-profit business enterprise or profession. 
(b)  For purposes of this article the term "garage sale" shall mean the sale of used household and/or personal items or goods by an individual at their principal residence or by a group of individuals combining such household and/or personal items or goods for a group garage sale at one of their principal residences and shall include, but not be limited to yard sales, garage sales, bake sales, carport sales, estate sales, basement sales and bazaars. 
(c)  Signs advertising garage sales may be erected in accordance with chapter 230 of this Code. 
(d)  The exemption granted in this article shall not be available to flea market operators, home occupations, promoters, performances or other such enterprises or any other established commercial venture or business-related operation. 
(e)  All other sales of merchandise are considered retail sales, and the merchandise is considered as inventory subject to the requirements of article II, chapter 86 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-09, § 1, 5-24-2005; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 2, 11-27-2012) 
Secs. 22-41—22-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE THERAPY 

Sec. 22-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any word or phrase not defined in this section but otherwise defined in chapters 2, 10, 22, 30, 38, 54, 86 and 90 of this Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Director means the director of the department of public services and engineering, or his designee. 
Massage, massages and massage therapy mean the systematic and scientific manipulation and treatment of soft tissues of the body, including but not limited to the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range of motion stretches, and any other soft tissue manipulation whether manual or by use of massage apparatus, and may include the use of oils, lotions, creams, salt glows, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, hot packs, and cold packs. The terms "massage," "massages" and "massage therapy" shall not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry, or medicine is required by the state. 
Massage apparatus means any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric, or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power, which is utilized by a massage therapist for the purpose of administering a massage. 
Massage apprentice means any person who by direct or indirect physical contact with the body of another, or by use and operation of massage apparatus, administers a massage in connection with a formal program of apprenticeship and training. 
Massage establishment means any business established for profit which employs one or more massage therapists, or operates or maintains for profit one or more massage apparatus, and which, for good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of massages. The term "massage establishment" shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the state. 
Massage therapist means any person who for good or valuable consideration administers a massage. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-72. - Licenses/permits required. 
(a)  Massage therapist license. It shall be unlawful for any natural person to administer massages as a massage therapist without having obtained a license in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Massage establishment license. It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to operate a massage establishment without having obtained a license therefor; or for any person, natural or corporate, to allow a massage therapist to administer massages without having obtained a license in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Massage apprentice permit. It shall be unlawful for any natural person to administer massages as a massage apprentice without having obtained a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7002) 
Sec. 22-73. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses and permits issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the license or permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the county and state law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent, or restrict in any manner: (i) any physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of such profession; or (ii) any hospital or other professional health care establishment separately licensed as such by the state. 
(c)  Except as specified in subsection (b) of this section, the requirements of this article shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, and regulatory provisions of local, state or federal law, and shall not authorize violations of such other applicable laws. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7003) 
Sec. 22-74. - Application process. 
(a)  Application requirements. Any person desiring to obtain a massage establishment license or massage therapist license shall make application to the department of public services and engineering. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant as true, correct and complete before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. All applications shall be in writing and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names currently or heretofore used by the applicant; 
(2)  The current and all previous business and residence addresses of the applicant within the two years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(3)  Sworn affidavits of at least two bona fide residents of the county that the applicant is personally known to them and they believe the person to be of good moral character; 
(4)  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair; 
(6)  Two current photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches in size; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  Any massage or similar business license history of the applicant, including whether such person, in any previous operation in any jurisdiction, has had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and any business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, pleas of guilty, or pleas of nolo contendere for violations of any law and the grounds therefor; 
(10)  The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the county sheriff's department, and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as an exhibit to the application. Payment of all fees charged by the county sheriff's department in connection with this requirement shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(11)  Applicants for a massage therapist license shall provide a certificate dated within 30 days of the application from a physician licensed in the state, certifying that the applicant is in sound mental and physical health, and free of all contagious or communicable diseases; 
(12)  Applicants for a massage therapist license must furnish a certified copy of a diploma or certificate of graduation demonstrating compliance with section 22-75(a)(2)a, or an affidavit of the person(s) under whom an apprenticeship or practical experience was conducted demonstrating compliance with section 22-75(a)(2)b. Applicants for a massage establishment license must furnish an affidavit demonstrating compliance with section 22-75(b)(2); 
(13)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the foregoing information and exhibits with regard to each employee, agent and partner, general or limited, associated with the operation of the licensed establishment; and 
(14)  If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall, in addition to the information required in this section, submit a complete list of the stockholders of such corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations. 
(b)  Fees. All license applications shall be accompanied by a fee as elsewhere established by the board of commissioners to defray the costs associated with issuance of such licenses. All fees associated with the background check required by subsection (a)(10) of this section shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be in addition to the application fee. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7004) 
Sec. 22-75. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  Massage therapist. No applicant shall be issued a license as a massage therapist unless both of the following standards are first met: 
(1)  The applicant must be of good moral character. No applicant shall be found to have met this requirement if such applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within a period of four years prior to the filing of the application; and 
(2)  One of the following is established: 
a.  The applicant must be the holder of a diploma or certificate earned by the applicant from a professionally recognized school, representative of the fact that the applicant attended a course of massage therapy education and study consisting of a curriculum of anatomy and physiology, basic massage theory, technique and clinical practice, approach to massage, allied modalities and disease awareness, and other such subjects; or 
b.  The applicant must have had an apprenticeship and practical experience for a period of not less than 500 hours in a regularly licensed massage establishment or hospital or other professional health care establishment separately licensed as such by the state, in which the applicant has received massage therapy training and experience in anatomy and physiology, basic massage theory, technique and clinical practice, approach to massage, allied modalities and disease awareness, and other such subjects. 
(b)  Massage establishment. No applicant shall be issued a license for a massage establishment unless all of the following standards are first met: 
(1)  The applicant, including the partner applying on behalf of a partnership and an agent applying on behalf of a corporation, must be of good moral character. No applicant shall be found to have met this requirement if such applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within a period of four years prior to the filing of the application; 
(2)  A corporate applicant must be chartered under the laws of the state or authorized by the secretary of state to do business in this state. The applicant shall be the owner or legal agent of the establishment. A massage therapist who is a sole proprietor shall not be required to obtain a massage establishment license; 
(3)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided also that all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of this Code; 
(4)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, and, additionally, at least one artificial light of not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth; 
(5)  Examining tables and other equipment in the establishment shall be specifically designed for and appropriate to the provision of professional therapeutic massage and related therapy. Ordinary beds shall not be permitted in any licensed massage establishment; 
(6)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code; and 
(7)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of any license under this article, must be in compliance with all applicable building and life safety codes, and the building to be occupied must have a valid, current certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7005) 
Sec. 22-76. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Review of applications. If a license application is submitted in proper form including all information and exhibits required in this article and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted and a review of the application and an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the director. The director shall transmit a copy of the completed application to the county sheriff's department. Upon the payment by the applicant of the required fees, the county sheriff, or his designee, shall cause to be conducted a background investigation of the police record and character and reputation of the applicant, and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the director. 
(b)  Action on applications. Upon receipt of this background investigation, and completion of review of the application in accordance with the terms of this article, the director shall act on the application. The director shall deny any application that: 
(1)  Fails to meet each of the application requirements specified in this article; 
(2)  Fails to meet each of the minimum standards specified in section 22-75; or 
(3)  Contains false information in the application or attached documents. 
Otherwise, the director shall approve the application and the license shall be issued by the department of public services and engineering upon the payment of any applicable county business or occupation tax. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of one year. If an application for a license is denied under this article, the applicant shall not be authorized to reapply for such denied license for a period of one year from the date of denial. 
(c)  Appeals of denials of applications. If the director denies a license or apprentice permit application, such denial shall be in written form, addressed to the applicant at the application address, and shall state the grounds upon which the denial is based. Within ten days of the date of issuance of such notice, the applicant may appeal the denial by submitting a written notice of appeal to the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and shall provide written notice thereof to the appellant. At the hearing, the appellant and the director may each present evidence relating to the grounds for denial. The appellant may be represented by counsel at such hearing or may appear in his own behalf. The board of commissioners shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. An appeal shall be sustained upon a finding by the board that the director's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that he acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the board of commissioners may reverse or affirm, or may modify, the decision appealed from and to that end shall have all the powers of the director and may issue or direct the issuance of a license or apprentice permit provided all requirements imposed by applicable laws are met. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7006) 
Sec. 22-77. - Transfers and sales prohibited. 
All licenses and permits issued pursuant to this article are nontransferable. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7007) 
Sec. 22-78. - Change of location. 
A change of location of massage establishment premises may be approved by the department of public services and engineering provided all general ordinances are complied with and a change of location fee as elsewhere established by the board of commissioners is first paid. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7008) 
Sec. 22-79. - Renewals. 
All valid licenses may be renewed for additional one-year periods provided a renewal application meeting all of the requirements for an initial license application is submitted prior to expiration of the existing license and approved by the director according to the same standards for initial licenses. The fee for the annual renewal shall be as elsewhere established by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7009) 
Sec. 22-80. - Further requirements. 
The following additional requirements shall apply to all license and permit holders and establishments under this article: 
(1)  All massage therapists and massage apprentices shall be completely clothed at all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "completely clothed" shall mean having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and such pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this subsection shall be entirely nontransparent. 
(2)  The storing, serving, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within massage establishments is expressly prohibited. 
(3)  Every person to whom a license or permit shall have been granted shall display such license or permit in a conspicuous place on the premises that is clearly visible to the visiting public. 
(4)  The county, through the department of public services and engineering, shall have the right to inspect any licensed massage premises and its records at any time, with or without notice, during business hours to ensure compliance with this article. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to patronize any massage clinic unless such person carries with him at the time of such patronage a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly licensed physician or written permission of the underage person's parent or legal guardian. It shall be the duty of the operator of such massage establishment to determine the age of the person patronizing such massage establishment and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such massage establishment and/or massage therapist and/or massage apprentice administering massage to an underage patron. 
(6)  Licensed massage therapists shall have the authority to train individuals in massage therapy under their supervision and in their establishment only in strict accordance with the following provisions: 
a.  Apprenticeship programs. Massages administered within massage establishments for good or valuable consideration may be given by persons not holding a license as a massage therapist only in connection with a formal program of apprenticeship and training. Such massages shall be given only by persons holding a valid massage apprentice permit pursuant to subsection (6)b of this section and only under the direct supervision of a licensed massage therapist at all times. Such licensed massage therapist shall be in the same room where the massage is being administered by the permitted massage apprentice during the entire time of the giving of the massage. 
b.  Massage apprentice permits. No person shall administer a massage in connection with the formal apprenticeship and training program authorized in subsection (6)a of this section without having first obtained a massage apprentice permit. Any person desiring to obtain a massage apprentice permit shall make application to the department of public services and engineering in accordance with section 22-74(a), except that the requirements of section 22-74(a)(12)—14) shall not apply. All applications for a massage apprentice permit shall be accompanied by a fee as elsewhere established by the board of commissioners. All fees associated with the background check required by section 22-74(a)(10) shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be in addition to the application fee. The minimum standard applicable to issuance of a massage apprentice permit shall be that specified in section 22-75(a)(1). If a massage apprentice permit application is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required by this section and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted and acted upon in accordance with section 22-76. Massage apprentice permits shall be valid for a period of one year and may be renewed for two additional periods of one year each in accordance with section 22-79. The renewal fee shall be as elsewhere established by the board of commissioners. Massage apprentice permits shall be subject to revocation for cause pursuant to the provisions of sections 22-81 and 22-82(a). All other applicable provisions of this article shall apply to such permit holders. 
(7)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license for a massage establishment under this article to file with the department of public services and engineering the names of all employees other than those holding massage therapist licenses, their home addresses, home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of such employees with the names of new employees must be filed with such county department within ten days from the date of any such change. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at such establishment; and the name of the person at the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by the county through the department of public services and engineering. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7010) 
Sec. 22-81. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  A license granted pursuant to this article shall be subject to revocation for cause. No license shall be revoked until after due notice and a hearing shall have been held before the board of commissioners to determine just cause for such revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the compliant against the holder of such license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be held. 
(b)  Such notice shall be served upon the license holder by delivering the notice personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the license holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the license holder cannot be found, and the service of notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner provided in this subsection, a copy of such notice shall be mailed registered or certified, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the license holder at his place of business or residence at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7011) 
Sec. 22-82. - Grounds for revocation. 
(a)  The license of a massage therapist may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license; 
(2)  The holder is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit in his being licensed in the practice of massage; 
(3)  The holder is engaged in the practice of massage under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another therapist of a like or different name; 
(4)  The holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he is unable to perform his professional duties; 
(5)  The holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive advertising or practices any other licensed profession without legal authority therefor; 
(6)  The holder has violated any of the provisions of this article; 
(7)  The holder has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity, or sexual conduct as defined under state law; or has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(8)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; or 
(9)  There has been the occurrence of a fact which would have barred the issuance of the original license. 
(b)  The license of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license; 
(2)  The holder allows or permits any person who is not a licensed massage therapist to administer a massage in such establishment except as specifically authorized by section 22-80(6); 
(3)  The premises in which the massage establishment is located are in violation of any federal, state, or county laws designed for the health, protection and safety of the occupants or general public; 
(4)  The premises are in violation of the county building or life safety codes; 
(5)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information, or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(6)  The holder of the license, including any person with an ownership interest in the license, has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity, or sexual conduct as defined under state law; 
(7)  Any of the license holder's employees or agents has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity, or sexual conduct as defined under state law, in connection with the operation of the massage establishment or on or about the premises of the massage establishment; 
(8)  Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the customers; or 
(9)  The holder or his employees associated with the establishment have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this article. 
(c)  Any massage therapist, massage apprentice, or massage establishment who or which has his or its license or permit revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license or permit for a period of 12 months immediately following the date of revocation. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7012) 
Sec. 22-83. - Penalty for violations. 
In addition to revocation, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be upon conviction thereof punished as provided for in section 1-11. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7013) 
Sec. 22-84. - Existing practices. 
Any person who is actually engaged as a massage therapist or who operates a massage establishment upon the effective date of the ordinance adopting this article (March 12, 1996), shall have 90 days from such effective date to comply with this article. 
(Code 1978, § 7-7014) 
Secs. 22-85—22-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BODY ART STUDIOS AND ARTISTS 

Sec. 22-111. - Body art studios and artists; adoption of rules and regulations. 
All body art studios and artists shall comply with the rules and regulations entitled "Body Art Studios and Artists" adopted by the Rockdale Board of Health on November 13, 2008, or as hereinafter amended, which rules and regulations are hereby adopted by reference as though fully set out at length in this section. Copies of the "Body Art Studios and Artists" rules and regulations are on file and shall be maintained at the Rockdale County office of Environmental Health and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-23, § 1, 12-23-2008) 
Sec. 22-112. - Penalties. 
A "body artist" or "owner" as defined by the rules and regulations entitled "Body Art Studios and Artists" that violates said rules and regulations may be charged with a violation of this article and subjected to the provisions of Rockdale County Code, section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-23, § 1, 12-23-2008) 
Secs. 22-113—22-140. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 0-2006-32, § 6, adopted Nov. 28, 2006, deleted Art. IV, §§ 22-111—22-140 in its entirety. Former Art. IV, §§ 22-111—22-140, pertained to open yard storage business and derived from Code 1978, §§ 7-5001—7-5005. 
ARTICLE V. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Prohibition of alcoholic beverages with nudity or in adult entertainment establishments, § 10-55; zoning, ch. 130. 

Sec. 22-141. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is the purpose and intent of this article to regulate adult entertainment establishments to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the county and to establish reasonable and uniform content-neutral regulations of adult entertainment establishments within the county, thereby reducing or eliminating the adverse secondary effects from such adult entertainment establishments. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor the effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor the effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. This article is not intended to interfere with or suppress legitimate expression or any speech activities protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or the state constitution nor is it intended to license any use or activity which is otherwise prohibited or made punishable by law. 
(b)  The regulations that follow and that otherwise are contained in this Code regarding adult entertainment establishments constitute content-neutral requirements that have been carefully designed to minimize adverse impacts caused by secondary effects of these establishments. The county finds that studies in other jurisdictions demonstrating a correlation between these establishments and such negative secondary effects as diminishing market values in neighboring residential and related areas, increasing crime rates, difficulty in securing residential and related financing, an influx of patrons to these establishments from outside the immediate neighboring areas, and similar negative effects, are pertinent and relevant to the situation that exists in the county. These studies, as well as other evidence from the public and professional staff, has been carefully reviewed by the county prior to adoption of these regulations. The county further finds that there is evidence considered by the county prior to adoption of these and other county regulations regarding the combined effects of adult entertainment establishments and alcohol, and showing that the combination of such activities create additional pernicious secondary effects upon surrounding communities. The county finds that adoption of regulations restricting these establishments to certain districts, barring alcohol sales within such establishments, and imposing distance and development standards is consistent with the general comprehensive planning standards and policies of the county, will reduce the negative secondary effects caused by these establishments, and will afford protection to residential uses and other uses consistent with residential uses so as to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morality while respecting and protecting the free speech rights of these establishments. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9001), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-142. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any word or phrase not defined in this section but otherwise defined in chapter 2, 10, 22, 30, 38, 58, 86 or 90 of part II, subpart A, general ordinances, of this Code, or in part II, subpart B, UDO, of this Code, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Adult device store means an establishment that offers or provides, for sale or distribution, instruments, devices, toys or paraphernalia that are designed or marketed as useful primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs in conjunction with specified sexual activities, excluding condoms and other birth control and disease prevention products. 
Adult encounter parlor means an establishment which offers or provides premises where customers either congregate, associate, or consort with employees who engage in specified sexual activities with or in the presence of such customers, or who display specified anatomical areas in the presence of such customers, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers. 
Adult entertainment business manager, manager and business manager mean the person on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment who has overall day-to-day supervisory authority over the operation of the business. 
Adult entertainment employee and employee mean any person who renders any service to the customers of an adult entertainment establishment, whether as an independent contractor, regular employee or otherwise, or who works in or about an adult entertainment establishment and who receives compensation for such service or work from the owner, operator, or licensee of such establishment or from customers therein, but excluding plumbers, electricians, and similar third party contractors temporarily performing work on the establishment's physical facilities. 
Adult entertainment establishment means any one or combination of the following: 
(1)  Adult arcade means an establishment which offers or provides to the public one or more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other image-producing devices, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, including an establishment having one or more booths each holding five or fewer persons, which are used to show films, motion pictures, peepshows, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions or images characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult dance establishment means a club, cabaret, restaurant, nightclub, theater or other establishment which offers or provides live performances, burlesque, dancing or entertainment by dancers or entertainers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances, dancing, or entertainment features entertainers that display or expose specified anatomical areas, or are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult media store means an establishment that offers or provides 20 percent or more of its floor area, shelf space, total inventory, or monthly gross sales for books, printed materials, pictorial materials, magazines or other periodicals, including electronic or digital versions of such materials, or videotapes, movies, compact discs, CD-ROMs, video discs, software, or other image-producing mediums, including electronic or digital versions of such materials, or adult toys, paraphernalia or novelty items not meeting the definition of "adult device store," or any combination thereof, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or, an establishment with a segment, section, or identified area comprising five percent or more of its floor area, shelf space, total inventory, or monthly gross sales devoted to the sale of, or consisting of, such materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The percentage thresholds for floor area, shelf space and total inventory shall be applied and enforced on a daily basis, such that if the percentage threshold is reached on any given day, said establishment shall have met the definition of adult media store and shall immediately be in violation of this chapter if a license authorizing and adult media store is not in place. The percentage threshold for monthly gross sales shall be applied and enforced on a monthly basis, such that if the percentage threshold is reached for any given month, said establishment shall have met the definition of adult media store and shall immediately be in violation of this chapter if a license authorizing an adult media store is not in place. 
(4)  Adult movie theater means an establishment that offers or provides 20 percent or more of its theater space or monthly gross sales for the exhibition to customers of motion pictures, films, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic or image-producing reproductions characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and which are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers. 
(5)  Adult video theater means a commercial establishment seating 50 or fewer persons which offers or provides films, motion pictures, video cassette projections, slides, photographs or other visual media characterized by depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas which are shown in the regular course of business of such establishment. The term "adult video theater" does not include a theater where all viewing occurs in a common area with seating for 51 or more persons. 
(6)  Escort service means an establishment where a person, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, profit, or other consideration, furnishes or offers to furnish names or persons, or who introduces, furnishes, or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places or amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
(7)  Lingerie modeling establishment means an establishment wherein a patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee or required to make a purchase in order to view entertainment or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments. 
Adult facility means a commercial establishment in which the patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in private, personal contact with employees, patrons, or personnel who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such patrons, using baths, steam rooms or other devices or equipment provided by the establishment and that is not otherwise regulated as a massage establishment pursuant to article III of this chapter. 
Adult service means a dance, performance or other activity, including but not limited to service of food or beverages, modeling, posing, wrestling, cutting hair, singing, reading, talking or listening, conducted for any consideration in an adult entertainment establishment by a person who exposes one or more specified anatomical areas or performs a specified sexual activity, or who simulates such exposure or specified sexual activity through the use of shadows or other means, during all or part of the time the person is providing the service. 
Adult service provider means any person who provides an adult service. 
Bathhouse means any commercial establishment which offers or provides 20 percent or more of its floor area for administered baths or where any person engages in any method of washing or cleansing the human body or any external part thereof with steam, vapor, or water or other liquid, provided that nothing contained in this section shall be construed to include a duly licensed: hospital, nursing home, medical clinic, school, physical fitness facility or health club, physician, massage establishment, surgeon, physical therapist, chiropractor, osteopath, naturopadi, podiatrist, or person holding a drugless practitioner's certificate under the laws of the state. Furthermore, this definition shall exclude from its operation establishments wherein duly licensed barbers, beauticians, and cosmetologists administer baths only to the scalp, the face, the neck or the shoulders. 
County means Rockdale County, Georgia. 
Director means the director of the county department of public services and engineering, or his designee. 
Government building means any building or structure used or operated by any local, state or federal government or agency thereof. 
Owner and owners mean the proprietor if a sole proprietorship; all general partners if a partnership; all officers, directors, and persons holding 20 percent or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation; or all members if a limited liability company. 
Premises means the entire area within the property lines of any lot upon which an adult entertainment establishment is located or within which any conduct or activity regulated by this article occurs. 
Public park means a publicly owned or leased tract of land, whether situated in the county or not, designated, dedicated, controlled, maintained or operated for use by the general public for active or passive recreational or leisure purposes, or natural areas whether or not used for recreational purposes, by the county or any political subdivision of the state and which may but need not contain improvements, pathways, access or facilities intended for public recreational use. The term "public park" shall not include parkways, public roads, rights-of-way, traffic circles, or easements. 
Religious institution means any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and related religious activities. 
School means a building, whether situated within the county or not, where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education together with the playgrounds, stadiums and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term "school" is limited to public and private schools used for primary or secondary education, in which any regular pre-kindergarten, kindergarten or grades one through 12 classes are taught using a curriculum authorized by the state. 
Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, and intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts of conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, or arousal; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttock, or female breasts; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic, or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
State means State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9002), 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 0-2006-32, § 7, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2008-03, §§ 2, 3, 2-12-2008) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-143. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate an adult entertainment establishment without a valid license issued pursuant to this article for the particular classification of an adult entertainment establishment sought to be operated. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate an adult entertainment establishment in an establishment that is licensed to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages under chapter 10, article II. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person to provide, offer or allow any adult service within any establishment holding a county business license unless such establishment also is properly licensed as an adult entertainment establishment pursuant to this article. Violation of this subsection by the owner or operator of any such establishment in the county shall constitute grounds for suspension and/or revocation of such establishment's business and/or alcoholic beverage license. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate an adult entertainment establishment under any name or designation, or under any premises name or designation, or at any premises address not specified in a valid license issued pursuant to this article. Each additional premises sought to be operated as an adult entertainment establishment shall require a separate license. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of an adult entertainment establishment to hire or engage any provider, employee or manager who does not hold a valid license as required under this article. 
(f)  Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition to or in lieu of all other remedies, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal, or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. 
(g)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. Such license is a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license. All licenses issued under this article, unless suspended or revoked, shall be valid only for the duration specified therein but not to exceed one calendar year, and no licensee shall have a vested right or interest in renewal. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate, or conduct any business in an adult entertainment establishment unless the license is posted at or near the principal public entrance to the adult entertainment establishment in such a manner that it will be conspicuous to patrons who enter the premises. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9003), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-144. - Prohibited establishments. 
No license to operate shall be issued to any establishment that meets the definition of "adult device store", "adult encounter parlor," "adult facility" or "bathhouse." Such establishments shall be prohibited and unlawful in the county. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9004), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-145. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the license only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the county and state law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent, or restrict in ay manner: (i) any physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, or other professional licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of such profession; (ii) any hospital or other professional health care establishment separately licensed as such by the state; or (iii) any licensed institution of higher learning providing a course of study related to material prohibited or regulated by this article. 
(c)  Except as specified in subsection (b) of this section, the requirements of this article shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, zoning, and regulatory provisions of local, state or federal law, and shall not authorize violations of such other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9005), 11-9-1999; Ord.No. 0-2008-03, § 4, 2-12-2008) 
Sec. 22-146. - Application process for adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  A person who wishes to operate an adult entertainment establishment shall make application for a license in person at the department of public services and engineering. The application shall be on a form prescribed by the department of public services and engineering. The application shall be signed under oath by each individual listed as an applicant and notarized. An application shall be deemed filed with the county when the director has received the required fee in full, a completed application with all information required in subsections (c) and (d) of this section, and the photograph and fingerprints of each applicant. The application shall be in duplicate, including all addendum or attachments, with one copy being kept on file with the director and one copy being transmitted to the sheriff. 
(b)  If a person who wishes to operate an adult entertainment establishment is an individual, that individual must be listed in the application for the license as the applicant and also as the designated license holder. If a person who wishes to operate an adult entertainment establishment is a legal entity other than an individual, each officer, manager or general partner of the entity, and any other individual who will participate directly in decisions relating to the management of the adult entertainment establishment, must be listed in the application as an applicant, with the individual appearing in person to make application being further designated as the primary applicant with general authority to act on behalf of the entity in connection with the application, and the entity listed as the designated license holder. If such legal entity is a corporation, each director, and each shareholder holding ten percent or more of the issued outstanding shares of such corporation's stock, shall be listed in the application as an applicant. Each applicant shall provide his photograph and fingerprints as provided in this section. 
(c)  In addition to such other information as may be requested on the face of the application form, the application shall include the following information: 
(1)  The name, premises address and business mailing address if different from the premises address, of the proposed adult entertainment establishment; 
(2)  The name, address and phone number of the designated license holder; 
(3)  Where the person seeking to operate the adult entertainment establishment is something other than an individual, the entity's state of origination and date of formation; 
(4)  The name under which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated and a description of the services to be provided; 
(5)  The telephone number of the adult entertainment establishment; 
(6)  The address, plat and/or legal description of the tract of land on which the adult entertainment establishment is to be located; 
(7)  If the adult entertainment establishment is in operation, the names of all owners and the date on which the owners acquired the adult entertainment establishment for which the license is sought, and the date on which the adult entertainment establishment began operations as an adult entertainment establishment at the location for which the license is sought; 
(8)  If the adult entertainment establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date (which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the license); if the expected startup date is to be more than ten days following the date of issuance of the license, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the work; 
(9)  Each applicant's full true name and any other names, aliases or stage names used in the preceding five years; 
(10)  Each applicant's current residential mailing address and telephone number, which information shall be forwarded in writing to the director by letter postmarked not later than ten days after any change in this information; 
(11)  Written proof that each applicant is at least 21 years of age, in the form of either a current driver's license with picture or other picture identification issued by an appropriate governmental agency; 
(12)  The issuing jurisdiction and the effective date of any license relating to the operation of an adult entertainment establishment or relating to the provision of any adult services which is held or has been held at any time by an applicant or by the designated license holder, whether any such license has been revoked or suspended, and the reason or reasons for revocation or suspension; 
(13)  Any specified criminal acts committed by each applicant or the intended license holder for which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts, which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or statutory rape, prostitution, bestiality, sodomy, sexual assault, drug-related offenses, kidnapping, or crimes connected with another adult entertainment establishment, including but not limited to distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or any conviction in another jurisdiction for conduct which, if carried out in the county or the state, would constitute a specified criminal act under this section; 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for the specified criminal acts, which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or statutory rape, prostitution, bestiality, sodomy, sexual assault, drug-related offenses, kidnapping, or crimes connected with another adult entertainment establishment, including but not limited to distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or any conviction in another jurisdiction for conduct which, if carried out in the county or the state, would constitute a specified criminal act under this section; 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period for the specified criminal acts, which are sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape or statutory rape, prostitution, bestiality, sodomy, sexual assault, drug-related offenses, kidnapping or crimes connected with another adult entertainment establishment, including but not limited to distribution of obscenity or material harmful to minors, prostitution, pandering or any conviction in another jurisdiction for conduct which, if carried out in the county or the state, would constitute a specified criminal act under this section. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the requirements of this subsection; 
(14)  The name and address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process; 
(15)  The names of the adult entertainment establishment managers who will have actual supervisory authority over the operation of the business, which information shall be forwarded in writing to the director by letter postmarked not later than ten days after any change in this information; and 
(16)  An accurate, to-scale floor plan or diagram of the business premises clearly showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business, total shelf space, the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted, the location of all managers' stations and overhead lighting fixtures, and clearly designating all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The director may waive the diagram requirement for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(d)  The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Payment in full of the fee required in subsection (g) of this section; 
(2)  Current photograph and the fingerprints of each applicant. Each applicant shall be fingerprinted by the sheriff, and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as an exhibit to the application. Payment of all fees charged by the sheriff in connection with this requirement shall be the responsibility of the applicant; 
(3)  A certified copy of the trade name certificate filed in compliance with the trade name statute of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, if the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated under an assumed name; 
(4)  If the adult entertainment establishment is a state corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments; 
(5)  If the adult entertainment establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in the state, together with all amendments; 
(6)  If the adult entertainment establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the state, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments, filed in the office of the secretary of state; 
(7)  If the adult entertainment establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments, filed in the office of the secretary of state; 
(8)  Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the adult entertainment establishment is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed; 
(9)  If the persons identified as the fee owners of the tract of land in subsection (d)(8) of this section are not also the owners of the adult entertainment establishment, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other documents evidencing the legally enforceable right the owners or proposed owners of the adult entertainment establishment have or shall obtain for the use and possession of the tract or portion that is to be used for the adult entertainment establishment for the purpose of the operation of the adult entertainment establishment; 
(10)  A plat of the surrounding area including the location of the proposed licensed establishment demonstrating compliance with all distance requirements set forth in this article and all requirements of the county zoning ordinance set out in UDO certified by a land surveyor registered in the state; 
(11)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or shareholders, officers or directors and who will not benefit from the license applied for; and 
(12)  Any of the items in subsections (d)(1)—11) of this section shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished to the director with the original application or previous renewals remain correct and current. 
(e)  The application shall contain a statement notarized under oath that: 
(1)  The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained in and furnished with the application is true and correct; and 
(2)  The applicant has read the provisions of this article. 
(f)  A separate application and license shall be required for each category of adult entertainment establishment as follows: 
(1)  Adult media store. 
(2)  Adult arcade. 
(3)  Adult movie theater. 
(4)  Adult video theater. 
(5)  Adult dance establishment. 
(6)  Escort service. 
(7)  Lingerie modeling establishment. 
(g)  Every application for issuance or renewal of an adult entertainment establishment license shall be accompanied by a nonprorated and nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $350.00, which fee shall be used to defray the costs of the county associated with determining and enforcing compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9006), 11-9-1999; Ord. No. 0-2006-32, § 7, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 22-147. - Action on adult entertainment establishment application. 
(a)  If an application for an adult entertainment establishment is submitted in proper form including all information and exhibits required in this article and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted and a review of the application and an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the director. Such review and inspection shall include review of all applicable building, fire and life safety codes. The director shall transmit a copy of the completed application to the sheriff. The sheriff shall cause to be conducted a background investigation of the police record and character and reputation of the applicant, and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the director. 
(b)  Following review by the director but no later than 45 days after the complete application for an adult entertainment establishment license is filed with the county, the director shall mail to the designated license holder a license or a written notice of intent to deny. No application shall be deemed to be complete until all information and fees are submitted by the applicant in proper form and all required inspections have been conducted. 
(c)  The director shall issue a license to the applicant unless one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The applicant's adult entertainment establishment is located within 1,000 feet of any school, religious institution, public park, hospital, government building, library, licensed day care center, establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, or property zoned for residential purposes, with measurements being made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's adult entertainment establishment to the nearest point on the property line of such school, religious institution, public park, hospital, government building, library, licensed day care center, establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, or property zoned for residential purposes; 
(2)  The applicant's adult entertainment establishment is located within 1,000 feet of any other adult entertainment establishment for which there is a license under this article. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's adult entertainment establishment to the nearest point on the property line of any other adult entertainment establishment; 
(3)  The applicant's adult entertainment establishment is located on property that is zoned other than to the M-1 (limited industrial) or M-2 (general industrial) zoning classifications in the county; 
(4)  The applicant has applied for or holds a license, issued under chapter 10, article II, to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages upon the premises of the intended adult entertainment establishment; 
(5)  The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application; 
(6)  The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
(7)  The applicant, or the applicant's spouse, or the intended license holder, has been convicted of a specified criminal act, as described in section 22-146(c)(13); 
(8)  The applicant's adult entertainment establishment is not in compliance with section 22-161; 
(9)  The application for the adult entertainment establishment does not meet all requirements of this article; 
(10)  The applicant has had a license revoked for any adult entertainment establishment within the 24-month period next preceding the date that the application was filed. The fact that a revocation is being appealed shall have no effect; 
(11)  The applicant has not demonstrated that the owner of the adult entertainment establishment owns or holds a lease for the property or the applicable portion thereof upon which the adult entertainment establishment will be situated or has a legally enforceable right to acquire the property; 
(12)  The applicant, the applicant's spouse, or the designated license holder is delinquent in payment to the county for taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant, the applicant's spouse, or the designated license holder in relation to an adult entertainment establishment or arising out of any other business activity owned or operated by the applicant, the applicant's spouse, or the designated license holder and licensed by the county; 
(13)  The applicant or the designated license holder has failed to comply with or is in violation of applicable provisions of the zoning ordinances or the building codes, development standards or other land use ordinances and regulations of the county relating to the business or activity to be conducted under the license; 
(14)  Within the past two years, the applicant or the designated license holder has had a license similar to that authorized under this article, issued in the county or any other jurisdiction, revoked on the basis of conduct which would be a ground for revocation of a license issued under this article if committed in the county. The fact that the revocation is being appealed at the time of the decision on this application shall have no effect; or 
(15)  The granting of a license would violate a state or federal statute, county ordinance, or a court order. 
(d)  Property uses and distances for original applications shall be determined as of the time that the application is filed. Property uses and distances for a renewal application shall be determined as of the time that the renewal application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9007), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-148. - Appeal from denial of an adult entertainment establishment application. 
(a)  If the director determines that an applicant is not eligible for a license, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within 45 days of the receipt of its complete application by the director. An applicant may appeal the decision of the director regarding such denial by filing a written request for a hearing with the board of commissioners within ten days after the applicant has been given notice of such denial. The director's decision on the application shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall not stay the director's decision on the issuance of a license. The applicant's written request for a hearing shall set out the grounds on which the denial is challenged. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall conduct a hearing on an appeal within 30 days after receipt of the applicant's written request for a hearing unless the applicant requests an extension in writing for good cause that is granted by the board of commissioners. The hearing shall be conducted before the board of commissioners at the date and time established by the board of commissioners and after reasonable notice of no less than five calendar days has been provided to the applicant. At the hearing, the board of commissioners shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the application. Hearings shall be conducted under procedures established by the board of commissioners, which shall be consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross examine witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. The board of commissioners shall render a written decision and issue notice of the decision to the applicant within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. Appeals from such decision by an aggrieved party shall be by writ of certiorari from the superior court of the county. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the 45-day period provided in section 22-147(b), in any instance in which an applicant's establishment is proposed to be situated within 1,000 feet from another proposed establishment for which a previously filed license application under this article has been denied, and the previously filed application is still subject to appeals, whether administrative or judicial, the director may hold the license application, subject to the outcome of the appeals on the previous application, and a final decision made in accordance with this article within ten days following the outcome of such appeals. 
(d)  In any instance in which the proposed adult entertainment establishment tract description submitted by an applicant pursuant this article for a license reflects a tract or parcel of land that has resulted from a subdivision of property for which compliance with the applicable subdivision requirements of this Code was required, and the director determines that the property has not been lawfully subdivided in accordance with the proper subdivision requirements, the director shall cause all measurements and determinations regarding the issuance of the license to be made on the basis of the parent tract from which the subdivision was made, rather than the improperly subdivided tract. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9008), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-149. - Nontransferability of an adult entertainment establishment license. 
(a)  Adult entertainment establishment licenses shall not be transferable as to licensee or location. A licensee shall not conduct a different classification of an adult entertainment establishment other than that designated in the license or conduct an adult entertainment establishment under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. No adult entertainment establishment shall be conducted under any name or under any designation or classification not specified in the license for that business. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface or alter a license. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9009), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-150. - Term of an adult entertainment establishment license. 
Each adult entertainment establishment license shall be valid until December 31 of the year of issue and shall expire at 11:59 p.m. on December 31 of the year of issue, unless sooner indicated on the face of such license, suspended, revoked, or surrendered. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9010), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-151. - Suspension of an adult entertainment establishment license. 
(a)  The director shall suspend a license for a period of no less than 30 days and no more than 60 days if a licensee is convicted of violating any provision of this article. Suspension shall be in addition to any license revocation procedures. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the suspension of the license. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9011), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-152. - Revocation of an adult entertainment establishment license. 
(a)  The director shall revoke a license issued pursuant to this division if the licensee: 
(1)  Knowingly allowed a person under 18 years of age to enter an adult entertainment establishment; 
(2)  Is convicted of a violation of this article in any 12-month period; 
(3)  Is convicted of any crime on the basis of which a license may be denied under section 22-146(c)(13); 
(4)  Gave false or misleading information in the application; 
(5)  Violates any provision of this article required as part of the application process; 
(6)  Violates any provision of section 22-166; 
(7)  Knowingly allows any employee or manager to violate any provision of section 22-167; 
(8)  Failed to operate and keep open the adult entertainment establishment for a period of 30 consecutive days, unless due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner, and the owner is proceeding with due diligence, given all attendant circumstances, to open or reopen the establishment; 
(9)  Received a license which was erroneously issued by the director in contravention of the criteria of this article; 
(10)  Has knowingly operated or worked in the adult entertainment establishment during a period of time when the license was suspended; or 
(11)  Is delinquent in payment to the county of taxes or fees related to the adult entertainment establishment or arising out of any other business activity owned or operated by the licensee and licensed by the county. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9012), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-153. - Adult entertainment establishment license renewal. 
(a)  An adult entertainment establishment license may be renewed by filing an application for renewal on a form provided by the director. The application for renewal shall be received by the director not less than 45 days before the expiration of the license. When the application for renewal is received less than 45 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license shall not be delayed, postponed or otherwise affected. 
(b)  The director shall process and investigate all applications for renewal, and may deny an application for renewal for any reason for which an application may be denied or revoked under this article. 
(c)  An application for issuance or renewal of an adult entertainment establishment license shall be accompanied by such fee as required under section 22-146(g). 
(d)  All renewal applications shall be reviewed in strict accordance with the rules and regulations, ordinances and laws existing on the date of renewal. No vested rights or interests of any kind whatsoever shall exist by virtue of an earlier license. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9013), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-154. - Procedure for revocation, suspension and denial of renewal of existing adult entertainment establishment licenses. 
(a)  If the director determines that grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license, or deny an application for renewal of a license, the director shall notify in writing the designated license holder, license applicant or licensee, as applicable, of the intent to deny, suspend or revoke, which notice shall include a summary of the grounds for such action. The notice shall be sent by registered or certified mail to the address of the designated license holder, license applicant or licensee listed in the current year's license application or renewal application. 
(b)  Within ten days after the effective date of notice, the designated license holder, license applicant, or licensee may provide to the director in writing a response, which shall include a statement of reasons why the license or its renewal should not be denied, suspended or revoked. If a response is not received by the director in the time stated, the denial of renewal, suspension or revocation shall be final; and notice shall be sent to the applicable designated license holder, license applicant or licensee by registered or certified mail. 
(c)  Within ten days after receipt of a response, the director shall either withdraw the intent to deny the renewal, suspend or revoke, and so notify the respondent, or shall deny the renewal, impose a suspension or revoke the license. Following a decision to deny renewal, suspend or revoke a license, the director shall send notice to the respondent, which shall include a statement of the reasons for the denial, suspension or revocation. The effective date of notice shall be five days after the date the notice is mailed. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the director may immediately suspend any license on a temporary basis when he determines that an emergency exists that immediately and substantially imperils the life, safety or welfare of the public. The designated license holder or licensee shall be notified immediately upon such emergency suspension by telephone and/or by delivery of written notice. Such notification shall state that an emergency hearing before the board of commissioners shall be conducted if requested in writing within five days by the license holder or licensee to the board of commissioners. Such hearing, if requested, shall be conducted within five days of the request by the board of commissioners pursuant to the procedures, except as hereby modified, of section 22-148(b). 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9014), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-155. - Appeal from suspension, revocation or denial of adult entertainment establishment renewal. 
(a)  An applicant may appeal the decision of the director regarding a suspension, revocation or denial of renewal of a license by filing a written request for a hearing with the board of commissioners within ten days after notice of such denial. The director's decision on the application shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall stay the director's decision regarding renewal, suspension or revocation. The applicant's written request for a hearing shall set out the grounds on which the director's decision is challenged. The hearing shall be conducted before the board of commissioners at a reasonable date and time established by the board of commissioners and after reasonable notice to the applicant. At the hearing, the board of commissioners shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the application. Hearings shall be conducted under procedures established by the board of commissioners, which shall be consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross examine witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall conduct the hearing within 30 days after receipt of the applicant's written request for a hearing unless the applicant requests an extension in writing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 22-148(b). The board of commissioners shall render a written decision and issue notice of the decision to the applicant within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. Appeals from such decision by an aggrieved party shall be by writ of certiorari from the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9015), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-156. - Business manager permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a permit to act as an adult entertainment business manager of or in an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the licensee and owner of an adult entertainment establishment to ensure that no person acts as a manager of or in the adult entertainment establishment unless that person holds a permit. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9016), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-157. - Issuance of manager permits. 
(a)  Any person who desires to obtain an original or renewal manager permit shall make application to the director in person. The application shall be made under oath upon a form prescribed by the director and shall include: 
(1)  The name, home street address and mailing address, if different, of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's age, date and place of birth; 
(3)  Proof of the date of birth of the applicant and the identity of the applicant, including at least one photographic identity card issued by a governmental agency; 
(4)  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(5)  A list of any specified criminal acts, and time of service in jail or prison, as specified in section 22-146(c)(13); 
(6)  Two current passport-type photographs of the applicant of a size specified by the director, which shall become part of the photographic identity cards if a permit is issued; and 
(7)  The fingerprints of the applicant. The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the sheriff, and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached to the application. Payment of all fees charged by the sheriff in connection with this requirement shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee of $100.00. The application shall be signed under oath by each individual listed as an applicant and notarized. An application shall be deemed filed with the county when the director has received the required fee in full, a completed application with all information required in subsection (a) of this section, and the photograph and fingerprints of each applicant. The application shall be in duplicate, including all addendum or attachments, with one copy being kept on file with the director and one copy being transmitted to the sheriff. The sheriff shall cause to be conducted a background investigation of the police record and character and reputation of the applicant, and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the director. 
(c)  The director shall issue the permit within 30 days from the date of filing of the application unless he finds that the applicant has been convicted of an offense specified in the applicable provisions of section 22-146(c)(13) within the time specified therein or has provided materially false or misleading application information. If the application is not granted, the applicant shall be mailed notice within such 30 days of the grounds and of his right to provide evidence and request a hearing as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  Each permit issued by the director shall consist of two photographic identification cards, a personal card and an on-site card. 
(e)  Any applicant whose application is denied may appeal the denial by filing a written request for a hearing with the board of commissioners within ten days after the applicant has been given notice of such denial. Any applicant who properly requests a hearing on the denial shall be granted a hearing by the board of commissioners within 20 days following the receipt of the request by the board. The hearing and appeals therefrom shall be conducted as provided in section 22-148(b). 
(f)  If any cardholder's card or on-site card is lost or stolen, the holder shall immediately notify the director and request a replacement, which shall be issued for a fee of $50.00 within five business days following verification of the identity of the holder. 
(g)  No permit application shall be accepted nor shall a permit be issued to any person who does not provide proof that he is at least 18 years old. Any permit issued by virtue of any misrepresentation or error to any person under age 18 years shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9017), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-158. - Term, transfer, and amendment of manager permit. 
(a)  A manager permit is valid for one year from the date of its issuance unless a shorter time is specified on the face of such permit. Applications for renewal may be made by following the procedures and requirements set forth in section 22-153. Renewal fees shall be $50.00. 
(b)  A permit is personal to the named permit holder and is not transferable or valid for use by any other person. 
(c)  Each permit holder shall notify the director of his new address within ten days following any change of his address. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9018), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-159. - Display of manager permit. 
Each manager shall conspicuously display his personal card upon his person at all times while acting as manager of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9019), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-160. - Revocation of manager permit. 
If the director has grounds to believe that any manager permit holder has been convicted of an offense as specified in the applicable provisions of section 22-146(c)(13) within the time specified therein or after, or has violated a requirement or prohibition of this article, the director may revoke the permit following a notice of the grounds and a hearing as provided in section 22-154 and section 22-155. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9020), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-161. - Employee permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a permit to act as an employee of or in an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the licensee and owner of an adult entertainment establishment to ensure that no person acts as an employee of or in the adult entertainment establishment unless that person holds a permit. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9021), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-162. - Issuance of employee permits. 
(a)  Any person who desires to obtain an original or renewal employee permit shall make application to the director in person. The application shall be made under oath upon a form prescribed by the director and shall include: 
(1)  The name, home street address and mailing, if different, of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's age, date and place of birth; 
(3)  Proof of the date of birth of the applicant and the identity of the applicant, including at least one photographic identity card issued by a governmental agency; 
(4)  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
(5)  A list of any specified criminal acts, and time of service in jail or prison, as specified in section 22-146(c)(13); 
(6)  Two current passport-type photographs of the applicant of a size specified by the director, which shall become part of the photographic identity cards if a permit is issued; and 
(7)  The fingerprints of the applicant. The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the sheriff, and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached to the application. Payment of all fees charged by the sheriff in connection with this requirement shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee of $100.00. The application shall be signed under oath by each individual listed as an applicant and notarized. An application shall be deemed filed with the county when the director has received the required fee in full, a completed application with all information required in subsection (a) of this section, and the photograph and fingerprints of each applicant. The application shall be in duplicate, including all addendum or attachments, with one copy being kept on file with the director and one copy being transmitted to the sheriff. The sheriff shall cause to be conducted a background investigation of the police record and character and reputation of the applicant, and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the director. 
(c)  The director shall issue the permit within 30 days from the date of filing of the application unless he finds that the applicant has been convicted of an offense specified in the applicable provisions of section 22-146(c)(13) within the time specified therein or has provided materially false or misleading application information. If the application is not granted, the applicant shall be mailed notice within such 30 days of the grounds and of his right to provide evidence and request a hearing as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  Each permit issued by the director shall consist of two photographic identification cards, a personal card and an on-site card. 
(e)  Any applicant whose application is denied may appeal the denial by filing a written request for a hearing with the board of commissioners within ten days after the applicant has been given notice of such denial. Any applicant who properly requests a hearing on the denial shall be granted a hearing by the board of commissioners within 20 days following the receipt of the request by the board. The hearing and appeals therefrom shall be conducted as provided in section 22-148(b). 
(f)  If any cardholder's card or on-site card is lost or stolen, the holder shall immediately notify the director and request a replacement, which shall be issued for a fee of $50.00 within five business days following verification of the identity of the holder. 
(g)  No permit application shall be accepted nor shall a permit be issued to any person who does not provide proof that he is at least 18 years old. Any permit issued by virtue of any misrepresentation or error to any person under age 18 years shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9022), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-163. - Term, transfer, and amendment of employee permit. 
(a)  An employee permit is valid for one year from the date of its issuance unless a shorter time is specified on the face of such permit. Applications for renewal may be made by following the procedures and requirements set forth in section 22-153. Renewal fees for an employee permit shall be $50.00. 
(b)  A permit is personal to the named permit holder and is not transferable or valid for use by any other person. 
(c)  Each permit holder shall notify the director of his new address within ten days following any change of his address. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9023), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-164. - Display of employee permit. 
Each employee shall keep his personal card upon the premises for display upon request by an appropriate authority at all times while acting as an employee of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9024), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-165. - Revocation of employee permit. 
If the director has grounds to believe that any employee permit holder has been convicted of an offense as specified in the applicable provisions of section 22-146(c)(13) within the time specified therein or after, or has violated a requirement or prohibition of this article, the director may revoke the permit following a notice of the grounds and a hearing as provided in section 22-154 and section 22-155. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9025), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-166. - Operational requirements. 
The following operational requirements shall apply to all adult entertainment establishments. Failure to ensure compliance with these requirements shall constitute a violation of this article by the licensee and manager: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than 18 years of age to enter or be on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment at any time the adult entertainment establishment is open for business. It shall be the duty of the license holder and manager of each adult entertainment establishment to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the adult entertainment establishment at all times during such adult entertainment establishment's regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to not allow any person under the age of 18 years to enter the adult entertainment establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 18 years unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
a.  A valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's license establishing the required age; or 
b.  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the state or another official government agency containing a description of the person so identified, such person's photograph, and such person's date of birth establishing the required age. Appropriate forms of such identification include a passport and military identification card. Appropriate forms of identification shall not include a birth certificate nor any traffic citation or complaint. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is visibly intoxicated to enter or be on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment at any time the adult entertainment establishment is open for business. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to allow the merchandise or activities of an adult entertainment establishment to be visible from any point outside such adult entertainment establishment. It shall be the duty of the licensee of an adult entertainment establishment to opaquely cover each nonopaque area through which a person outside the premises of the adult entertainment establishment may otherwise see inside the adult entertainment establishment. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to allow the sale, dispersion or consumption of alcoholic beverages upon the premises, including all outdoor areas, of an adult entertainment establishment. It shall be unlawful to allow any person, whether a patron, contractor, subcontractor, agent, employee or otherwise, to bring any alcoholic beverage onto the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, including all outdoor areas. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any employee to provide any adult service to any customer in any separate area within an adult entertainment establishment to which entry or access is blocked or obscured by any door, curtain or other barrier, regardless of whether entry to such separate area is by invitation, admission fee, club membership fee, or any form of gratuity or consideration. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of any licensee and manager of an adult entertainment establishment to allow immediate access by any sheriff or police officer, fire department official, code enforcement officer, or health officer to any portion of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment upon request for the purpose of inspection of such premises for compliance with this article or any other applicable law. 
(7)  Each adult entertainment establishment shall be equipped with lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than ten footcandle as measured at four feet above floor level. 
(8)  Each adult entertainment establishment shall have at least one adult entertainment business manager on duty on the premises at all times during which the adult entertainment establishment is open for business or during which customers are on the premises. All persons acting as managers on the premises shall hold and display the permit required by this article. 
(9)  All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult entertainment establishment shall be illuminated from sunset to one hour following the time of closing of the adult entertainment establishment with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of ten footcandle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult entertainment establishment for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce criminal conduct. 
(10)  All adult services performed in an adult dance establishment shall be conducted upon a stage elevated at least 18 inches above floor level. All parts of the stage, or a clearly designated area on such stage within which the adult service is provided, shall be a distance of at least three feet from all parts of a clearly designated area in which patrons may be present. The stage or designated area shall be separated from the area in which patrons may be located by a solid barrier or railing the top of which is at least three feet in height. A provider or patron may not extend any part of his body over or beyond the barrier or railing. 
(11)  Adult entertainment establishments shall be closed between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. on and between Monday through Saturday nights, and between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 8:00 a.m. on Monday. 
(12)  No adult service may be provided in any location within an adult entertainment establishment which is not visible by direct line of sight at all times from a manager's station located in a portion of the premises which is accessible to customers or patrons. 
(13)  No adult service shall be provided in any location or area of premises so as to be visible or viewable from a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9026), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-167. - Conduct of employees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider to touch a customer or patron or the clothing or patron of a customer while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider to approach closer than three feet to any customer or patron while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider to engage in adult services or to expose any specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities in the presence of a customer or patron in any separate area within an adult entertainment establishment to which entry or access is blocked or obscured by any door, curtain or other barrier separating entry to such area from the other areas of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider to, by bending, stooping or other postural movements, display the interior of the anus or vagina. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider to touch a specified anatomical area of another adult service provider while in the presence of a customer or patron. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for an adult service provider to accept a gratuity of any kind from a customer or patron. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act as an adult service provider at an adult entertainment establishment that he knows or should know has no adult entertainment license issued by the county pursuant to this article, or which has an adult entertainment license that is under suspension, has been revoked, or has expired. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any adult service provider to display or expose specified anatomical areas while situated outside any structure on the site of an adult entertainment establishment or while situated at any other location on the site that is visible from any public right-of-way or sidewalk. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any adult service provider or any other employee, agent or servant of an adult entertainment establishment or any person employed on a contractual basis to engage in any activity commonly referred to as lap dancing or private tableside dancing whereby the person intentionally sits upon or rubs against the clothed or unclothed genitals, vulva, anus or buttocks of any patron, customer or spectator. It shall be unlawful as well for the patron, customer or spectator upon whose body the lap dancer or private tableside dancer is committing the proscribed activity in this subsection to permit the activity to occur. 
(j)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article which may otherwise be construed to the contrary, it shall not be a violation of this article for any employee of an adult entertainment establishment to expose any specified anatomical area during the employee's bona fide use of a restroom or during the employee's bona fide use of a dressing room which is accessible only to employees. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9027), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-168. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, business, or other legal entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided for in section 1-11. With respect to a violation that is continuous in nature, each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The revocation or suspension of any license shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty, and the imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of a license. Imposition of a criminal penalty shall not be a prerequisite to the revocation or suspension of a license. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9028), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-169. - Injunction. 
The operation of an adult entertainment establishment without a valid license in violation of this article or the operation of any establishment prohibited by this article shall constitute a nuisance, and any person who operates or causes to be operated such business shall be subject to a suit for injunctive or other appropriate relief as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9029), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-170. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all persons engaging in the activities described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9030), 11-9-1999) 
Sec. 22-171. - Severability. 
Each section and each provision or requirement of any section of this article shall be deemed severable and the invalidity of any portion of this article shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other portion. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-22, § 1(7-9031), 11-9-1999) 
Secs. 22-172—22-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FOOD SERVICES 

Sec. 22-201. - Food service; adoption of rules and regulations. 
All food service shall be in compliance with the rules and regulations entitled "Food Service" adopted by the Rockdale Board of Health on February 14, 2008, which rules and regulations are hereby adopted by reference as though fully set out at length in this section. Copies of the "Food Service" rules and regulations are on file and shall be maintained at the Rockdale County office of Environmental Health and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 0-2004-17, § 2, 5-11-2004; Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 10-14-2008) 
Sec. 22-202. - Penalties. 
An "employee" or "person in charge" as defined by the rules and regulations entitled "Food Service" may be charged with a violation of this chapter and subject to the provisions of Rockdale County Code Section 10-1008. 
(Ord. No. 0-2004-17, § 2, 5-11-2004) 
Secs. 22-203—22-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 22-211. - Title. 
This article shall be known, cited and referred to as "The Taxicab Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-212. - Definitions. 
Commissioners means the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. 
County means the unincorporated areas within Rockdale County, Georgia. 
Cruising means moving about on the streets for the purposes of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or personal command. 
Department means the Rockdale County Department of Public Services and Engineering. 
Director means the director of Rockdale County Department of Public Services and Engineering, or his or her designee. 
Driver means any person who is issued a driver's permit and drives or operates a taxicab on the streets of the county. 
Driver's permit means the required written authority granted by the director to persons who qualify to drive or operate a taxicab within the county upon meeting the requirements of this article. 
License means the right and privilege granted by the director to companies who qualify for the operation of a taxicab company within the county upon meeting the requirements of this article. 
License holder means any individual, firm, partnership or corporation that has possession of a license to operate a taxicab company issued by the director. 
Operate means when a person picks up one or more passengers in the county for which such person is accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee that is determined by agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the taxicab is used or when a person maintains a physical place of business as a taxicab company within the county. 
Street means and include any street, alley, lane, avenue, court or public road in the county. 
Taxicab means any motor vehicle used in the business of transporting passengers for a fee or fare or offering to transport passengers for a fee or fare as a public conveyance and is fitted with a taximeter or other device used to compute such fee or fare. 
Taxicab company means a person, firm, partnership or corporation licensed to do business by the Rockdale County Department of Public Services and Engineering with its primary function being the operation of one or more taxicab under the provisions of this article. 
Taxi stand means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere that has been designate as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs. 
Taximeter means a meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which is designed to measure the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the times the vehicle travels or is in waiting, and to indicate the fare to be charged. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-213. - Operations deemed to be doing business in the county. 
Any person, business or entity shall be deemed doing business in the county under this article if such person is picking up passengers in the county and accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the taxicab is used or by contract for the use of any motor vehicle or other vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers. Any person shall also be deemed doing business in the county under this article if such person has established a business relationship with independent contractors or operates taxicabs on such person's own behalf for the purpose of transporting passengers in the county. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-214. - Appeals procedure. 
(a)  Decisions of the director that adversely effect or aggrieve any applicant or license holder or driver's permit holder under this article may be appealed to the commissioners. All appeals shall be submitted in writing to the county clerk, located in the office of the commissioners, within ten calendar days after issuance of written notification of the adverse decision. 
(b)  A hearing shall be conducted by the commissioners on each appeal within 30 days of the date of the filing of the written appeal unless the appellant and the commissioners agree to a continuance. The appellant in such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. 
(c)  The appellant shall be notified in writing of the date and time of the hearing at least seven calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(d)  The finding of the commissioners shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date the finding is issued by certiorari to the Superior Court of Rockdale County. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-215. - Notice. 
For the purposes of this article, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served; when delivery to the last known address of the affected party is acknowledged by signed receipt of certified mail; or three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-216. - Occupation tax. 
Each taxicab company licensed under the provisions of this article, with a location in the county, shall be subject to occupation tax as provided in section 86-32 of the Code of Rockdale County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-217. - Enforcement. 
The enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be conducted by the Rockdale County Sheriff's Office and Rockdale County Code Enforcement Officers. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Secs. 22-218—22-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAXICAB COMPANY REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 22-221. - License required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall operate a taxicab or conduct the business of operating taxicabs in the county until the person has first applied for and obtained a license to do so. It shall be the duty of the director to examine the application and to either grant or refuse the license based on the requirements set forth in this article, including the payment of any fees required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-222. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a license shall be filed with the department upon forms provided by the department, and shall be sworn to by the applicant as true, correct and complete before a notary public. Each applicant is required to submit to a criminal history check. If the applicant is other than a sole proprietor then every partner, officer, manager and stockholder holding a ten percent or more interest in the company shall be subject to the provisions of this section. The applicant shall: 
(1)  Be at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Not have been convicted, pleaded guilty, pleaded nolo contendere, forfeited bond or been imprisoned, within a period of five years prior to the date of application for a license, for violation of any of the following federal or state criminal offenses: criminal homicide; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs; illegal gambling, criminal trespass, public indecency, any theft or violence against person or property; peeping tom, leaving the scene of an accident; manslaughter resulting from the operation of a vehicle; racing on highways and streets; using a motor vehicle in fleeing or attempting to elude an officer; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle was used; perjury or false swearing; any crime of violence or theft or possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants; provided, however, that all applicants shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60, et seq., relating to first offender status. If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea or verdict or dismissal. 
(4)  Never have been convicted of crimes against children, violent crimes, or sex crimes, in accordance with state law. 
(5)  File a list of all drivers who will be applying for a driver's permit and indicate whether the drivers are company employees or independent contractors. 
(6)  Advise the department of the number of taxicabs the applicant will be operating, listing the taxicab's vehicle identification number (VIN), each taxicab's Georgia license tag number, and the year, make and model of each taxicab in use. 
(7)  Submit with the application written consent to conduct a criminal history check signed by the applicant. 
(8)  Submit with the application payment of any fees required by this article. 
(9)  Provide the following information: 
a.  Business: 
1.  Trade name and legal name of business (if different from trade name); 
2.  Business location, mailing address and telephone number; 
3.  Federal employer ID number or Social Security number; 
4.  Form of business (sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, etc.). 
b.  Applicant: 
1.  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms currently or previously used by the applicant; 
2.  The current business and residence addresses of the applicant; 
3.  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair. 
(10)  Submit proof of the applicant's compliance with the provisions of section 22-224 regarding liability insurance for each vehicle to be used, whether the vehicle belongs to the company or to an independent contract driver. 
(11)  File a copy of the applicant's proposed rate schedule. 
(12)  Provide such further information as the director shall require. 
(b)  The application may also include, but shall not be limited to, the information required for an occupation license as provided in the Code of Ordinances of Rockdale County. 
(c)  Failure to furnish the required information, in the form required, may result in the denial of the application or the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-223. - Issuance. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director to examine the application and to either grant or refuse the license, in writing, based upon the requirements set forth in this article. 
(b)  If the director finds that the applicant is not qualified to engage in the taxicab business, the application shall be denied and the license shall be refused. The applicant shall have the right to file an appeal from the decision of the director in refusing to issue a license to the commissioners as set forth in section 22-214 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-224. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  No license shall be issued or continued in effect unless there is in full force and effect liability insurance for each vehicle authorized in the amount of $100,000.00 bodily injury to any one person; in the amount of $300,000.00 for injuries to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident and $50,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. Such liability insurance shall be for to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the conduct of a holder, his servants or agents. Written documentation of above stated insurance coverage, signed by an authorized agent of the insurer shall be filed with the department and shall be kept in each vehicle at all times. Such insurance shall be carried with a reputable company with an agency and place of doing business in the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Each taxicab company shall provide to the director, at the time of submitting an application or renewal, and by June 15 of each year, proof that all taxicabs used by the taxicab company are in compliance with the insurance requirements of this article. 
(c)  Before any policy of insurance required by this article is amended or voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice thereof shall be immediately given by the license holder, in writing, to the department. alteration or voidance of an insurance policy required by this article without adequate notice to the department shall be grounds for immediate suspension of the license. 
(d)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this Code section shall be waived in the event that the license holder has obtained and presents proof of a current and valid certificate of self-insurance from the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Insurance in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 33-34-5.1. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-225. - Suspension, denial or revocation of license. 
(a)  A license may be denied, suspended or revoked by the director for the following reasons: 
(1)  Furnishing fraudulent or untruthful information or omitting information requested in any application or report. 
(2)  Failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license. 
(4)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse. 
(5)  Violation of any provision of this article. 
(6)  Conviction of any act, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any act, which would disqualify a person from obtaining a license. 
(7)  Discontinuing operations for a period of more than 30 days, or failing to begin operations within 60 days of the date of issuance of a license. 
(b)  Prior to any suspension or revocation by the director, the license holder shall be given written notification of the action, which shall include the grounds for such action and notice of the license holder's right to appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-226. - Renewal of license. 
All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year, including the year of issue. Licenses may be renewed only between November 15 and December 31 of each year for the following year. Permits not renewed by December 31 shall be void and such license holder must reapply as a new applicant in order to obtain a license. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-227. - License holders responsible for violations by drivers. 
License holders under this article are responsible for violations of this article by their drivers, whether such drivers are direct employees or independent contractors. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-228. - Alteration of license prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate, or destroy a license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Secs. 22-229—22-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAXICAB DRIVER REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 22-241. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall operate or drive a taxicab for the purpose of doing business in the county, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so operated or driven, unless the driver of such vehicle shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  No license holder shall employ any driver who has not first met the requirements of this article and been issued a driver's permit. 
(c)  No application for a driver's permit will be processed unless the license holder affirms in writing that they intend to hire the applicant if the driver's permit is approved. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-242. - Application. 
(a)  Each applicant for a driver's permit shall: 
(1)  Be at least 18 years of age; 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service; 
(3)  Not have been convicted, pleaded guilty, pleaded nolo contendere, forfeited bond or been imprisoned, within a period of five years prior to the date of application for a permit, for violation of any of the following federal or state criminal offenses: criminal homicide; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs; illegal gambling, criminal trespass, public indecency, any theft or violence against person or property; peeping tom, leaving the scene of an accident; manslaughter resulting from the operation of a vehicle; racing on highways and streets; using a motor vehicle in fleeing or attempting to elude an officer; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; any felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle was used; perjury or false swearing; any crime of violence or theft or possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants; provided, however, that all applicants shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60, et seq., relating to first offender status. If at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses prescribed in this subsection, consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea or verdict or dismissal. 
(4)  Never have been convicted of crimes against children, violent crimes, or sex crimes, in accordance with state law; 
(5)  Not possess a driver's history which contains more than five moving traffic violations in the past five years, or violations of traffic offenses totaling more than 20 points as designated by the Georgia Department of Driver Services; 
(6)  Submit an application to the department on forms provided by the department. Such application shall be sworn to by the applicant as true, correct and complete before a notary public and shall contain at a minimum the following information: 
a.  Name; 
b.  Age; 
c.  Sex; 
d.  Date of birth; 
e.  Social Security number or, if applicant is not a U.S. citizen, applicant's alien identification number; 
f.  Residence address and telephone number; 
g.  Name and address of the taxicab company for whom applicant will work; 
h.  A complete disclosure of all arrests for criminal and traffic violations, including the date, charge, location, and disposition of each offense; 
i.  Employment history for the two years immediately proceeding the date of the application; 
j.  Such other relevant information as shall be required by the director. 
(7)  Provide authorization and any information necessary to enable the director to investigate the driver's background, criminal history, and traffic record; and 
(8)  Be of good character as determined by the aforesaid investigation. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A valid Class C Georgia driver's license of the applicant. The license must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-58 and 40-5-64. 
(2)  One fingerprint card representing the fingerprints of the applicant prepared by the Rockdale County Sheriff's Office. Payment of all fees charged by the Rockdale County Sheriff's Office in connection with this requirement shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(3)  A driver's history from the Georgia Department of Driver Services, which contains the applicant's driving record for the previous seven, or number of years available if seven year history does not exist. 
(4)  Criminal history consent form signed by the applicant. 
(5)  Certification that the applicant has read and understands the provisions of this article. 
(6)  Two current two inch by two inch (approximately) full-face photographs of the applicant. 
(7)  Payment of the fees for the driver's permit and background investigation required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-243. - Permit fees. 
There shall be an annual fee as determined by the commissioners for a taxicab driver's permit issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-244. - Permit and notice to be displayed. 
(a)  The driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be placed on display in the taxicab to be operated by the holder of the driver's permit in a display case or holder designed for that purpose on the dashboard facing the passenger compartment, in clear view of the passengers at all times when the taxicab is for hire. 
(b)  A notice provided by the director shall be on display on the front dashboard facing the passenger compartment. The notice shall contain sufficient information to allow the customer to contact the director concerning compliments or complaints about the taxicab or driver. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-245. - Reserved. 
Sec. 22-246. - Criminal history record check. 
The Rockdale County Sheriff's Office shall conduct an investigation into the criminal history of each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit. In addition to the criminal history consent referenced above, the applicant shall, upon request from the director provide criminal history information from Georgia, any other state, or any political subdivision thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-247. - Consideration of application. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director to examine the application and to either grant or refuse the driver's permit based upon the requirements set forth in this article. 
(b)  In the event the driver's permit is denied, the director shall notify the applicant in writing with the specific grounds for the denial and notice of the applicant's right to appeal pursuant to section 22-214. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-248. - Suspension, denial or revocation of driver's permit. 
(a)  A driver's permit may be denied, suspended or revoked by the director for the following reasons: 
(1)  Furnishing fraudulent or untruthful information or omitting information requested in any application or report. 
(2)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a permit. 
(3)  Violation of any provision of this article. 
(4)  Commission of any act, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any act, which would disqualify a person from obtaining a permit. 
(5)  Violation of any traffic law while operating a taxicab. 
(b)  In the event that a permit is denied, suspended or revoked, the director shall notify the applicant in writing with the specific grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation and notice of the applicant's right to appeal. 
(c)  The director may immediately suspend a driver's permit or cause a vehicle to be removed from service if the director has reasonable cause to believe that the Driver or vehicle present an immediate danger to the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-249. - Driving after suspension or revocation of driver's permit prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any driver to operate a taxicab for the purpose of carriage of passengers during any period in which that driver's permit is suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-250. - Renewal of driver's permits. 
(a)  All driver's permits shall be in effect for 12 months from the date of issuance. Driver's permits may be renewed, upon application and payment of the required fees, for 12-month periods thereafter, unless the permit for the preceding period has been revoked or is under suspension. The driver shall surrender their expired driver's permit before a renewed driver's permit will be issued. 
(b)  Each applicant for renewal must submit a driver's history from the Georgia Department of Driver Services covering the previous calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-251. - Alteration of driver's permit or notices prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate, or destroy a driver's permit or a notice to passengers or cause or allow the same. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-252. - Driver's permit not assignable. 
(a)  Every person to whom a permit has been issued shall return same to the department upon discontinuing operation of a taxicab for the driver named on the driver's permit. Such driver's permit shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person or be valid for any other driver. Taxicab driver permit holders who change employment shall apply to the department for an updated driver's permit, which reflects the proper taxicab company for which the driver will be employed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any driver to allow his permit to be used by any other person. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Secs. 22-253—22-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONDITION OF TAXICAB 

Sec. 22-261. - Condition of taxicab. 
(a)  Each vehicle doing business in the county as a taxicab shall be mechanically sound and in good working order to ensure the safety of drivers, passengers, and the other drivers on the roadways. All headlights, taillights, brake lights, top lights, turn signals, license plate lights, windshield wipers and washers, all vehicle glass, window cranks or electric windows, door locks, trunk lid, trunk hood, door handles, exhaust system, bumpers, fenders, body, tires and other vehicle parts shall be in good condition and functioning properly. Every vehicle operating under this article shall be inspected annually by a certified ASE (auto service excellence) facility verifying that the vehicle meets the following minimum safety requirements: 
(1)  Tires shall not be retread and shall have at least three lines of noticeable tread depth, not less than three-thirty-seconds inch deep. 
(2)  Braking system must be fully functional and in good working order. 
(3)  Exhaust system must be complete and enable the taxicab to run quietly. 
(4)  Equipped with safety restraints for each passenger the vehicle is designed to carry. 
(5)  Have a minimum of three doors designed for passenger entry and exit. Each door must be functioning and in good repair. 
(6)  Have a spare tire and jack. 
(7)  Have a current Georgia license registration tag displayed properly on the vehicle. 
(8)  Bumpers must be tightly secured. 
(9)  Paint shall not be faded; waxing and washing should be done at reasonable intervals; distinctive markings and colors applied pursuant to this article must be clearly legible. 
(10)  Shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, free of litter and debris and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(b)  Taxicabs found to be not in compliance with the provisions of this section shall be removed from service immediately. 
(c)  No license holder or driver shall drive or operate any vehicle, which does not meet the minimum safety requirements as set forth in this section. 
(d)  The department must be notified within ten calendar days of any taxicab being taken out of service for any reason other than temporary maintenance. Temporary maintenance is maintenance that will be completed within a 30-day period. 
(e)  All taxicabs operating in the county shall be no more than ten model years older than the current calendar year on or after January 1, 2006. 
(f)  Any taxicab shall be subject to inspection at any time by the director, any employee of the Rockdale County Sheriff's Office or any code enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-262. - Identification of vehicles; display required. 
(a)  Taxicabs subject to the provisions of this article shall display, in colors contrasting with the color of the vehicle, on each side of the vehicle, the correct name or trade name and telephone number of the license holder. Markings displaying the name of the business shall be a minimum of four-inch letters and a maximum of ten-inch letters. Other lettering shall be in minimum of two-inch letters and a maximum of six-inch letters. All markings and lettering shall be professionally applied and shall be either painted or permanently affixed. 
(b)  Taxicabs may also bear an identifying design, monogram or insignia. Such design, monogram or insignia shall be constructed so as not to conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used by another license holder, nor shall it be designed in such a manner as to be misleading or deceptive to the public. Such identifying design, monogram or insignia shall be professionally applied and shall be permanently affixed. 
(c)  Taxicabs shall be assigned an identification number by the director that shall be displayed on the front and rear bumper of each taxicab. Identification numbers shall be a minimum of four inches and shall be reflective white, silver or gray and shall be painted or permanently affixed. Such number to be separate and distinct from that on any other public vehicle or taxicab permitted in Rockdale County or the City of Conyers. 
(d)  Taxicabs operated on the streets of the county shall display, as a part of its equipment, an identification insignia on the top, which shall be electrically lit at night, and which top light shall carry either the name of the taxicab company, the word "taxi" or the words "taxicab," or the word "cab", provided, however, that during the period in which a taxicab is occupied and under hire by a passenger or passengers, the identification insignia on the top of the vehicle shall not be lit. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-263. - Distinctive color scheme. 
All taxicabs owned and operated by a taxicab company shall be painted the same color scheme. No two taxicab companies may operate taxicabs of the same color scheme. Color schemes shall be recorded and controlled by the director. No color scheme shall duplicate the color scheme of the Rockdale County Sheriff's Office enforcement vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-264. - Taximeters required. 
All taxicabs operated under the authority of this article, which charges are determined by mileage or by the length of time the vehicle is used, shall be equipped with a taximeter. The taximeter shall be fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times day and night, and, after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. All taximeters shall be installed, properly connected and repaired as prescribed by the manufacturer of such meter. Each taximeter shall have thereon some device, which designates when the taximeter is engaged. Any taximeter shall be subject to inspection at any time by the director, any code enforcement officer or any employee of the Rockdale County Sheriff's Office. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Secs. 22-265—22-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OPERATING REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-271. - Rates of fare. 
(a)  No person shall operate a taxicab within the county without first filing with the department a copy of such license holder's rate schedule; and any changes must also be filed with the department prior to such changes being made. 
(b)  No operator shall charge a rate in excess of the rates filed with the department. 
(c)  Copies of all fares and charges shall be posted in each taxicab and shall be of such size and positioned in such a manner as to be plainly visible to passengers being transported in the vehicle. 
(d)  Rate schedule shall include rates for mileage, waiting time, extra passengers, excess baggage, and flat rates. 
(e)  No charge shall be made for time and/or mileage for traveling to the location of a prospective passenger. 
(f)  The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, on which shall be the name of the taxicab company, the taxicab number, name and permit number of the driver, trip origin and destination, amount of charges, and date of transaction. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-272. - Failure, refusal to pay fare. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any vehicle having a valid driver's permit under this article after having hired the same, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-273. - Prohibitions of drivers. 
No driver shall engage in selling or soliciting for the sale of intoxicating beverages, illegal drugs or produce, or solicit for prostitution, or use their taxicab for any purpose other than the transportation of passengers. This section shall not prohibit drivers from transporting passengers along with their purchased merchandise, which is subject to lawful sale in the county. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-274. - Occupancy. 
No taxicab operating within the county shall carry more passengers than that recommended by the manufacturer of the vehicle or for which there is individual seating available. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-275. - Driver appearance. 
All drivers shall be neat in appearance while on duty, clean in person and dress. No person shall operate a taxicab without shoes. A driver's clothing and shoes shall be neat and in good repair, free of holes, tears, fading, stains or soil. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-276. - Refusal to transport orderly passengers. 
(a)  No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly persons upon request unless such taxicab is previously engaged or is unable or forbidden to do so by provisions of this Code or state law. 
(b)  A driver may refuse to convey a passenger if he has reasonable cause to believe that the person intends to violate any law of the county, state or the United States. 
(c)  The provisions of this Code section are not intended to force a driver to convey a passenger if he has reasonable cause to believe that doing so places himself or others in danger. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-277. - Availability of service. 
(a)  Taxicab companies operating under the provisions of this article shall render an over-all service to the public desiring to use a taxicab. License holders shall maintain a central place of business from where they shall receive calls and dispatch services. The taxicab company shall answer all calls received by them for services in the county as soon as they can do so and if such services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time they shall notify the prospective passengers of the estimated time in which the call can be answered and give the reason therefore. 
(b)  Taxicab companies operating as a home occupation as such term is defined by section 130-3 of the Code shall strictly comply with subsection 130-10(a)(2) of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-278. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Drivers must maintain daily trip logs upon which shall record all trips made by each vehicle each day, showing time and place of origin, destination of each trip and amount of fare and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle. The driver shall return all completed trip logs to the taxicab company at least weekly. Each taxicab company shall retain and preserve all drivers' trip logs for a minimum of 12 months. Trip logs are subject to inspection by the director and/or the Sheriff of Rockdale County or their agents or designees upon request. 
(b)  License holders shall maintain the records required by this article at a place readily accessible for examination by the director, Rockdale County Sheriff, or their designees and access shall not be denied at any time of normal operation of business. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-279. - Sleeping, lounging or lying in taxicabs prohibited. 
While any taxicab is parked or is otherwise in service, the driver will remain awake and alert at all times. Sleeping, lounging in a reclining posture, or lying in the taxicab is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-280. - Report of charges. 
Drivers shall report to the department any charges filed against them by any law enforcement officer, including but not limited to minor traffic charges, within 72 hours of the charge being made. Upon request by the director, said driver shall provide such details and/or documents as are available concerning such charges. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-281. - Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers. 
(a)  No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curbside thereof. The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment at all times when such vehicle is upon the street, provided further that nothing herein shall be held to prohibit driver from alighting to the side of the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers in and out of the vehicle. 
(b)  No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud tone of voice or in any manner obstruct the movement of any person or vehicle, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting their patronage. 
(c)  Drivers shall not receive nor discharge passengers in the street but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk or to the extreme right-hand side of the street and there receive or discharge passengers, except on one-way streets where drivers may pull to the sidewalk or extreme right-hand or left-hand side of the street. 
(d)  No driver shall park or stand on any private property without the permission of the owner of said property, nor shall such drive park adjacent to clearly marked yellow curbs or "No Parking" zones. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-282. - Stands, generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any taxicab stand within the county that causes taxicabs to queue on a street. Whenever any such taxicab stand is established, such taxicab stand may be used by taxicabs upon a rotation basis of "first-come-first-served." Drivers shall pull into taxicab stands from the rear and shall advance forward as the taxicabs ahead depart. Drivers shall stay within five feet of their taxicabs and shall not solicit passengers or engage in loud or boisterous talk while at the taxicab stand. Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding any taxicab of choice that is parked at a taxicab stand. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-283. - Telephone stands. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to install or attach any telephone or similar device on any telephone post, telegraph post, tree post, or on the side of any building in any street, sidewalk, alley or lane in the county for the purpose of using such telephone in connection with the taxicab business. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-284. - Property left in taxicabs by passengers. 
Any driver or permit holder discovering in any taxicab under his control personal property, which was lost or left therein by a passenger of such vehicle shall report such loss and deliver such property to the office of the taxicab company within 12 hours after the discovery of such property. The driver's report shall include brief particulars to enable the taxicab company to identify the owner of the property. The permit holder shall insure that all reasonable steps are taken to locate the owner and return said property. The taxicab company shall retain the property on behalf of the owner for at least 60 days. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-285. - Smoking prohibited when taxicab is occupied by passenger. 
(a)  In accordance with the Rockdale County Smoke-Free Air Ordinance, it shall be unlawful for the driver to smoke in such taxicab when one or more passengers occupy the taxicab. 
(b)  "No Smoking" signs with letters not less than one-inch in height or signs with the international no smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) not less than three inches in diameter shall be clearly and conspicuously posted inside the passenger compartment of the taxicab by the driver or taxicab company owner. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-286. - Taxicab movement prohibited under certain circumstances. 
No driver shall collect fares, make change, or take on or discharge passengers while his/her taxicab is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-287. - Compliance with laws and ordinances; safety. 
Drivers shall operate such taxicab in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia and the Code of Rockdale County, Georgia. Drivers shall exercise due regard for the safety, comfort, and convenience of their passengers and the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Sec. 22-288. - Penalty for violation. 
For violations of this article, section 1-11 "General penalty," shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 1-24-2006) 
Secs. 22-289—22-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PUBLIC SWIMMING POOLS 

Sec. 22-301. - Public swimming pools; adoption of rules and regulations. 
All public swimming pools shall comply with the rules and regulations entitled "Public Swimming Pools Regulation" adopted by the Rockdale Board of Health on December 8, 1977, or as hereinafter amended, which rules and regulations are hereby adopted by reference as though fully set out at length in this section. Copies of the "Public Swimming Pool" rules and regulations are on file and shall be maintained at the Rockdale County office of Environmental Health and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 0-2016-01, § 1, 3-2016) 
Sec. 22-302. - Penalties. 
An "owner" or "operator" as defined by the rules and regulations entitled "Public Swimming Pools Regulation" that violates said rules and regulations may be charged with a violation of this article and subjected to the provisions of Rockdale County Code Section 1-11." 
(Ord. No. 0-2016-01, § 1, 3-20-2016) 
Secs. 22-303—22-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TOURIST ACCOMMODATIONS 

Sec. 22-311. - Tourist accommodations; adoption of rules and regulations. 
All tourist accommodations shall comply with the rules and regulations entitled "Tourist Accommodations" adopted by the Rockdale Board of Health on January 1, 2014, or as hereinafter amended, which rules and regulations are hereby adopted by reference as though fully set out at length in this section. Copies of the "Tourist Accommodations" rules and regulations are on file and shall be maintained at the Rockdale County office of Environmental Health and shall be available to the public for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 0-2016-02, § 1, 3-2016) 
Sec. 22-312. - Penalties. 
An "employee" or "person in charge" as defined by the rules and regulations entitled "Tourist Accommodations" that violates said rules and regulations may be charged with a violation of this article and subjected to the provisions of Rockdale County Code Section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 0-2016-01, § 1, 3-2016) 
Secs. 22-313—22-320. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 30; emergency services, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agency means the Rockdale County Emergency Management Agency. 
Energy emergency means a condition of danger to the health, safety, welfare, or economic well-being of the citizens of this state arising out of a present or threatened shortage of usable energy resources; also any condition of substantial danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of this state resulting from the operation of any electrical power-generating facility, the transport of any energy resource by any means whatsoever, or the production, use or disposal of any source material, special nuclear material, or byproduct, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, 68 Stat. 919, 42 USC 2011, et seq.; also any nuclear incident, as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, occurring within or outside this state, substantially affecting the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of this state. 
Energy resources means all forms of energy or power including, without limitation, oil, gasoline, and other petroleum products; natural or synthetic gas; electricity in all forms and from all sources; and other fuels of any description, except wood. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 26-32. - Rockdale County Emergency Management Agency created. 
There is hereby created the Rockdale County Emergency Management Agency. This agency (in joint-action with the Conyers Emergency Management Agency) is created to organize forces, prepare plans and procedures, train personnel and conduct emergency operations that will save lives, minimize damage to property and provide immediate recovery operations, and any other emergency governmental functions, other than functions for which the state and federal governments are primarily responsible, for the protection of life and property in the county in both peacetime and attack-caused emergencies; to provide continuity of local government in emergency and post-emergency periods; to coordinate plans for mutual aid assistance with adjoining local governments; and when directed by the governor of the state, or his legal representative, to render aid to other stricken areas in declared emergency periods. 
(Code 1978, § 2-3001) 
Sec. 26-33. - General duties. 
The agency will provide for the organization, mobilization and direction of the civilian population and for the protection of public and private property, and provide necessary support agencies (those agencies required but not available in normal day-to-day operation of the government) to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; emergency medical services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical, biological, and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; consequence management functions to include victim services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the such functions. 
(Code 1978, § 2-3002) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3. 
Sec. 26-34. - Emergency management director; duties. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of the emergency management director. The county chairperson shall nominate, for appointment by the director of the state emergency management agency, an emergency management director, who upon appointment becomes an employee of the county and director of the emergency management agency. 
(b)  Upon appointment, the emergency management director is charged: 
(1)  To represent the county on all matters pertaining to the emergency management agency; 
(2)  To take the lead in coordinating the development of countywide emergency preparedness, for example: 
a.  Develop an emergency and disaster operations plan for effective mobilization of all resources of the county, both private and public; 
b.  Prepare and recommend for approval mutual aid plans and agreements; 
c.  Prepare and effectuate legal action for continuity of government; 
d.  Coordinate and advise government departments in development and implementation of the emergency and disaster operations plans and other required agencies or groups; 
e.  Procure needed federal and state assistance through emergency management channels and through federal assistance programs in such areas as law enforcement, highway safety, ambulance procurement, or emergency medical services and others. 
(c)  During a peacetime or attack-caused emergency, the chief executive of government is charged with the protection of life and property by law and is in overall command. 
(d)  The emergency management director will be responsible during an emergency: 
(1)  To advise the county chairperson and the board of commissioners in operational situations, public and privileged information, and implementation of the emergency plan; 
(2)  To direct and coordinate the activities of the emergency operation center staff; and 
(3)  To assist the chief executive in ensuring the execution of operations, plans and procedures required by the emergency. 
(Code 1978, § 2-3003) 
Sec. 26-35. - Existing agencies; emergency management director. 
It is an operational assumption of the civil preparedness program and emergency management agency that existing agencies of government will perform emergency activities related to those they perform in normal times. Auxiliary groups will be formed and trained under the direction and control of the operating department of government they are to support, and nongovernmental groups such as physicians or news media will be assigned emergency missions as necessary to develop a capability to augment or supplement existing agencies of government in responding to emergencies. A basic purpose of the local emergency management agency and its director shall be to provide for coordination of the operations of all such governmental and nongovernmental forces in emergencies, and to provide those unique civil preparedness skills and capabilities not available in existing government organizations. The emergency management director shall also inform the operating departments of government of those special conditions arising out of a nuclear attack which would call for a modification of traditional operating techniques. 
(Code 1978, § 2-3004) 
Sec. 26-36. - Agency and existing departments. 
(a)  The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing county departments and agencies, and organized support forces, as needed to provide for the effective mobilization of all resources of the county, both private and public. 
(b)  Existing government departments, with or without support forces, will be commanded by their regular department executives, who will name for command three successors for emergency operation purposes. 
(c)  Organized support forces of the emergency management agency which are required for the functions of this agency, by law and need, will be provided from the populace and will have a chief executive, who will name for command three successors for emergency operation purposes. 
(d)  The departments, agencies and organized support forces of the emergency management agency will be named, their emergency functions and responsibilities defined in the emergency and disaster operations plan of the county. 
(Code 1978, § 2-3005) 
Cross reference— Departments and agencies, § 2-91 et seq. 
Sec. 26-37. - Emergency powers; chairperson. 
In the event of an actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other disaster which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the county chairperson, or in the absence of the county chairperson his legally appointed successor, who for emergency purposes to assure continuity of government will have three legally appointed successors, e.g., first, second, third, may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise, for such period as the state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management and the emergency management agency and its components, and to assume direct operational control over all county emergency management and emergency management forces; 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use, or condemn any property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any seized property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county, to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for the property or supplies; and 
(4)  To perform and exercise any other functions and duties, and take any other emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county and private and public property. 
(Code 1978, § 2-3006) 
Sec. 26-38. - Emergency meeting of board of county commissioners. 
(a)  Upon a declaration of an emergency as provided in section 26-37, the county board of commissioners shall immediately be called into session to perform any duties necessary. 
(b)  The state of emergency and the resulting powers may be ended immediately upon a motion thereon being adopted by the county board of commissioners, or by an order of the officer declaring the emergency. 
(Code 1978, § 2-3007) 
Sec. 26-39. - Emergency personnel. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this article shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in emergency functions, these persons shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees and shall have full authority, respective to their services, as any officer and employee of the county. 
(Code 1978, § 2-3008) 
Sec. 26-40. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful during an emergency: 
(1)  To willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management agency, and enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this article; 
(2)  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if the act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this political subdivision or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; or 
(3)  To wear or carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
(Code 1978, § 2-3009) 
Sec. 26-41. - Liberal construction. 
This article shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes. 
(Code 1978, § 2-3010) 
Secs. 26-42—26-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 26-71—26-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUSPENSION OF CODE PROVISIONS AND OTHER FORMALITIES 

Sec. 26-91. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting the state or the United States, the affairs and business of the county may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or in compliance with time consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(c)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of this Code, or any portion thereof, where: (i) the emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside the Code is required; (ii) such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and (iii) such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(d)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary manufactured home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and the county department of public services and engineering. The temporary permit shall not exceed six in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-10, § 1, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 26-92. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fees means any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency means a state of emergency as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period of time that the disaster or emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. The "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six months after the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
Temporary dwelling means any mobile or easily movable home, trailer, recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations in a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-10, § 2, 4-9-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 26-93—26-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CURFEW 

Sec. 26-111. - Institution of curfew. 
(a)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of the county. 
(b)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(c)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-11, § 1, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 26-112. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew means a regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this division from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals means, unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, those individuals engaged in the provision of designated essential services such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, and utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to division 4 of this article pertaining to the registration and licensing of building and repair services during a state of emergency, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency means a state of emergency as defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-11, § 2, 4-9-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-113. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated areas of the county during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-11, § 3, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 26-114. - Penalties. 
The penalty for a violation of this division shall be as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-11, § 4, 4-9-2002) 
Secs. 26-115—26-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— General provisions of planning and development, ch. 102. 

Sec. 26-131. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of the county, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the board of county commissioners and having paid fees as provided by this division. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-12, § 1, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 26-132. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building contractor means any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this division if: 
(1)  He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2)  He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency means a state of emergency as defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-12, § 2, 4-9-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-133. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the board of commissioners or such other person designated by the board of commissioners at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-12, § 3, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 26-134. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are fixed under the terms and conditions of this division at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-12, § 4, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 26-135. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this division to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this division. Section 1-11 shall apply to violations of this division. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-12, § 5, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 26-136. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this division is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the certification is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-12, § 6, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 26-137. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued under this division shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-12, § 7, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 26-138. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this division is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as such business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county board of commissioners hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted under this division, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this division or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-12, § 8, 4-9-2002) 
Secs. 26-139—26-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OVERCHARGING 

Sec. 26-161. - Prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency, or subsequent recovery period in which the county has been designated as a disaster area, for any person located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-9, § 1, 4-9-2002) 
Sec. 26-162. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency means a state of emergency as defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period means the period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-9, § 2, 4-9-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-163. - Penalties. 
The penalty for a violation of this division shall be as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-9, § 3, 4-9-2002) 
Chapter 30 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 26; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Superior courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-1 et seq.; state courts of counties, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-1 et seq.; probate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-1 et seq.; magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CLAIMS; JUDGMENTS 

Sec. 30-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Claim means all claims presented against an employee prior to institution of a proceeding. 
Employee means the members of the governing body of the county, employees of the county, elected or appointed county officers and their appointees and employees, including appointed members of the board of commissioners, councils, authorities and boards, past, present and future other than the county school board. 
Proceeding means any matter of a civil nature in or before any court or agency of this state or of any other state or of the United States. 
(Code 1978, § 3-4001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 30-32. - Legal defense. 
Whenever any claim is made or proceeding is brought against an employee, either against him asserting personal liability for damages arising out of the performance of his duties or in any way connected therewith, whether based on negligence, violation of contract rights or violation of civil, constitutional, common law or other statutory rights, whether federal, state or local, the county shall, upon his written request, provide for his defense unless otherwise limited by the terms of this article. The provisions of this article shall not apply unless the employee provides notice in writing of any claim or proceeding to one or more members of the county board of commissioners within 30 days after the employee has notice of a claim and/or within five days after the employee has been served with process in a proceeding initiated against him. 
(Code 1978, § 3-4002) 
Sec. 30-33. - Grounds for refusal of defense. 
(a)  The county shall not provide for the defense of a claim or proceeding brought against an employee if: 
(1)  The act or omission did not arise out of and in the course of his county employment; 
(2)  The employee acted or failed to act because of actual or intentional misconduct, fraud, corruption or malice; 
(3)  Defense of the claim or proceeding by the county would create a conflict of interest between the county and the employee; 
(4)  The proceeding is a criminal prosecution; provided, however, that should the county employee be acquitted or the charges otherwise dismissed by the court, then the county shall provide for the defense of the case if and only if the alleged violation arose out of the employee's duties for the county; 
(5)  Provision of a defense against the claim or proceeding would not be in, the best interest of the county; 
(6)  The employee acts or fails to act as a result of, or at a time when, his own self-indulgence substantially impaired his judgment as, for example, an officer or employee who causes damage or injury while intoxicated or under influence of drugs while on the job; 
(7)  The employee acts or fails to act, except in emergencies or the existence of extenuating circumstances, directly contrary to advice of the county attorney; or 
(8)  The employee acts or fails to act in such manner as to constitute a criminal act as, for example, the misappropriation of property or funds. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the county from providing a defense against a claim or proceeding where there is a conflict of interest between one employee or group of employees of the county as compared with another employee or group of employees. 
(c)  The determinations required by subsection (a) of this section shall be made by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  If two or more employees or groups of employees are involved, and the interest of one employee or group of employees conflicts with the interest of another employee or group of employees, then and in such event, the board of commissioners shall specify which employee or group of employees shall be represented by the county attorney and shall authorize other employees or groups of employees to employ counsels at the expense of the county; provided, however, that the selection and compensation of any other counsel shall be subject to prior approval by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Where the board of commissioners is unable to determine initially whether a defense is authorized under this section, as in the case of charges being made in the proceedings of actual or intentional misconduct, fraud, corruption or malice on the part of the employee which cannot be initially disproved to the satisfaction of the board of commissioners upon investigation, then the board of commissioners may decide that the defense be allowed by the county or that the board of commissioners may reserve judgment until the conclusion of the proceeding, before or after any appeals thereon, upon whether to reimburse the employee for any attorney's fees and court costs he may have incurred. 
(Code 1978, § 3-4003) 
Sec. 30-34. - Payment of judgments and settlement of claims. 
(a)  Where defense of a claim or proceeding against an employee is provided by this article, all final judgments awarded in a court of competent jurisdiction against employees in proceedings to which this article applies or any amount payable under any settlement of such proceeding or of claims in accordance with this article shall be paid by the county only as provided in this article. All compromises of claims or proceedings governed by this article shall be submitted to the board of commissioners for its prior approval and that approval shall only be sparingly granted upon legal advice and after a determination by the board of commissioners that such payment is in the best interest of the county on a case-by-case basis. 
(b)  Where the board has agreed to reimburse the employee for attorney's fees and court costs under section 30-33(d), the county may also provide for the payment of judgments and claims under this section. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, payment of judgments and claims shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  No sum shall be paid on behalf of any employee in any one claim or proceeding in excess of $10,000.00 for property damage, $25,000.00 in the case of any other claim or claims brought by any one claimant, and $100,000.00 for any number of claims by numerous claimants arising out of the same occurrence. 
(2)  No sum shall be paid under the provisions of this article for punitive or exemplary damages. 
(3)  No sum shall be paid under the provisions of this article unless the claimant unconditionally releases the employee and the county from any and all claims, causes of action or judgments arising out of the subject claim or proceeding. 
(4)  No sum will be paid under the provisions of this article unless the employee shall first pay $1,000.00 toward the total sum payable under the provisions of this article; provided, however, that this $1,000.00 shall be waived when in the opinion of the county attorney the facts of the particular case warrant such a waiver. 
There is excluded further from the operation of this article any claim or proceeding as to which insurance is provided by the county. 
(Code 1978, § 3-4004) 
Sec. 30-35. - Construction; governmental immunity. 
Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to constitute any waiver by the county of the governmental immunity afforded it under the constitution and laws of the state. Nothing contained in this article shall be interpreted in any way to reduce or eliminate the rights of any employee of the county against any other party. 
(Code 1978, § 3-4005) 
Chapter 34 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; sale of alcohol on election days permitted, § 10-53. 
State Law reference— Elections, title 21. 

Sec. 34-1. - Qualification fees for candidates not qualified by primary. 
(a)  The qualification fees for candidates in general elections for the following offices, who were not qualified as a result of a party primary, shall be as fixed, from time to time by the commissioners and entered in the official minutes: 
(1)  Clerk of the superior court; 
(2)  Sheriff; 
(3)  Judge of the probate court; 
(4)  Tax commissioner; 
(5)  County commissioner; 
(6)  County chairperson; 
(7)  Member of the county board of education; 
(8)  Coroner; 
(9)  Surveyor; and 
(10)  Magistrate. 
(b)  These qualification fees shall be paid to the board of elections of the county upon qualifying and shall be disbursed as provided in the state election code. 
(Code 1978, § 1-2001) 
State Law reference— Qualification fees, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-131. 
Chapter 38 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; civil emergencies, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 46. 
State Law reference— Emergency medical services, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMBULANCES 

Sec. 38-31. - Definitions. 
The definitions used in section 86-31 shall likewise apply to this article. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Any word or phrase not defined in this section, but otherwise defined in this Code, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Advanced life support means the base level of services and equipment to be provided by a service provider which shall include, at a minimum, basic life support plus the use of adjunctive equipment, the establishment of an intravenous line, the administration of fluids and drugs, cardiac monitoring, defibrillation, the control of arrhythmias, and postresuscitation care. 
Ambulance service provider means any person furnishing convalescent or emergency care and transportation on the streets and highways of the county for wounded, injured, sick, invalid, or incapacitated human beings to or from a place where medical or hospital care is furnished. 
Basic life support means that particular phase of emergency care that either (i) prevents circulatory or respiratory arrest or insufficiency through prompt recognition and intervention, or both; or (ii) externally supports the circulation and respiration of a victim of cardiac or respiratory arrest through cardiac pulmonary resuscitation (CPR). 
Director means the director of the department of public services and engineering, or his designee. 
Paramedic means any person who has been certified by the composite state board of medical examiners before January 1, 2002, or by the state department of human resources on or after January 1, 2002, as having been trained in emergency care techniques in a paramedic training course approved by the state department of human resources. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, group of individuals acting together for a common purpose, or other organization of any kind. 
(Code 1978, §§ 7-1001, 7-8001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 31-11-2. 
Sec. 38-32. - Ambulance service provider license required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate as an ambulance service provider in the county without having obtained a license in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8002) 
Sec. 38-33. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the license only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the county and state law. The regulations of this article shall be in addition to and supplement state laws regulating ambulance service. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent or restrict in any manner any (i) physician, chiropractor, or physical therapist, licensed and regulated by or through the state while engaged in the practice of such profession; or (ii) any hospital or other professional healthcare establishment separately licensed as such by the state. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8003) 
Sec. 38-34. - Application process; requirements. 
Any person desiring to obtain an ambulance service provider license shall make application to the department of public services and engineering. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant as true, correct and complete before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. All applications shall be in writing and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The full legal name of the applicant, including trade names currently or heretofore used by the applicant. 
(2)  The current and all previous business and resident addresses of the applicant within five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(3)  Any emergency medical service or ambulance service business license history of the applicant, including whether such person in any previous operation in any jurisdiction has had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation. 
(4)  Applicant shall provide a certificate demonstrating compliance with all state laws. 
(5)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the information and exhibits set out in this section with regard to each employee, agent and partner. 
(6)  All license applications shall be accompanied by a fee as elsewhere established by the board of commissioners to defray costs associated with the issuance of such license. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8004) 
Sec. 38-35. - Minimum standards. 
No applicant shall be issued a license as an ambulance service provider unless the following standards are first met: 
(1)  The applicant must be the holder of a certification from the state evidencing compliance with state law and all rules and regulations promulgated by the governing state authority regarding the providing of ambulance service and emergency medical services. 
(2)  The applicant must provide in a format acceptable to the director evidence of the applicant's ability to deliver advanced life support minimum standard care which shall be inclusive of the equipment and supplies adjunctive to such care and further evidence that such equipment and supplies shall be available for all delivery and care services to be provided in the county. Inspection of the equipment and supplies shall be conducted by the director or his designee prior to the issuance of a license. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8005) 
Sec. 38-36. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Review of applications. If a license application is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required in this article and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted and a review of the application conducted by the director. 
(b)  Action on applications. Upon receipt of the application in accordance with the terms of this article, the director shall review and investigate such application and act on the application. The director shall deny any application that (i) fails to meet each of the application requirements specified in this article, (ii) fails to meet each of the minimum standards specified in this article, or (iii) contains false information. Otherwise, the director shall approve the application and the ambulance service provider license shall be issued by the department of public services and engineering upon the payment of any applicable county occupation tax. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of one year. If an application for a license is denied under this article, the applicant shall not be authorized to reapply for such denied license for a period of one year from the date of denial. 
(c)  Appeals of denials or applications. If the director denies a license, such denial shall be in written form addressed to the applicant at the application address and shall state the grounds upon which denial is based. Within ten days of issuance, the applicant may appeal the denial by submitting a written notice to the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal and shall provide written notice thereof to the appellant. At the hearing, the appellant and the director may present evidence relating to the grounds for denial. The appellant may be represented by counsel at such hearing or may appear on his own behalf. 
(d)  Decisions of board. The board of commissioners shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time period. An appeal shall be sustained upon a finding by the board that the director's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that he acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the board of commissioners may reverse or affirm, or may modify, the decision appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the director and may issue or direct the issuance of a license provided all requirements imposed by applicable laws are met. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8006) 
Sec. 38-37. - Transfers and sales prohibited. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this article are nontransferable. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8007) 
Sec. 38-38. - Change of location. 
A change of location of an emergency medical service or ambulance service provider premises may be approved by the department of public services and engineering provided all general ordinances are complied with and a change of location fee as elsewhere established by the board of commissioners is first paid. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8008) 
Sec. 38-39. - Renewals. 
All valid licenses may be renewed for an additional one-year period provided a renewal application meeting all the requirements for an initial license application is submitted prior to the expiration of the existing license and approved by the director according to the same standards for initial licenses. The fee for such annual renewal shall be as elsewhere established by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8009) 
Sec. 38-40. - Further requirements. 
The following additional requirements shall apply to all license holders: 
(1)  The county through the department of public services and engineering shall have the right to inspect any licensed establishment and vehicles, and its records, at any time with or without notice during business hours to ensure compliance with this article. 
(2)  Any licensed provider shall provide a management plan to the director for annual review and approval. Such management plan will establish minimum standards for the delivery of advanced life support care and transport for 911 or other emergency response calls within the county. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8010) 
Sec. 38-41. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  A license granted pursuant to this article shall be subject to revocation for cause. No license shall be revoked until after due notice and a hearing shall have been held before the board of commissioners to determine just cause for such revocation. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the grounds of the complaints against the holder of such license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing shall be held. 
(b)  Notice of such hearing shall be served upon the license holder by delivering the notice personally or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the license holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the license holder cannot be found, and the service of the notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner provided in this article, a copy of such notice shall be mailed registered or certified, postage prepaid, addressed to the license holder at his place of business or residence at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8011) 
Sec. 38-42. - Grounds of revocation. 
The license of an ambulance service provider may be revoked upon one or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license. 
(2)  The holder has violated any of the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The holder has violated any of the provisions of state law or regulations promulgated thereunder, or the original application contains materially false information. 
(4)  The applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein. 
(5)  There has been an occurrence of a fact which would have barred the issuance of the original license. 
(6)  The services and equipment offered by the license holder do not comply with minimum advanced life support standards. 
(7)  Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of employees and others in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8012) 
Sec. 38-43. - Penalty for violations. 
In addition to revocation, any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be upon conviction thereof punished as provided for in section 1-11. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8013) 
Sec. 38-44. - Existing practices. 
Any person who is actually engaged as an ambulance service provider upon the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, June 25, 1996, shall have 90 days from such effective date to comply with this article. 
(Code 1978, § 7-8014) 
Chapter 42 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18; health and sanitation, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 70; solid waste and weeds, ch. 78; construction and demolition sites to be maintained, § 78-11; utilities, ch. 98; general provisions of planning and development, ch. 102; floods, ch. 106; house relocation; oversized loads, ch. 110; manufactured and industrialized homes, ch. 114; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 118; subdivisions, ch. 122; vegetation, ch. 126; zoning, ch. 130. 
State Law reference— Cleaning agents containing phosphorus, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-27.1; nuisances, O.C.G.A. title 41. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Noises prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. 
All-terrain vehicle shall mean any motor vehicle designed or used for recreational off-road use, including but not limited to dirt bikes, four-wheelers, or other similar vehicles. 
Amplification shall mean any electric, electronic, digital, or mechanical means for the intensification or augmentation of voice, music or other sound. 
Commercially zoned area shall mean any real property zoned to any zoning classification not listed in the definition or "residential district" found in section 106-1 of this Code. 
Construction and utility work shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair, alteration, demolition or similar action of buildings or structures or equipment or fixtures for the distribution of water, sewerage, electricity, natural gas, telephone, cable television or other utility services. 
Lawn equipement shall mean any diesel, gasoline, mixed fuel or electric powered mowers, blowers, edgers, chipper/shredders, lawn tractors, saws, tillers, stumpgrinders, or other similar machine. 
Motor vehicle shall mean any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by an engine or motor, whether designed for on-road or off-road use. 
Multi-unit dwelling shall mean any residential building containing more than one dwelling, residence or unit, including, but not limited to, apartment buildings, duplexes, hotels, motels, lodging or boarding houses and similar dwellings. 
Musical equipment shall mean any electric or battery operated device, machine or equipment for the reception, playing, production, reproduction or amplification of music, speech or other sound of any type. 
Property line shall mean either (a) the imaginary line, including vertical extension that separates one parcel of real property from another; or (b) the vertical and horizontal boundaries of a dwelling unit of a multi-unit dwelling. 
Residentially zoned area shall mean any real property zoned to one of the zoning classifications listed in the definition of "residential district" found in section 106-1 of this Code. 
(b)  Musical equipment in motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated in or on a motor vehicle musical equipment which causes the music, speech or sound produced thereby to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the point of origin. To be "plainly audible" words or phrases need not be discernable and bass reverberations may be included. Law enforcement vehicles, and motor vehicles used for business or political purposes which in the normal course of conducting such business use sound-making devices, are exempt from te prohibitions of this subsection. 
(c)  Musical equipment in multi-unit dwellings. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated in or on the cartilage of any unit in a multi-unit dwelling any musical equipment which causes such music, speech or sound to be plainly audible beyond the property line of such unit so as to be heard outside the unit or within another unit in the same or another building. 
(d)  Musical equipment in residentially zoned areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated on private property within a residentially zoned area musical equipment which causes such music, speech or sound to be plainly audible to a person of ordinary hearing ability beyond the property line of the property from which the sound is originating. 
(e)  Musical equipment in commercially zoned areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated on private property within a commercially zoned area musical equipment which causes such music, speech or sound to be plainly audible a beyond the property line from which the sound is originating between 12:01 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Sunday through Thursday and between 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on Friday and Saturday. 
(f)  Musical equipment outside residentially zoned area audible within residentially zoned areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated on private property outside a residentially zoned area musical equipment which causes such music, speech or sound to be plainly audible within the boundary of a residentially zoned area. 
(g)  Horns. It shall be unlawful for any person to sound a horn or other device for signaling by a sound within any residentially zoned area, or outside a residentially zoned area that is plainly audible within a residential area for a sustained period of time. Horns or other warning devices required or permitted by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-70 being used a traffic warning devices are exempt from the prohibitions of this subsection. For purposes of this subsection "sustained period of time" shall be defined as a period of time during which the sound is continuous for a period of 15 minutes or more, or such sound is heard intermittently for 30 minutes or more. 
(h)  Construction and utility work. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in construction or utility work within a residentially zoned area between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. during the week (Monday morning through Friday night), and between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends (Saturday morning through Sunday night). It shall not be a violation of this section: 
(1)  To take action made necessary by an emergency to secure property damaged by calamity, to restore or deliver essential utility services including, but not limited to, repairing water, gas, electric, telephone or sewerage services, removing fallen trees or other debris from public rights-of-way, or abating life-threatening conditions; or 
(2)  If, during a time when construction and utility work would otherwise be prohibited, the noise generated by such work is not plainly audible beyond the property line of the property from which the sound is originating. 
(i)  Lawn equipment. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated lawn equipment within a residentially zoned area between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(j)  All-terrain vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated an all-terrain vehicle in any residentially zoned area in a manner which causes such all-terrain vehicle to be plainly audible at a distance of 300 feet beyond the property line of the property from which the all-terrain vehicle is being operated. 
(k)  Special event permits. No activity conducted on public property for which a special event permit for a public property location has been issued by Rockdale County pursuant to Code section 218-2 shall constitute a violation of this section. This section shall apply to activity conducted under a special event permit issued by Rockdale County pursuant to Code section 218-2 for a private property location. 
(l)  Emergency sirens. No sound emitted by a law enforcement or emergency vehicle as a traffic signaling or warning device shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Code 1978, § 9-1004; Ord. No. 2007-21, § 1, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 0-2010-05, § 7, 4-27-2010) 
Sec. 42-2. - Water quality control. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. O.C.G.A. § 12-5-27.1 provides that whenever a local governmental entity is required by the environmental protection division to reduce phosphorous in its wastewater, being discharged into the water of the state, such local governmental entities shall pass an ordinance mandating the retail sale of low-phosphorous household laundry detergent as part of its phosphorous reduction process. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the county to encourage the use of clean, phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than 0.5 percent phosphorous by weight. The county finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorous in wastewater discharge so as to protect the state's rivers and lakes downstream and promote the health, safety and welfare, and prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the county that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply an interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
(1)  Household laundry detergent means a laundering, cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
a.  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound cleaner, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is intended for nonlaundry cleaning purposes; 
b.  A detergent used in dairy, beverage, or food processing cleaning equipment; 
c.  A phosphorous acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner or metal conditioner; 
d.  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, or health care facilities or in agricultural production; 
e.  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning; 
f.  A detergent manufactured, stored or distributed for use or sale outside of the state; 
g.  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory or an engineering laboratory; or 
h.  A detergent used in a commercial laundry services for a hospital, health care facility, or veterinary hospital. 
(2)  Person means any person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
(3)  Phosphorous means elemental phosphorous. 
(c)  Sale of detergents regulated. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than 0.5 percent phosphorous by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. 
(d)  Penalties for violation. Section 1-11 shall apply to a violation of this section. 
(e)  Court action. In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (d) of this section, the county may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this section. 
(f)  Other actions authorized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this section and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding therefor. 
(Code 1978, § 9-1004) 
Secs. 42-3—42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - JUNK VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, adopted May 23, 2006, amended Art. II in its entirety, in effect deleting and reenacting said article to read as herein set out. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1978, §§ 9-2001—9-2006. 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
State Law reference— Removal of junked motor vehicles, adoption of ordinances, authority to contract for removal, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; nuisances, O.C.G.A. title 41. 

Sec. 42-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle means any motor vehicle which: 
(1)  Has been left by the owner or some person acting for the owner with an automobile dealer, repairman, or wrecker service for repair or for some other reason and has not been called for by such owner or other person within a period of 30 days after the time agreed upon; or within 30 days after such vehicle is turned over to such dealer, repairman, or wrecker service when no time is agreed upon; or within 30 days after the completion of necessary repairs; 
(2)  Has been left unattended on a public street, road, or highway or other public property for a period of at least five days and when it reasonably appears to a law enforcement officer that the individual who left such motor vehicle unattended does not intend to return and remove such motor vehicle; 
(3)  Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a law enforcement officer and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone having paid all reasonable current charges for such towing and storage; 
(4)  Has been lawfully towed onto the property of another at the request of a property owner on whose property the vehicle was abandoned and left there for a period of not less than 30 days without anyone having paid all reasonable current charges for such towing and storage; or 
(5)  Has been left unattended on private property for a period of not less than 30 days. 
Junk vehicle means any motor vehicle, including parts thereof, which has been discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, partially dismantled, rendered inoperative otherwise incapable of being safely and legally operated on the public streets, roads and highways of the State of Georgia so that such motor vehicle constitutes a health hazard or unsightly nuisance. Failure to display on the vehicle a current license plate shall constitute prima facie evidence that such vehicle is incapable of being safely and legally operated on the public streets, roads and highways of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 5-23-2006) 
Sec. 42-32. - Public nuisance and unlawful parking of junk vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked any junk vehicle on public property or any private lot, tract or parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the county. The presence of any junk vehicle on any property shall be deemed a public nuisance except as otherwise stated in this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a public nuisance by parking or maintaining a junk vehicle on the real property of another or on public property, or to permit or allow junk vehicles to be parked or maintained on a person's own property. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 5-23-2006) 
Sec. 42-33. - Exceptions. 
Section 42-32 shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle kept in an enclosed building that is i) attached to the main dwelling, or ii) located in the rear yard of the property; 
(2)  Any motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary for the operation of the business; 
(3)  Any motor vehicle on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles in conformance with the zoning ordinances of the county set forth in chapter 130; or 
(4)  Any motor vehicle which is located within the premises of any junkyard complying with the laws of the state relating to the licensing and regulating of motor vehicle junkyards. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 5-23-2006) 
Sec. 42-34. - Disposition of junk vehicles. 
The county is authorized to remove and dispose of any junk vehicle, notwithstanding the fact that such vehicle may be located on private property. No such vehicle shall be disposed of in less than 30 days from the time the junk vehicle is removed. Prior to the disposal of such vehicle and if such vehicle is affixed with a current license tag, the current owners and lienholders of the motor vehicles shall be identified by a records search in the state department of revenue; and upon the identification of the owners and lienholders, they shall be notified of the pending disposal by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 5-23-2006) 
Sec. 42-35. - Disposition of abandoned vehicles. 
Disposition of abandoned vehicles shall be in compliance with and pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Abandoned Motor Vehicle Act, O.C.G.A. Section 40-11-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 5-23-2006) 
Sec. 42-36. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the code enforcement officers of the department of planning and development or any Rockdale County Sheriff's deputy. 
(b)  When a motor vehicle is deemed to be a junk vehicle in violation of this Code by an authorized enforcement officer, such officer may issue a written warning notice to the parties owning or in apparent possession of the motor vehicle, or the owner of the property upon which the motor vehicle is located, to remove the vehicle within five days. If the owner or person in apparent possession of the vehicle is not ascertainable, written notice may be given by attaching such notice to the vehicle. Written notice to the property owner shall be by certified mail to the address listed in Rockdale County property tax records. If the junk vehicle is not removed within five days, the owner of the motor vehicle or the owner of the land on which it is located shall be issued a citation. If a junk vehicle is found in violation on the property of an owner who has been cited within the past 12 months for the same offense, then the authorized enforcement officer may immediately issue a citation to the parties owning or in apparent possession of the motor vehicle, or the owner of the property upon which the motor vehicle is located. 
(c)  Each and every day that any such violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, 5-23-2006; Ord. No. 0-2017-04, § 1, 4-25-2017) 
Secs. 42-37—42-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES GENERALLY[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Animals creating nuisances, § 18-1. 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. title 41. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 42-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animals means horses, ponies, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters or similar animals. 
County board of health means the board of health of the county as established by O.C.G.A. §§ 31-3-1 and 31-3-2. 
Enclosure means any uncovered, enclosed parcel of land where animals and/or fowl are kept. 
Fowl means chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons and similar fowl. 
Health officer means the chief executive of the county board of health, or his authorized representative. 
Housing means any building, shed, cage, pen, or similar structure used for the housing of animals and/or fowl. 
Nuisance means whatever is detrimental or dangerous to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome and shall specifically include unsanitary conditions enumerated in this article. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-72. - General provisions. 
The following are specifically declared to be unsanitary conditions which are or will become nuisances and, as such, are prohibited by this article and no person shall create, maintain, support, aid or continue those conditions. Upon written notice from the health officer, these conditions shall be corrected: 
(1)  Toilets or sanitary facilities, plumbing or sewers in bad repair. 
(2)  Conditions which are conducive to the breeding of flies, mosquitoes or other insects. 
(3)  Trash, garbage, refuse or any foul, decaying or putrescent material kept or used in such a manner or place as to be or become a nuisance or breeding place for rodents. 
(4)  Contamination of lakes, ponds, streams and other waters by manmade or other contaminants. 
(5)  Manmade or mechanically induced noxious air contaminants. 
(6)  Keeping of horses, mules, asses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, dogs, rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters, chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons or similar fowl or animals except under the following conditions: 
a.  Any housing or enclosures used by any animals or fowl shall be well drained, free from accumulation of animal excrement and objectionable odors, and otherwise clean and sanitary to the extent that it will not injure the health, safety or comfort of the citizens affected thereby. Animal and/or fowl excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health officer. 
b.  Hogs, cows, goats, mules, horses or similar animals shall not be permitted in a residential subdivision, the lots of which contain less than 1½ acres each; 1½ acres to five acres, one each except horses, no more than two horses. 
c.  Any housing or enclosure used for the keeping of such animals or fowl shall be kept at the following minimum distances from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner: 

 
d.  All such animals or fowl (except dogs in area where confinement of dogs under the rabies control regulations does not apply) shall be kept in adequate enclosure or tethered. 
e.  Diseased animals or fowl which might infect healthy animals or cause a menace to the public health shall be isolated or destroyed as the health officer deems necessary. 
f.  In the case of bona fide licensed pet shops, veterinary hospitals, stockyards, poultry houses and similar commercial establishments, the health officer may recommend modification of these requirements where undue hardship would result from their strict enforcement. Upon his recommendation, the county board of health may grant a variance to the party affected. 
(7)  Open, abandoned wells. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5002) 
Sec. 42-73. - Inspections and investigations. 
(a)  The health officer shall have the right to enter on any premises at reasonable times and to make any inspections and investigations as he shall deem necessary to enforce the regulations of the board of health and of the county and to protect the public health. 
(b)  No person shall refuse to allow the health officer to fully inspect any and all premises, and no person shall molest or resist the health officer in the discharge of his duties. 
(c)  The health officer may take and examine reasonable samples of any substance suspected of creating a nuisance or menace to the public health. The health officer shall promptly investigate every bona fide complaint coming under this jurisdiction, but he may at his discretion refuse to investigate any anonymous complaints. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5003) 
Sec. 42-74. - Hauling building materials at night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or transport any building materials by means of any vehicle between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the driver of the vehicle has in his possession documents establishing the ownership of such building materials or the vehicle is owned by a governmental entity or public utility and is operated by an authorized employee of such governmental entity or utility, or the vehicle is subject to regulations of the state public service commission or the Interstate Commerce Commission. As used in this section, the term "building materials" shall mean and include any new materials customarily used in building or construction work and which have a reasonable fair market value in excess of $100.00. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5009(a)) 
Cross reference— General provisions of planning and development, ch. 102. 
Sec. 42-75. - Control on construction sites during certain hours. 
(a)  No trespassing upon construction sites. 
(1)  In general. Anyone who, between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. or on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday, knowingly and without authority enters upon the premises of a construction site which is located within the unincorporated area of the county and which is posted with a notice sign "No trespassing between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. or on weekends or holidays by order of the Rockdale County Sheriff's Department" shall be deemed to be in violation of this section. 
(2)  Construction site defined. The term "construction site" as used in this section shall include both residential and commercial construction sites. The term "construction site" shall not include sites where additions or improvements are being made to an existing residential structure or where a garage, shed, etc., is being built adjacent to an existing residential structure. 
(3)  No-trespassing signs to be posted. Before entry upon a construction site shall be a violation of this section, the person, company or corporation in rightful possession of the property or the builder, contractor, etc., must post the appropriate no-trespassing sign at the construction site itself or in such a conspicuous manner as to give notice that the sign applies to an entire subdivision or commercial complex that is then under construction. 
(4)  Preparation and purchase of signs. 
a.  Preparation of no-trespassing signs to be posted. The notice signs will be prepared by the department of public services and engineering and will contain the words "No trespassing between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. or on weekends or holidays by order of the Rockdale County Sheriff's Department." No other signs will comply with the provisions of this section. 
b.  Purchase of no-trespassing signs. The developer, builder, contractor, etc., may buy the trespassing signs from the department of public services and engineering at the time the building permit is obtained. 
(5)  Persons to contact. The name and phone number of the person or persons to contact in reference to a possible violation of this section shall either be posted along with the no-trespassing sign or furnished to the sheriff's department. 
(6)  Persons authorized to be on the site. 
a.  The property owner, contractor, etc., shall either furnish the sheriff's department a list of the persons authorized to be on the construction site during the posted hours, post a list of the authorized persons at the site, or furnish the authorized persons with an identification card or other written permission to be on the site during the posted hours. 
b.  Duly authorized real estate agents or brokers who possess proper identification, along with their prospective purchasers, who are on the construction site on official business are not required to have an identification card or written permission to be on the construction site. 
(b)  Content of signs to be posted. The content of signs to be posted shall be as follows: "No trespassing between the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. or on weekends or holidays; by order of the Rockdale County Sheriff's Department." 
(Code 1978, § 9-5010(a), (b)) 
Sec. 42-76. - Parking of motor vehicles in shopping center parking lots. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park an automobile, truck or other vehicle in a shopping center parking lot in the county between the hours of 7:30 p.m. and 4:00 a.m., except to: 
(1)  Park in order to frequent the establishments of the merchants of the shopping center in question; 
(2)  Park on a temporary basis to take part in a driving pool or a park-and-ride arrangement, assuming permission of the shopping center's owner; or 
(3)  Park for any other reasons pursuant, to the written permission of the shopping center's owner. 
(b)  Upon request of a police officer, an individual shall present the shopping center owner's written consent which is required pursuant to exceptions in subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section. 
(c)  The purpose of this section shall be to prevent the obstruction of traffic in shopping center parking lots. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5011) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
Sec. 42-77. - Livestock at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to permit livestock to run at large on or to stray upon the public roads of the county or any property not belonging to the owner of the livestock except by permission of the owner of such property. For purposes of this section, the term "livestock" shall mean horses, cows, goats, pigs, chickens and similar farm animals. 
(Ord. No. 0-1999-26, § I, 12-14-1999) 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18. 
Sec. 42-78. - Environmental health fees of the board of health. 
(a)  A certain document entitled "Fees for Environmental Health Services," adopted by the board of health on June 7, 1984, and subsequently approved by the board of commissioners in Resolution 1984-18, is hereby incorporated by reference herein; and a copy thereof shall be maintained in the office of the board of commissioners for public inspection. 
(b)  Amendments to the fees for environmental health services may be adopted by ordinance and shall thereby be incorporated by reference herein, and the amendments shall be available to the public in the same manner as the original regulations. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5015) 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 50. 
Sec. 42-79. - Weapons; discharge. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fire a shotgun, pellet gun or BB gun within the unincorporated area of the county within 150 feet of any residence, place of worship, business or public meeting place or roadway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fire any center fire or rim fire rifle, pistol or revolver or black powder weapon within the unincorporated area of the county within 500 feet of the residence of another located in zoning districts A-R, W-P or A-M; any place of worship, business or public meeting place or roadway; or within any unincorporated area of the county within zoning districts R-1, R-1B, R-2, R-3, O-I, C-1, C-2, M-1, M-2 and M-H. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, negligently or carelessly discharge any firearm in such a manner as to be likely to cause bodily injury or death to persons or domestic animals or cause destruction of property. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to discharge any weapon across the property line of another without first obtaining the permission of such property owner. 
(e)  Special activity permits may be granted as an exception to the provisions of this section by the sheriff's department. Applications for such permits must be submitted to the sheriff's department on the approved form provided by the sheriff's department. 
(f)  This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer while in the discharge of his official duties, nor to any individual lawfully defending any person or property. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5016) 
Sec. 42-80. - Lakeview Estates. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remain in or upon the county-owned property within the Lakeview Estates Subdivision between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage, including but not limited to beer, wine and liquor, in or upon the county-owned property within the Lakeview Estates Subdivision. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit litter, as defined in section 78-1, in or upon the county-owned property within the Lakeview Estates Subdivision. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearms, including but not limited to rifles, shotguns or pistols, in or upon the county-owned property within the Lakeview Estates Subdivision. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5017; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 1, 5-11-2010) 
Sec. 42-81. - Public nuisance; traffic right-of-way. 
Any tree, shrub, mailbox, fence, sign, or parts thereof growing or installed on public or private property which either interferes or endangers the use of the public street obscures sight distances and creates a traffic hazard on intersections; or endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public shall in the opinion of the director of the department of public services and engineering be declared a public nuisance. The owner shall be notified in writing by certified mail of the existence of the nuisance and be granted 15 days from the time of notification for instigating corrective measures or removal pursuant to the instructions provided by the director or his designated representative. If the declared nuisance is not corrected within 30 days of the issuance of notification, the director of the department of public services and engineering shall cause the nuisance to be corrected or removed and the cost incurred by the county for correction or removal may be assessed to the owner. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5018) 
Sec. 42-82. - Sanctions and penalties. 
Section 1-11 shall apply to this article. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5004) 
Secs. 42-83—42-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - REGULATION OF VACANT REAL PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2018-14, § 1, adopted November 13, 2018, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 42-101—42-107, pertained to unfit buildings or structures; health hazards on private property, and derived from Code 1978, §§ 9-5019—9—5025. 
Cross reference— General provisions of planning and development, ch. 102. 

Sec. 42-101. - Definitions. 
The following terms used or referred to in this Code shall have the respective meanings: 
(a)  Agent shall mean an individual with a place of business in this state at which he or she is authorized to accept inquiries, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner. 
(b)  Foreclosed real property shall mean improved or unimproved real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued by the county and is held pursuant to a judicial or non-judicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, deed to secure debt, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor. 
(c)  Owner shall mean any person or persons having any individual, joint or common title or interest in real property defined by the laws of the State of Georgia as a legal or equitable estate or interest. 
(d)  Registration shall mean the filing of a registration statement with the office of code enforcement. 
(e)  Registration statement shall mean the form(s) required to be filed with the office of code enforcement pursuant to this article. 
(f)  Residential rental property shall mean a dwelling lawfully occupied as a residence pursuant to a lease instrument by one or more tenants. A dwelling which is vacant, as defined herein, as opposed to occupied, shall be subject to registration notwithstanding the owner's intent to lease such dwelling on a future date. 
(g)  Registry shall mean the official record, electronic or otherwise, of registration of structures required by this article. 
(h)  Street address shall mean the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. 
(i)  Vacant real property shall mean real property that is either: (1) intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least 60 days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past 60 days; or (2) is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. Such term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14, § 1, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 42-102. - Registration. 
(a)  Duty to register. It shall be the affirmative duty of each owner of real property to file a complete registration statement with the department of planning and development upon such property becoming vacant real property within the meaning of this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the filing of a registration statement of vacant real property shall not be required by this article within 90 days of such real property's transfer: 
(1)  Pursuant to a deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure; or 
(2)  To the first subsequent transferee after the vacant real property has been acquired by foreclosure under power of sale or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
After 90 days from either transfer it shall be the affirmative duty of each owner of vacant real property to file a complete registration statement with the office of code enforcement. 
(c)  Exemption for foreclosed real property. Notwithstanding section 42(a) and (b), when any vacant real property is acquired by foreclosure under power of sale, or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure and; 
(1)  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure contains the information specified in subsections (1) through (5) of section 42(a); 
(2)  The deed is filed with the Clerk of Superior Court within 60 days of the transfer; and 
(3)  Proof of the following is provided to the office of code compliance: 
(i)  A filing date stamp or a receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
(ii)  The entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure, the transferee shall not be required to register such foreclosed real property of this article or the payment of any administrative fees of this article. 
(d)  Penalties for failure to register or to update. Any owner that fails to register or to update the information specified in section 42 shall be in violation of the Rockdale County Code and shall be subject to the provisions of Rockdale County Code Section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14, § 2, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 42-103. - Registration statement. 
(a)  Registration statement. Until such time as the Georgia Department of Community Affairs promulgates a standard registry form, the office of code enforcement is authorized to prepare registry forms, in paper or electronic format. On such form, each registrant shall be required to file with the office of code enforcement only the following information: 
(1)  The real property owner'(s) name, the street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, email address, Driver's license number, state of issue and date of birth; 
(2)  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and email address, Driver's license number, state of issue and date of birth; 
(3)  The real property's street address and tax parcel number; 
(4)  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(b)  Updated registration statement. The owner shall notify the department of planning and development, within 30 days, of any change in the information provided in the registration statement and regardless of whether the information provided was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure, by filing an updated registration statement on a form provided by the department of planning and development for such purposes. There shall be no fee for the filing of an updated registration statement. 
(c)  Initial validity/renewal. The registration shall remain valid for 12 months from the date of the filing of the registration statement. In the event that ownership of a registered structure changes during this period, the new owner shall file an amended registration statement within 20 days of accepting the vesting instrument. The owner shall be required to renew the registration for successive 12-month periods as long as the real property remains vacant for any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14, § 3, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 42-104. - Registration/renewal fee. 
At the time of the filing of the registration statement, the owner shall pay a registration fee in the amount of $60.00 for each vacant real property. No registration statement shall be deemed filed unless the fee has been paid. For a parcel of land containing two or more buildings under common ownership, only one registration statement and one fee shall be required. 
At the time of the expiration of the original filing, the owner shall be responsible for renewing the registration statement if the property is still vacant. The owner shall pay a registration fee in the amount of $100.00 for each vacant real property. No registration statement shall be deemed filed unless the fee has been paid. For a parcel of land containing two or more buildings under common ownership, only one registration statement and one fee shall be required. The property is inspected to determine its maintenance, and any fees to maintain the property shall be assessed, and due at the time of renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14, § 4, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 42-105. - Electronic registration. 
The department of planning and development is authorized to administer, or contract for the administration of, the provisions of this article pursuant to an electronic and/or web-based registry system for the registration of structures subject to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14, § 5, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 42-106. - Maintenance of vacant real property. 
The owner of any vacant building or dwelling, shall, within 30 days of registration, do the following: 
(a)  Enclose and secure the building or dwelling as provided; and 
(b)  If deemed essential by the director of planning and development, post a sign affixed to the building or dwelling indicating the name, address and telephone number of the owner and the owner's authorized agent for the purpose of notice and/or service of process. The name, address and telephone number of a person responsible for day-to-day supervision and management of the building or dwelling, if such person is different from the owner holding title or authorized agent shall be indicated on the sign as well. The sign shall be of a size and placed in such a location so as to be legible from the nearest public street or sidewalk, whichever is nearer; and 
(c)  Maintain the building or dwelling in accordance with the ICC Property Maintenance code, as adopted by Rockdale County. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14, § 6, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 42-107. - Removal from registry. 
A vacant real property owner, or the agent of such owner, may apply to remove such vacant real property from the registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes vacant real property. Application for removal from the registry shall be accompanied by corroborating documentation that the real property no longer constitutes vacant real property defined by the department of planning and development. Corroborating documentation need not, and shall not, include the names or other personal information of any tenant(s). The department of planning and development shall inspect the property to identify any violations which must be addressed prior to removal from the registry. The department of planning and development will grant or deny such application within 60 days and in the case of denial shall provide notice to the property owner. If the department of planning and development does not grant or deny the application for removal from the registry within 60 days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14, § 7, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 42-108. - Administrative procedures/appeals. 
(a)  Appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved by any determination of an administrative official, by filing with the director of planning and development a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and all documentation in support thereof, within 30 days after the determination appealed from was taken. 
(b)  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the director of planning and development, after notice of appeal shall have been filed with him or her, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such a case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the director or a court of record on application, on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
(c)  The director of planning and development shall review the appeal and any documentation submitted in support of opposition to the appeal and shall rule on the appeal within 30 days of appeal. An appeal shall be sustained upon an expressed finding by the director that the administrative official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that he or she acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising his or her powers, the director may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may order the registration, or not, or removal, or not, from the registry provided all requirements imposed by the applicable laws other than these are met. 
(d)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the director of planning and development may appeal from such decision to the Rockdale County Magistrate Court, subject to applicable jurisdictional requirements, by filing with the clerk of said court a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly wherein such decision is contrary to law. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 days after decision of the director is rendered. 
(Ord. No. 2018-14, § 8, 11-13-2018) 
Secs. 42-109—42-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKE-FREE AIR[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2004-25,§ 1, adopted Oct. 1, 2004, supplied provisions for Ch. 43, Art. IV, §§ 43-1—43-18. In order to maintain the style and consistency of the Code, at the discretion of the editor, these provisions have been redesignated as Ch. 42, Art. IV, §§ 42-121—42-138. The original section designation has been retained in the history note at the end of each section for reference. 

Sec. 42-121. - Title. 
This article shall be known, cited and referred to as the Rockdale County Smoke-free Air Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-1, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-122. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The board of commissioners does hereby find that: 
(1)  Certain studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy non-smokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. 
(2)  Certain studies have also found that secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. 
(b)  Accordingly, the board of commissioners finds and declares that the purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and private places of employment; and 
(2)  Provide to non-smokers the opportunity to breathe 100 percent smoke-free air in all public places and private places of employment; and 
(3)  Recognize that the need to breathe 100 percent smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-2, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-123. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
Attached bar means a bar area of a restaurant or anywhere in an enclosed area of a restaurant where malt beverages or beer, vinous liquors or wine, and distilled spirits are sold, purchased, served, and/or consumed. 
Beverage means any drinkable liquid including but not limited to malt beverages or beer, vinous liquors or wine, and distilled spirits. 
Board means the present governing body of Rockdale County, Georgia or any successor to the legislative powers of the present county board of commissioners. 
Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity formed for profit-making or non-profit purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered. 
County means the County of Rockdale, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on at least three sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doorways), which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
Outdoor seating area means any patio, courtyard, sidewalk cafe, backyard or other outdoor area of a restaurant or business where food and/or beverages are served and/or consumed. 
Partially enclosed means an outdoor seating area where the circulation of outdoor air is obstructed by a temporary or permanent wall, tarp, shield, blind, or other kind of covering, exclusive of a temporary or permanent roof, ceiling, overhang, or overhead structure and the perimeter of the adjoining enclosed Restaurant or Business. 
Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and snack bars, lobbies and reception areas, and shared company vehicles when occupied by more than one person. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Public means of transportation means buses, vans, taxicabs, commuter vans, paratransit vehicles, limousines and all vehicles for hire. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, automobile dealerships, banks and other financial institutions, billiard halls, bowling facilities, childcare facilities, churches or other places of worship, educational facilities, elevators, bingo games available to the general public, hallways, recreational and health care facilities, laundromats, lobbies, public transportation facilities, reception areas, repair shops, restrooms, government-owned or leased facilities, restaurants and attached bars, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, service lines, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a "public place" unless it is used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means an enclosed area, which is primarily devoted to the serving of or offering of food and/or beverages for sale to the public, guests, or employees and which contains an area for onsite consumption. The term "restaurant" shall include any dining area located within a health care, educational, or childcare facility. Food courts within enclosed shopping malls shall be treated as Restaurants under this section. 
Rockdale County Board of Health means the county board of health established in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 31-3-1 and its duly authorized agents. 
Service line means a line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money and regardless of whether the service line is indoors or outdoors. 
Shared company vehicle means any vehicle used expressly for business purposes that is not assigned to any one employee for use. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Significant tobacco retailer means any Business that either devotes 75 percent or more of floor area or display area to, or derives 75 percent or more of gross sales receipts from, the sale or exchange of tobacco products and/or tobacco paraphernalia. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted bidi, cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
Sports arena means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. This term includes the seating area, concession areas, and walkways of an outdoor sports arena. 
Tobacco paraphernalia means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking or ingestion of tobacco products. 
Tobacco products means any substance containing any tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, bidis, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, and smokeless tobacco. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-3, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-124. - Prohibited smoking. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in all public places and places of employment within the unincorporated areas of Rockdale County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-4, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-125. - Prohibition of smoking applicable to county property. 
All enclosed areas and enclosed facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the county shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-5, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-126. - Prohibition of smoking applicable to places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of employment. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, shared company vehicles when occupied by more than one person, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(b)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this article and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-6, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-127. - Prohibition of smoking applicable to public means of transportation. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in public means of transportation when occupied by passengers or customers. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-7, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-128. - Distance from public places and places of employment. 
Smoking is prohibited within a distance of 15 feet from all entrances to a public place or place of employment, during the hours of operation or during the hours the public place or place of employment is open to the public. Smoking is also prohibited within 15 feet of any open window or other opening into a public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-8, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-129. - Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 42-124 and 42-126 of this article: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a licensed childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than 20 percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be designated as smoking rooms. 
(3)  Significant tobacco retailers, provided, however, that smoke from the significant tobacco retailer does not infiltrate areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Outdoor seating areas. Smoking may be allowed in a contiguous outdoor seating area, as defined in section 42-123, provided that such area: 
a.  Directly adjoins an enclosed restaurant or business as defined in section 42-123; and 
b.  Is not enclosed or partially enclosed as defined in section 42-123; and 
c.  Is not located within 15 feet of any entrance or open window into the restaurant or business as required in section 42-128. 
(5)  All restaurants to which access is denied to any person under the age of 18 and that do not employ any person under the age of 18. Restaurants shall post conspicuously at every entrance a sign stating the following language: 
"No person under the age of 18 allowed. 
This is a smoking-permitted establishment." 
(6)  Private personal offices in private places of employment open to the general public by appointment only, except that smoking shall be prohibited in any public reception area of such private place of employment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-9, 10-1-2004; Ord. No. 2004-25(Amd.), § 1, 6-28-2005) 
Sec. 42-130. - Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or place of employment may declare that entire public place or place of employment including non-enclosed areas of the property as a non-smoking property. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-10, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-131. - Employers' responsibility. 
(a)  All employers shall remove from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article, all ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia. 
(b)  All employers shall provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees of public places, and places of employment but employers are not required to make expenditures or structural changes to create a smoke-free work area. 
(c)  Each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within the unincorporated areas of Rockdale County is encouraged to adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy that incorporates the smoking prohibitions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-11, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-132. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs with letters not less than one inch in height or signs with the international no smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) not less than three inches in diameter shall be clearly and conspicuously posted at all entrances of every Public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of said public place or place of employment. 
(b)  A minimum of four "No Smoking" signs with letters not less than one inch in height or a minimum of four signs with the international no smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) not less than three inches in diameter, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted inside the building of every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of said public place or place of employment. 
(c)  A minimum of one of the no smoking signs as described in section 42-131(b), shall be posted clearly and conspicuously in the area the attached bar is located. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-12, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-133. - Non-retaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercises any right to a smoke-free environment as afforded by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-13, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-134. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the board of health or its authorized designee. 
(b)  Any certified deputy employed by the sheriff's office, within their jurisdiction, may issue a citation for any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-14, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-135. - Notification. 
(a)  Notice of the provisions of this article shall be given to all applicants for a business license in Rockdale County. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may file their complaint with the board of health. 
(c)  The health department, fire department, or their designees may, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
(d)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of a public place or place of employment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(e)  An owner, manager, operator, or person in control of a public place or place of employment subject to this article must refuse to serve or seat any person who smokes where smoking is prohibited, and must ask the person to leave the building or area if the person continues to smoke after being informed pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this article. 
(g)  In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, the board of health or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this article may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-15, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-136. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, and shall upon conviction be subject to section 1-11, General Penalty, of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances and shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A minimum fine of $100.00 for a first violation. 
(2)  A minimum fine of $200.00 for a second violation within one year. 
(3)  A minimum fine of $500.00 for each additional violation within one year. 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation, business or other legal entity who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, and shall upon conviction be subject to section 1-11, General Penalty, of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances and shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A minimum fine of $100.00 for a first violation. 
(2)  A minimum fine of $200.00 for a second violation within one year. 
(3)  A minimum fine of $500.00 for each additional violation within one year. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this article by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  With respect to a violation that is continuous in nature, each day the violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense for that business and each person violating the smoking prohibition may also be cited as a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-16, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-137. - Other applicable laws and disclaimer. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. By regulating smoking the county is assuming an undertaking only to advance the public health, safety and welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, the county, its officers, or its employees, are not liable in money damages to any person who claims that any breach of this article caused injury. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-17, 10-1-2004) 
Sec. 42-138. - Severability. 
Each section and each provision or requirement of any section of this article shall be deemed severable and the invalidity of any portion of this article shall not affect the validity or enforceability of any other portion. 
(Ord. No. 2004-25, § 43-18, 10-1-2004) 
Chapter 46 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 2-93; civil emergencies, ch. 26; emergency services, ch. 38; littering, dumping, burning offenses, § 78-41 et seq.; spacing of fire hydrants, § 98-1. 
State constitution references— Fire protection services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1). 
State Law reference— Fire escapes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50 et seq.; forest fires, O.C.G.A. § 12-6-89; criminal damage to property in the second degree, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-23; burning of woodlands, brush, fields, etc., destruction of or damage to material or device used in detection or suppression of wildfires, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-28; arson in the first degree, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-60; arson in the second degree, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-61; arson in the third degree, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-62; obstruction or hindering firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; transmitting false report of fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; refusal to obey official request at fire or other emergency, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-30; fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. § title 25; firefighters' pensions, O.C.G.A. § 47-7-1 et seq.; liability of firefighters for activities, O.C.G.A. § 51-1-30. 

Sec. 46-1. - Fire prevention code. 
(a)  The rules and regulations for fire prevention as recommended by the Southern Building Code Congress and known as the Standard Fire Prevention Code (SBCCI), as adopted pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, is hereby adopted in its entirety as the fire prevention code of the county, a copy being made a part of this section and being on file with the county clerk, and that code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, the provisions of such code being effective and controlling within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)  Any provision in this Code which is in conflict with the fire prevention code shall be controlling over the fire prevention code. 
(c)  Deletions and additions to, or adoption of the latest addition or supplement to the fire prevention code may be adopted by a resolution of the board of commissioners, and thereby incorporated herein; provided that copies of any changes in the standard text shall be made available in the department of public services and engineering for review by the public. 
(d)  As to the code referenced and adopted in this section, such code shall be amended for enforcement in this county by the substitution of the board of commissioners for performance of the function of any board of adjustment or appeals under the code. 
(e)  When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in the code referenced and adopted in this section, the designated official of the county who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the code. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2001) 
Sec. 46-2. - Definitions. 
As used in the fire prevention code, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Board of appeals and adjustments means the county board of commissioners. 
Fire authority means the county board of commissioners. 
Fire official means the assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department or the county fire marshal. 
Fire prevention bureau means the fire department of the county. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2002; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 8, 3-10-2009) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-3. - Life safety code. 
The Life Safety Code NFPA 101 (2000) Edition is hereby adopted as a general ordinance of the county. Each of the sections of that code are ordained, enacted and adopted as fully as though set out in full in this section. The Life Safety Code NFPA 101 (2000) Edition is hereby incorporated by reference into this section; and a copy thereof shall be maintained in the office of the board of commissioners, assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department, and department of public services and engineering. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2014; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 8, 3-10-2009) 
Sec. 46-4. - Rules and regulations authorized for fire department. 
Under the direction of the board of commissioners, the assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department shall maintain written rules and regulations for the operation of the fire department as are necessary but these rules and regulations shall become effective only upon adoption by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2003; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 8, 3-10-2009) 
Sec. 46-5. - Authority at fires. 
(a)  The assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department or fire officers under his direction shall have full control over all fire apparatus of the fire department in service at any fire. It shall be the duty of the assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department or his designee to superintend the fire department while performing any public duty in fighting a fire and to give general and specific directions as to the manner of fighting fires, the use of hose and apparatus, and the specific duties and assignments of the various members of the fire department in attendance at a fire. The assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department may immediately suspend any member of the fire department for insubordination at any fire. 
(b)  The assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department or his designee shall, in all cases of fire and fire alarms, have full control and occupy sufficient ground or space necessary for the operation of all fire companies at any fires, and for the protection of life and property, and shall be protected in the discharge of their duties by the law officers of the county. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the county law officers in directing traffic in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2004; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 8, 3-10-2009) 
Sec. 46-6. - Records of fires. 
The assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department or his designee shall keep a permanent record of the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire and the damages resulting therefrom immediately after the occurrence of any fire. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2005; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 8, 3-10-2009) 
Sec. 46-7. - Obstruction of or tampering with fire hydrants and apparatus prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall place ashes, cinders, dirt, rubbish, building material or any other material around or in close proximity to any fire hydrant so as to cause hindrance or delay in access thereto, or prevent the free use thereof by the fire department. No person shall, in any way, interfere with or tamper with any fire hydrant or attempt to take water therefrom without special authority from the assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department or his designee. 
(b)  Without the consent of the assistant director of the department of emergency services, no person not an active member of the fire department shall at any time ride upon any of the fire apparatus of the fire department, nor shall any person make use of any fire apparatus, hose, or other equipment of the fire department, other than for the purpose for which the equipment was intended, without the consent of the assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2006; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 8, 3-10-2009) 
Sec. 46-8. - Certain acts interfering with firefighting activities. 
No person, except an active member of the fire department, shall at any time enter within the territory or vicinity of any fire, when the area is roped off or access is denied by county law or fire officers, or interfere with or attempt to operate any of the apparatus or equipment of the fire department or any fire hydrant, or interfere by giving orders to any individual, unless requested to do so by the assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department or fire officers under his direction; however, a county commissioner, any police officer or other law enforcement officer, the owner or occupant of the property, and any other persons as may be specifically authorized by the assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department or his designee, may enter the restricted areas. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2007; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 8, 3-10-2009) 
Sec. 46-9. - Obstruction of fire officers prohibited. 
No person shall, in any way, obstruct or prevent the assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department or fire marshal in the discharge of his duties, by denying or attempting to deny access to any premises owned or occupied by the person, or by failing or refusing to furnish correct information requested by the assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department or fire marshal in the investigation into the cause, origin or circumstances of any fire. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2008; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 8, 3-10-2009) 
Sec. 46-10. - Fire drills. 
The assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department or his authorized representative shall have the authority to conduct fire drills in all public buildings located within the county. Public buildings shall include but not be limited to all buildings owned by the county, county school district or the county board of education, all libraries, recreation facilities, and any privately owned structure if the owners or occupants thereof request this service of the assistant director of the department of emergency services over the fire department. The principal of any school shall be notified before any drill is held. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2009; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 8, 3-10-2009) 
Sec. 46-11. - Fire limits. 
The fire limits for the county are established as follows: 
Beginning at the Peachstone Shoals on South River; running thence up said river to the north of Camp Creek; thence running up said creek to Flat Shoal Road in Henry County; running thence along said road to the land line between Robert M. Clark and John Calaway; thence along the present county line between the counties of DeKalb and Henry to the point of South River where the county line between DeKalb and Newton counties strikes said river; thence along the county line between the counties of DeKalb and Newton to the point where the lines between the counties of DeKalb, Gwinnett, Newton and Walton intersect; thence along the county line between the counties of Newton and Walton to Little Haynes Creek; thence down Little Haynes Creek to its mouth; running thence down Big Haynes Creek to its mouth; running thence on a direct line to Peachstone Shoals on South River, the starting point. As amended by 1876 Ga. Laws, the land and residence of H.C. Penn, in the county of Rockdale, is included. These limits are less and except the legal limits of the City of Conyers as presently existing or hereinafter as by law provided. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2011) 
Sec. 46-12. - Clearing property of debris and refuse where building has burned. 
(a)  Where a building has burned, the premises must be cleared of all debris within 90 days thereafter. 
(b)  If the remains of such building constitute a safety hazard, any official or citizen of this county may at any time file a complaint with the building inspector to have the condition declared to be a nuisance and for the abatement thereof. 
(c)  The provisions of this section are and shall be construed to be cumulative of all other provisions of this Code regarding the condition of property within this county, and shall not be construed to alter, amend or repeal any other provisions. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2012) 
Sec. 46-13. - Fire calls outside county limits. 
The fire department shall answer all calls upon authorization of the fire chief outside the county limits whether or not property owners carry an insurance rider. 
(Code 1978, § 2-2013) 
State Law reference— Assistance to other agencies, O.C.G.A. §§ 25-3-3, 25-3-5. 
Sec. 46-14. - Parking in fire lane prohibited. 
No person shall, at any time, park, stand, or stop any motor vehicle or place any other property in a fire lane, so designated by signs and/or painted curbing or other markings indicating a fire lane; however, this section shall not apply to the parking of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 5-10-2011) 
Secs. 46-15—46-17. - Reserved. 
Sec. 46-18. - County not liable for enforcement pertaining to maintenance and clearing of fire lanes. 
(a)  The county assumes no liability for any damages, injuries or deaths resulting from enforcement, or lack of enforcement, of the laws pertaining to maintenance and clearing of the fire lanes. The county has the authority to issue individual citations for fire lane violations, but the property owner has the ultimate responsibility to clear the fire lanes. 
(b)  Any vehicle obstructing a fire lane in violation of this section may be removed at the direction of the chief of the department of fire and rescue or his designee, or a law enforcement officer, and the costs of removal and storage shall be borne by the owner of such vehicle and paid for [by] him or her prior to the release of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 2, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 46-19. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforceable by the chief of the department of fire and rescue or his designee, or any law enforcement officers authorized to enforce the ordinances of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 3, 5-10-2011) 
Sec. 46-20. - Penalty. 
The following minimal penalties shall apply to any person who violates the provisions of section 46-14: 
(1)  Upon conviction, a fine of not less than $100.00 shall be imposed. 
Or 
Any person who violates the provisions of section 46-14 shall be upon conviction thereof punished as provided in section 1-11 of the Code of Rockdale County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2011-08, § 4, 5-10-2011) 
Chapter 50 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18; environment, ch. 42; environmental health fees of the board of health, § 42-78; natural resources, ch. 62; solid waste and weeds, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 98; general provisions of planning and development, ch. 102; floods, ch. 106; house relocation; oversized loads, ch. 110; manufactured and industrialized homes, ch. 114. 
State constitution reference— Public health facilities and services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); intergovernmental contracts for the care, maintenance and hospitalization of the indigent sick and for other services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § III, ¶ I. 
State Law reference— County boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ON-SITE SEWAGE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 50-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Health officer means the chairperson of the county board of health or any of his duly appointed deputies. 
Industrial waste means any liquid waste of whatever nature arising out of any manufacturing, fabricating, processing, treating, renovating, or any other industrial or commercial operation. 
Premises means building, house, store or any other place where people live, work, or congregate. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting such impervious tank with a plumbing stubout; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from such tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Subdivision means any tract of land divided, planned, or developed as a subdevelopment with two or more residences, buildings, or building sites. 
Toilet means flush toilet. 
(Code 1978, § 5-4001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-32. - Toilets. 
Each and every premises shall be provided, by the owner thereof, with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. 
(Code 1978, § 5-4002) 
Sec. 50-33. - Disposal of human excrement. 
No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. 
(Code 1978, § 5-4003) 
Sec. 50-34. - Disposal of other wastes. 
(a)  All sinks, dish washing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer; provided that where no sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities, approved by the health officer, may be used. 
(b)  Industrial wastes shall be discharged into the public sewer; provided that where no sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities, approved by the health officer, may be used. 
(c)  All subsurface disposal facilities, provided for in this article, shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged, and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health officer. All these facilities shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(d)  No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any subsurface disposal facilities, provided for in this article, who does not possess an unrevoked permit for work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of a permit pending the inspection and approval, by the health officer, of the site and location of the proposed work. Before any facilities or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered, or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer. 
(e)  No subsurface disposal facilities shall be installed in any place where the health officer deems the use of the facilities to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(Code 1978, § 5-4004) 
Sec. 50-35. - Flush toilets. 
(a)  Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer or to a septic tank. 
(b)  Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(Code 1978, § 5-4005) 
Sec. 50-36. - Pit privies. 
No pit privies or other such subsurface systems shall be installed. 
(Code 1978, § 5-4006) 
Sec. 50-37. - Septic tanks. 
(a)  Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged, and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the sanitary officer of the county. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(b)  No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tanks who does not hold an unrevoked permit for that work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of a permit pending the inspection and approval, by the health officer, of the site and location of the proposed work. Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered, or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer. 
(c)  No septic tank shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved, nor in any place where the health officer deems the use of a septic tank to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(Code 1978, § 5-4007) 
Sec. 50-38. - Connection to sewers. 
Any premises that has a septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system, located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner, shall be immediately connected to a public sewer, where a sewer is available. The use of any faulty systems shall be immediately discontinued after the sewer connection has been made. The pits of pit privies, no longer used for the disposal of human excrement, shall be filled with earth so as to completely prevent the ingress or egress of insects and rodents to and from such pits. 
(Code 1978, § 5-4008) 
Sec. 50-39. - Subdivisions. 
Where private systems, for the disposal of sewage and other liquid wastes, are proposed in any proposed subdivision, before any person shall develop any such subdivision and before the sale of any land therein or the erection of any building thereon, the owner shall file plats, plans, and specifications, as the health officer may deem necessary, with the health officer and receive written approval of the plats, plans, and specifications by the health officer. 
(Code 1978, § 5-4009) 
Secs. 50-40—50-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

Sec. 50-71. - Applicability. 
This article will have application in all except the following cases: 
(1)  Any facility or system under the jurisdiction of and regulated by the state department of natural resources or its successor; 
(2)  Any public or community sewage treatment system; 
(3)  Other shared jurisdiction by memoranda of agreement or other agreements. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6001), 1-8-2002) 
State Law reference— Notice of denial of individual sewage disposal permits, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-1; powers of department of human resources, O.C.G.A. §§ 31-2-1, 31-2-4. 
Sec. 50-72. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Absorption field means a configuration of absorption trenches installed in a portion of land and used for the absorption and final treatment of sewage. 
Absorption line means a pipeline of perforated pipe or open-point drainpipe laid in an absorption trench to serve as a conduit for sewage effluent. 
Absorption trench means an excavation in which an absorption line is laid. 
Absorption trench bottom and side soil area means the total interface of bottom and side soil area with undisturbed soils of all absorption trenches in an absorption field and occurring horizontally and downward from the point of distribution into the soil, expressed in square feet. 
Aggregate means washed gravel or washed stone meeting the state department of transportation standards for hardness or other materials approved by the department that shall be 1½ inches to two inches in diameter. 
Alternative on-site sewage management system means any approved on-site sewage management system which differs in design or operation from the conventional or chamber septic tank system or privy. 
Approved and approval mean compliance with applicable specifications or criteria developed or accepted by the state department of human resources. 
Auxiliary system means a system to serve a portion of a residence, a pool house or other adjunct facility. 
Bedroom means any room that is designed primarily for sleeping purposes, as shown on the building plan. 
Blackwater means wastewater generated by water closets, urinals, bidets, kitchen sinks and garbage disposals. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest piping of a building drainage system inside the walls of a building, which receives the discharge from soil, waste or other drainage systems and conveys the discharge to the building sewer. 
Building sewer means that part of the horizontal piping of a building drainage system beyond the building drain which receives the discharge from the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, on-site sewage management system or other disposal. 
Central on-site sewage management system means an on-site sewage management system serving more than one building, business, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. 
Chamber septic tank system means a septic tank and a chamber system as defined as chamber system. 
Chamber system means a system of chambers with each chamber being a molded polyolefin plastic, arch shaped, hollow structure with an exposed bottom area and solid top and louvered sidewall for infiltration of effluent into adjoining bottom and sidewall soil areas. Chambers may be of different sizes and configurations to obtain desired surface areas. 
Community subsurface treatment system means any system which treats primarily domestic wastewater other than those serving single-family residences or nondomestic sewage systems. 
Conventional septic tank system means any septic tank and conventional system as defined as conventional system, but does not include alternative or experimental systems. 
Conventional system means a traditionally used system that is composed of perforated pipe surrounded by gravel or stone masking for the infiltration of effluent into adjoining bottom and side soil areas. 
County board of health means the county board of health established by O.C.G.A. § 31-3-1 et seq., or its designee. 
Department means the state department of human resources or its designee. 
Distribution device means a watertight structure which receives sewage effluent from a septic tank, dosing tank or other sewage retention device and distributes it in equal portions to two or more absorption lines. 
Dosing tank means an approved watertight tank, located after a septic tank or other sewage retention device, to receive and retain sewage effluent, and so equipped as to discharge sewage effluent intermittently to a distribution device, either by pump or by siphon. 
Experimental on-site sewage management system means any on-site sewage management system proposed for testing and observation, and provisionally approved for such purposes by the department, but which has not been fully proven under field use. 
Failure means an on-site sewage system in such a condition that it constitutes a public hazard by inadequate treatment and/or disposal of sewage. 
Filter means an approved device that removes solids or other materials from the effluent that could cause failure of an on-site sewage management system. 
Floodplain means a generally flat plain or depression susceptible to being flooded from any source, including small and intermittent water courses and coastal areas subject to intermittent tidal action. 
Graywater means wastewater generated by water-using fixtures and appliances, excluding water closets, urinals, bidets, kitchen sinks and garbage disposals. 
Grease trap means a device in which the grease content of sewage is intercepted and congealed, and from which grease may be skimmed or otherwise removed for proper disposal. 
Individual water supply system means a system of piping, pumps, tanks or other facilities, utilizing groundwater to supply a single-family dwelling. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision, or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership, or for development, or both, and shall not include any part of the right-of-way of a street or road. 
Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems means the technical handbook currently adopted and periodically updated which is used by the department in the implementation of this article and is available for inspection at the appropriate state office in Atlanta or at local health departments. The Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems and its provisions are herein adopted unless inconsistent with other provisions of law or regulation and is hereafter referred to as the "Manual" or "Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems". 
Manufactured home park means a parcel of land developed for subsequent rental or lease for placement of two or more manufactured homes. 
On-site sewage management system means a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system serving one or more buildings, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles, residences, or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. The term "on-site sewage management system" shall include, without limitation, conventional and chamber septic tank systems, privies, and experimental and alternative on-site management systems which are designed to be physically incapable of a surface discharge of effluent that may be approved by the department. 
Percolation coefficient means the ratio of trench bottom area to percolation time; it is expressed as the allowable rate of sewage application in gallons per square foot per day. 
Percolation rate means the time, expressed in minutes per inch, required for water to seep into saturated soil at a constant rate. 
Percolation test means the method used to measure the percolation rate of water into soil as described in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation, or association and may extend and be applied to bodies, both political and corporate. 
Physical development means development, which includes, but is not limited to site preparation, erection of a structure, road construction, well construction or installation of on-site sewage management systems. 
Privy means a structure (and necessary appurtenances) used for the sanitary disposal or storage of human wastes without the aid of water carriage; the term "privy" does not include chemical, composting, portable or incinerator toilets. 
Public water supply system means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections, or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily, at least 60 days out of the year. 
Septage means a waste that is a fluid mixture of partially treated or untreated sewage solids, liquids and sludge of human or domestic waste, present in or pumped from septic tanks, malfunctioning on-site sewage management systems, grease traps or privies. 
Septic tank means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Sewage means and includes human excreta, all water-carried wastes, and liquid household waste from residences or commercial and industrial establishments. 
Sewage treatment system means a system that provides primary treatment and disposal, including absorption field components, devices and appurtenances intended to be used for disposal of sewage by soil absorption, but does not include a conventional or chamber septic tank system. The system shall be designed to be physically incapable of a surface discharge of effluent. 
Sinkhole means a depression in the land surface, generally in a limestone region, which communicates or has the potential to communicate with a subterranean passage developed by solution; typical sinkholes can be broad, closed basin-like features or steep-sided dropouts, or variants thereof. 
Site means the location where the absorption field will be installed to include replacement area. 
Soil classifier means a person who holds at least a Bachelor of Science degree from an accredited college or university with a major in Agronomy, Soil Science, or related field, as approved by the soil classifiers certification advisory committee. A soil classifier must have completed a minimum of 15 semester hours or 25 quarter hours in approved soil science courses including a course in pedology and have four years or more of full-time experience as a soil classifier/soil scientist actively mapping, identifying and classifying soil features, and interpreting the influence of soil features on soil uses. Certification shall be in accordance with guidelines published in the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. Any person who holds a valid certificate of registration as a geologist issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-19-1 et seq., or who holds a valid certificate of registration as an engineer issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-15-1 et seq. and is practicing within his area of engineering competency may register with the department as a soil classifier. 
Subdivision means any division of a tract or parcel of land into five or more lots, building sites, manufactured home sites, or other divisions, resulting in any single lot of less than three acres, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or legacy, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided, provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of previously platted lots or portions thereof where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots conform to the standards of this article. 
(2)  The division of land into parcels, all of which are three acres or more in size with minimum width of 150 feet for a distance sufficient to provide an adequate area for the placement of structures and improvements including wells and approved installation of approved on-site sewage management systems. 
Well means an excavation or opening into the ground by which groundwater is sought or obtained. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6002), 1-8-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Notice of denial of individual sewage disposal permits, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-1; authority of department of human resources, O.C.G.A. § 31-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 50-73. - General provisions. 
(a)  On-site sewage management system required. Where public or community sewage treatment systems are not available, the owner, lessee or agent thereof of every building, residence or property, designed, used or intended to be used for human occupancy or congregation, shall provide an approved on-site sewage management system sufficient for persons normally expected to use or frequent the building, residence or other property for two hours or more. Connection shall be made to a public or community sewage treatment system when such system is available within 200 feet of the property line, or available in a public right-of-way abutting the property. Where a public or community sewage treatment system is to be constructed, or an existing public or community sewer is to be extended to serve a lot, or an approved on-site sewage management system is to be used, the building sewer shall be installed so that it will ensure gravity flow at a self-cleaning velocity throughout. If an existing on-site sewage system fails, immediate connection shall be made to a public or community sewerage system if such a system is available. Any facility that produces a waste stream with biochemical oxygen demand and total suspended solids higher than 200 mg/l shall be required to pretreat the waste to reduce the biochemical oxygen demand and total suspended solids to 200 mg/l or below before disposal through a conventional or chamber septic tank system. 
(b)  On-site sewage management system construction permit required. No person may begin the physical development of a lot or structure thereon, where an on-site sewage management system will be utilized, nor install an on-site sewage management system or component thereof without having first applied for and obtained from the county health department a construction permit for the installation. 
(1)  Application for such a construction permit shall be made in writing on forms provided by the county board of health. The county board of health shall approve or disapprove such application within 20 days after the receipt of a completed application. The application shall include: 
a.  Name and address of the owner and the applicant, if other than the owner; 
b.  Location of property; 
c.  Plans and specifications including location and design of the proposed on-site sewage management system including surface and subsurface drainage and piping; 
d.  Nature of the facility to be served; 
e.  Location of all water supplies, geothermal systems, or other utilities and trash pits on or off the lot, which will bear upon the location of the on-site sewage management system; 
f.  Number of bedrooms in the dwelling, or the number of persons to be served in other types of establishments, or other sewage flow or water usage data; 
g.  Soil characteristics, including soil types and capabilities, frequency and evaluations of seasonal high groundwater tables, occurrence of rock and other impervious strata; 
h.  Signature of the owner or agent applying for permit; and 
i.  Any additional information deemed necessary to determine the suitability of the site. 
(2)  The county board of health may waive submission of part of the information required for the application, provided the county board of health deems that such information is available from previously submitted subdivision or manufactured home park data, or from other sources. The information must be sufficient to make an adequate appraisal of the acceptability of the proposed lot for the installation of an on-site sewage management system. 
(3)  Repairs, replacement, or additions to existing systems must be permitted and inspected. 
(4)  Any person preparing to modify a lot for the purpose of obtaining a construction permit for the installation of an on-site sewage management system shall submit plans showing the type and extent of modifications. No modifications shall be carried out prior to the approval of the plans by the county board of health. Such approval shall be in accordance with the provisions of the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(c)  Requirements for on-site sewage management system construction permit issuance or denial. On-site sewage management system construction permits shall be issued only after a site inspection by the county board of health shows favorable findings relative to absorption rates, soil characteristics, groundwater, rock and any other factors which would affect the acceptability of the lot. No construction permit for an on-site sewage management system shall be issued prior to the approval of the public water supply system, where a public water supply system is to be utilized. Lot suitability and approval is to be determined by the criteria established by the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. Lots shall be sized according to the regulations of the county board of health. The county board of health may deny or revoke an on-site sewage management system construction permit upon finding the lot unsuitable or for failure of the applicant to comply with the provisions of these rules. Such denial shall be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-1, 31-5-2, 31-5-3, 31-5-4, 31-5-5 and 31-5-6. On-site sewage management construction permits shall remain valid for not more than 12 months from the date of issue. 
(1)  Issuance of a construction permit for an on-site sewage management system, and subsequent approval of such permit by representatives of the county board of health shall not be construed as a guarantee that such systems will function satisfactorily for a given period of time; furthermore, such representatives do not, by any action taken in affecting compliance with these rules, assume any liability for damages which are caused, or which may be caused, by the malfunction of such system. 
(2)  On tracts or parcels of land of three acres or more, the conventional or chamber septic tank system may be utilized where the percolation rate does not exceed 120 minutes per inch. All other conditions must comply with the requirements of the regulations for on-site sewage management systems. 
(d)  Inspections. No person may backfill or use an on-site sewage management system until final inspection has been made by the county board of health to determine compliance with the provisions of the construction permit issued under Section 290-5-26-.03(3) of the rules of the state department of human resources and written approval has been issued by the county board of health. 
(1)  A copy of the final inspection of an on-site sewage management system shall be provided to the owner, builder, developer or agent, whichever is appropriate. 
(2)  Grading, filling, digging trash pits or other landscaping or construction activities on the lot subsequent to final inspection by the county board of health which may adversely affect the on-site sewage management system shall render the approval void. Removal or alteration of system components after final inspection by the county board of health shall render the approval void. 
(e)  Design limits for conventional or chamber septic tank systems. To provide for the maintenance of sanitary conditions through the proper functioning of a conventional or chamber septic tank system for a reasonable period of time, no such system may be installed, constructed, or used, having a septic tank design capacity of less than 1,000 gallons or greater than 10,000 gallons, or where the total length of absorption trenches required would exceed 3,000 linear feet, or where the total absorption trench bottom area required would exceed 9,000 square feet. 
(f)  Submission of plans, specifications, and soil data. Plans, specifications, soil data and, if required, absorption test data, submitted to the county board of health for the purpose of obtaining a construction permit to install an on-site sewage management system, which will produce a sewage flow in excess of 2,000 gallons per day, shall bear the registration number and signature of a registered professional engineer, certified and registered under the laws of this state. The county board of health may accept plans, specifications, soil data, and absorption test data for facilities with sewage flow of 2,000 gallons or less per day, when prepared in accordance with these rules, from any person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the county board of health that they have sufficient knowledge of on-site sewage management system design. 
(g)  Soil data acceptability for individual lots. Soil evaluations shall be conducted by individuals meeting the requirements established in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6003), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-74. - Sewers. 
(a)  Size of sewers. Sewers connecting component parts of on-site sewage management systems shall be of sufficient size to serve anticipated flow conditions. 
(b)  Sewers. All solid pipe and, fittings used in an on-site sewage management system, beginning at the house, shall be NSF International schedule 40 PVC or equivalent and shall be a minimum of four inches in diameter. Sewers under driveways or similar areas of load or impact shall be of material capable of withstanding anticipated loads or installed so as to provide protection from crushing. 
(c)  Construction. Sewers, other than perforated pipe or drain tiles used in absorption fields, shall be laid with sealed, watertight, root-resistant joints. Such sewers shall be laid on a firm foundation, shall not be subject to settling, and shall be installed on a grade that will ensure a self-cleaning velocity. Where on-site sewage management systems are used, and where installation of building drains and building sewers is not covered by duly adopted local plumbing codes, or in the absence of a local plumbing code and/or plumbing inspections, the county board of health may verify the adequacy and acceptability of all or any portion of the building sewer or the building drain. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6004), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-75. - Septic tanks. 
(a)  Minimum design and construction. Septic tanks shall provide a minimum of 24 hours of retention and shall be designed and constructed to equal or exceed minimum design and construction criteria established by the department as published in the current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, any person seeking approval of septic tanks to be used in on-site sewage management systems, shall submit detailed plans and specifications for tank manufacture and other information as may be required by the department. Manufacturers and suppliers may be subject to periodic inspection, and approval by the county board of health or the department. Both the inlet and outlet tees shall be ASTM 3034 rated or equivalent. In addition, an approved filter shall be installed on the outlet end of the septic tank in compliance with the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(b)  Location. No septic tank shall be installed less than 50 feet from existing or proposed wells/springs, sink holes, or suction water lines, and tanks shall be located downgrade from wells or springs if physically possible; less than 25 feet from lakes, ponds, streams, water courses, and other impoundments; less than ten feet from pressure water supply lines, or less than ten feet from a property line. No septic tank shall be installed less than 15 feet from a drainage ditch or embankment. Septic tanks shall be installed so as to provide ready access for necessary maintenance. Normally, the distance a septic tank shall be located from a building foundation is at least ten feet but, lesser distances may be allowed by the county board of health. The county board of health, after site inspection, may require greater separation distances than cited herein due to unusual conditions of topography, or other site configuration; subsurface soil characteristics and/or groundwater interference. 
(c)  Capacity. The liquid capacity of septic tanks for single-family dwellings shall be 1,000 gallons for one, two, three or four bedrooms, and 250 additional gallons for each bedroom over four. Septic tank capacity shall be increased by 50 percent where garbage grinders are to be used. Auxiliary systems serving single-family residences or other facilities shall be based on the maximum daily flow. 
(d)  Compartmented tanks. Two-compartment tanks shall be required. The first compartment shall be at least two-thirds the liquid capacity of the tank. 
(e)  Tanks in series. The county board of health may approve the installation of two septic tanks placed in series provided that the capacity of the first tank is at least 1,000 gallons and at least equal to the capacity of the second tank. When tanks in series are used, they shall be connected with a sealed sewer line, and all sewage shall initially enter the first tank. 
(f)  Foundation and backfill. Septic tanks will be constructed or installed level, on a foundation that will prevent settling; backfill shall be placed so that a stable fill results and undue strain on the tank is avoided. Earth backfill shall be free of voids, large stones, stumps, broken masonry, or other such materials. A minimum earth cover of six inches over the tank is recommended. With proper documentation the county board of health may approve less over. All openings and manholes shall be constructed so as to prevent the entrance of surface water. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6005), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-76. - Distribution devices and dosing tanks. 
(a)  Minimum design and construction of distribution devices. Distribution devices shall be designed and constructed in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(b)  Minimum design and construction of dosing tanks. Where required, dosing tanks shall be designed, constructed, and installed in accordance with the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6006), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-77. - Absorption fields. 
(a)  Absorption area. The absorption area shall be based upon the anticipated volume of treated sewage and upon the characteristics of the soil in which absorption fields are to be located as specified in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. Soil characteristics and other related data, including percolation tests, may be required by the county board of health. Absorption areas shall be classified as follows: aggregate, nonaggregate and other. 
(b)  Prior approved systems. Any prior approved system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-2-7(a)(4) is approved for installation according to the manufacturers recommendation. 
(c)  Location. No absorption field will be constructed less than 100 feet from existing or proposed wells, springs or sinkholes; less than ten feet from water supply lines and buildings with basements and less than five feet from buildings without basements, other structures, drives and property lines; less than 15 feet from an embankment, drainage ditch or trash pits; not less than 50 feet from the normal water level of any impoundment, tributary, stream, or other body of water, including ponded areas of wetlands. If the water supply line crosses or comes within ten feet of the absorption field, the water supply line shall be installed at least 12 inches above the top of the aggregate layer of the absorption line, nonaggregate absorption line or other absorption line, and shall be encased in a single length of larger diameter water pipe. No absorption field shall be installed in areas where groundwater, soil characteristics or adverse geological formation may interfere with the absorption or effective treatment of sewage effluent. 
(d)  Minimum design and construction for absorption fields. Absorption lines and absorption trenches shall be designed and installed in accordance with the minimum design and installation criteria established in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6007), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-78. - Privies; minimum design and construction. 
Privies shall be designed and constructed in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established by the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6008), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-79. - Alternative on-site sewage management systems. 
(a)  Term defined. The term "alternative on-site sewage management system" means the same as defined in section 50-72. 
(b)  Design and construction. Alternative on-site sewage management systems shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the minimum design and construction criteria established by the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. The department shall maintain a list of approved alternative on-site sewage management systems. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6009), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-80. - Experimental on-site sewage management systems. 
The term experimental on-site sewage management system means any on-site sewage management system proposed for testing and observation, and provisionally accepted for such purposes by the department's technical review committee. Any limitations to the use of experimental systems shall be decided by the department's technical review committee. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6010), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-81. - Septage removal and disposal. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall engage in the removal or disposal of the contents of septic tanks, pit privies, or other on-site sewage management or experimental systems without having first applied for and obtained from either the department or the county board of health a septage removal permit, renewed annually, for such activities. The application for such septage removal permit shall be submitted in writing on forms provided by the department or the county board of health at least ten days prior to engaging in such activities. The application shall include but not be limited to: the business name and address, name and address of the applicant, the manner by which such contents are to be removed, transported and given final disposal, and such other documentation as may be required by the county board of health, including evidence that septage removed and transported will be accepted at approved disposal sites. 
(b)  Suspension and revocation. The septage removal permit shall be subject to suspension and revocation for failure to comply with the requirements of this article or the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(c)  Pumping and disposal methods. Approved methods of pumping and disposal of septage from on-site sewage management systems shall be: discharge to a public or community sewage treatment system for treatment in treatment plant, treatment at separate septage handling facilities, or direct land application. Pumping and disposal shall be in accordance with the requirements of the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(d)  Vehicle identification. The name and address of the person or firm engaging in the removal of septage from on-site sewage management systems and the permit number shall be lettered on both sides of each vehicle used for septage removal purposes. Letters and numerals shall not be less than two inches in height and shall be readily visible. 
(e)  Vehicle maintenance. Every vehicle used for removal of septage from on-site sewage management systems shall be equipped with a watertight tank or body and properly maintained. Liquid wastes shall not be transported in open bodied vehicles. All pumps, hose lines, valves and fittings shall be maintained to prevent leakage. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6011), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-82. - Grease traps. 
(a)  Grease traps required. Grease traps shall be required for commercial or industrial establishments with on-site sewage management systems where it is determined by the county board of health that the amount of grease introduced into the system is in excess of 50 mg/l. 
(b)  Grease trap design. Plans and specifications for grease traps shall be submitted to the county board of health for approval. The county board of health shall review the grease trap design in accordance with minimum design and construction criteria established by the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. Effluent from grease traps shall be disposed of in a septic tank and not directly discharged to the absorption field. Grease traps shall be located, installed and constructed so that the temperature of the sewage will be reduced to permit congealing or separation of grease, and easy access for cleaning is provided. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6012), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-83. - Sewage flow. 
The design sewage flow of an on-site sewage management system shall be determined from the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. The daily sewage flow may be determined by the department after due consideration of data submitted by the owner or his agent on design criteria. Calculations will be made on the basis of peak flow and not on longterm averages. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6013), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-84. - Subdivision and manufactured home parks. 
(a)  Predevelopment review. It is recommended that developers considering subdivision or manufactured home park development, where public or community sewage treatment systems will not be available, seek a predevelopment review by the county board of health prior to developmental improvements. A predevelopment report which indicates disapproval or tentative approval may be obtained by submitting a boundary plat including: 
(1)  A vicinity map; 
(2)  A topographic map; 
(3)  A preliminary soil study conducted in compliance with the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(b)  Proposals and plans required. The following information is required for subdivision and manufactured home park proposals: 
(1)  A boundary plat drawn to a reasonable scale which includes: 
a.  A vicinity map; 
b.  Proposed lots and streets including lot identification, dimensions, building lines and square footage of lots; 
c.  A topographic map depicted in two-foot contour intervals. Lesser contour intervals may be approved by the county board of health if the slope is sufficiently steep; 
d.  A soil map and soil descriptions based on a high intensity soil study conducted in compliance with the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems; 
e.  The location of all present and proposed wells, water systems, watercourses, floodplains, sewage systems, structures, rights-of-way, utilities, stormwater drainage systems and easements on the property and within 100 feet outside the perimeter of the property; and 
f.  The name, registration number and seal of the professional surveyor or engineer that prepared the development plan. 
(2)  A completed subdivision analysis record on forms provided by the department. 
(3)  A copy of the following documents issued by the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources: 
a.  The land disturbance activity permit issued by either the environmental protection division or the local issuing authority. For the purposes of this section, the term "issuing authority" means the governing authority of any county or municipality, which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) by the director of the environmental protection division; 
b.  A letter of approval to begin construction of a public water supply system and approving the source of the water supply where a public water supply system is to be utilized; and 
c.  For a development, which will result in the disturbance of more than five acres, a copy of the notice of intent submitted to the environmental protection division to be covered under NPDES Permit GAR100000 for the discharge of stormwater associated with construction activity. 
(c)  Approval required. No person may sell, offer for sale, lease, rent, begin construction or otherwise begin the physical development of a lot or lots in a subdivision or manufactured home park until written approval of plans for water supply and sewage disposal has been obtained from the county board of health. This approval constitutes general acceptance of all lots, except those lots excluded, for development with on-site sewage management systems. Excluded lots may receive further consideration based on additional information. 
(d)  Limits on use of on-site sewage management systems for subdivision and manufactured home parks. Approval of subdivisions and manufactured home parks utilizing on-site sewage management systems shall not be granted: 
(1)  When a public or community sewage system is available within 1,500 feet of the subdivision or manufactured home park; 
(2)  When soil maps, descriptions, and reports compiled by a registered soil classifier indicate that soil conditions prohibit safe development of on-site sewage management systems. 
(3)  Prior to receipt of a letter from the environmental protection division approving the plans to construct the public water supply system and approving the source of the water supply where a public water supply system is to be utilized. 
(e)  Construction permits. Construction permits for on-site sewage management systems shall be issued in accordance with section 50-73(b)(1). 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6014), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-85. - Subdivision, manufactured home park water and sewage. 
(a)  Subdivision and manufactured home park water supply. Connection to a public water supply system shall be required if available within 1,500 feet of the proposed subdivision or manufactured home park. 
(b)  Subdivision and manufactured home park percolation tests. Where required for planning purposes and determination of the general absorptive capacity of soils, the number of percolation tests to be made shall be one per lot, in the area where absorption fields are to be located. Before construction of on-site sewage management systems, individual lots within the proposed development shall comply with section 50-84. 
(c)  Subdivision and manufactured home park test bores. Where required for planning purposes, test bores to determine groundwater elevations and subsurface rock formations shall be made at locations, in numbers and at depths to be determined by the department or county board of health. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6015), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-86. - Technical review committee. 
(a)  Appointment; duties. The department shall appoint and maintain a technical review committee consisting of a maximum of 15 individuals with technical or scientific knowledge relating to on-site sewage management systems. The duties of the committee will be to approve new systems, periodically review systems performance, assist the department with the development of standards and guidelines for new technology, assist with the periodic updating of the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, revisions to standards and serve as the authority for product approval, evaluation, and the development of installation standards. The technical review committee shall also maintain a list of approved systems. 
(b)  Membership. The technical review committee shall include at least one individual from the following disciplines: 
(1)  An environmental health section staff person who shall serve as the secretary; 
(2)  Local county environmentalist; 
(3)  Health district environmentalist; 
(4)  Engineering; 
(5)  Manufacturing; 
(6)  Home builders association; 
(7)  Soil classifier; 
(8)  University/academia; 
(9)  District health director; 
(10)  Environmental protection division; 
(11)  Well driller; 
(12)  Georgia On-Site Wastewater Association; 
(13)  Land developer; 
(14)  Septic tank contractor. 
(c)  Meetings. The technical review committee shall meet as deemed appropriate by the department. 
(d)  Fee. The department shall adopt a fee schedule for the technical review of new products and technology. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6016), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-87. - Certification and decertification of septic tank contractors, inspection personnel, pumpers, soil classifiers and maintenance personnel. 
(a)  Certification required. Individuals performing services related to site approval, the design, location, installation, inspection and maintenance of an on-site sewage management system, must be certified by the department. 
(1)  Guidelines defining certification qualifications for septic tank contractors, inspection personnel, pumpers, soil classifiers and maintenance personnel shall be established by the department and shall be published in the Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. The guidelines shall be based on education, experience, testing and performance. 
(2)  The department shall write a protocol for decertification of persons certified under the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Certification shall be required every two years and shall be based on meeting continuing education requirements. 
(b)  Fee. The department shall adopt a fee schedule for the certification and recertification of the persons listed in this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6017), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-88. - Maintenance and operation. 
(a)  Prohibited discharge. No person shall allow the unapproved discharge or spillage of sewage, nor shall an on-site sewage management system be used or maintained in such a manner that will allow the seepage or discharge of effluent from such system to the ground surface, to a water-course, drainage ditch, open trench, canal, storm drain or storm sewer, water well, abandoned well, lake, stream, river, estuary, groundwater, or other body of water. 
(b)  Maintenance. The property owner shall be responsible for properly operating and maintaining the on-site sewage management system to increase the life expectancy and prevent failure. Maintenance of the system shall be in accordance with the criteria established in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. Where an on-site sewage management system is proposed to serve facilities under separate ownership, a contract to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the system signed by all owners, shall exist as a precondition to the issuance of a permit for the construction of an on-site sewage management system. 
(c)  Additives. No strong bases, acids or organic solvents shall be used in the operation of an on-site sewage management system. 
(d)  Existing system evaluations. If a performance evaluation of an existing system is conducted, the evaluation shall be performed in accordance with the procedure established in the department's current Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(e)  Variances. The county board of health may grant variances in the cases of hardship where existing systems are malfunctioning. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6018), 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 50-89. - Enforcement. 
The administration and enforcement of this article shall be in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1 et seq. through the county environmental health department. 
(Ord. No. 0-2002-01, § 1(9-6019), 1-8-2002) 
Chapter 54 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Fair housing, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-200 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 

Sec. 54-31. - Policy. 
It is the policy of the county that no person shall be discriminated against in the sale or rental of housing on the basis of race, color, religion, familial status, sex, age, national origin, disability or handicap. 
(Code 1978, § 7-4001) 
Sec. 54-32. - Definitions. 
The definitions used in section 86-31 shall likewise apply to this article. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disability means, with respect to a person: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; 
(2)  A record of having such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance. 
Discriminatory housing practice means any act which is prohibited under this article. 
Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
Familial status means, with respect to a person: 
(1)  That the person is a parent of or has legal custody of one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years and such individuals are being domiciled with such parent or legal custodian; 
(2)  That the person is the designee of a parent or other person having legal custody, with the written permission of the parent or other person, and that one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years are being domiciled with such person; or 
(3)  That the person is pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Family includes a single individual. 
Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, or fiduciaries. 
To rent means to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1978, §§ 7-1001, 7-4002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-201. 
Sec. 54-33. - Unlawful practices in selling or renting dwellings; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as exempted by subsection (b) or (d) of this section or section 54-37, it shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin; 
(2)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin; 
(3)  To make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination; 
(4)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(5)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin or with a disability; 
(6)  To discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a disability of: 
a.  That buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with that buyer or renter; or 
(7)  a.  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a disability of: 
1.  That person; 
2.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
3.  Any person associated with that person. 
b.  For purposes of this subsection, discrimination includes: 
1.  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the person with disabilities, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 
2.  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
3.  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that: 
i.  The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by persons with disabilities; 
ii.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons with disabilities in wheelchairs; and 
iii.  All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: (i) an accessible route into and through the dwelling; (ii) light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations; (iii) reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and (iv) usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
c.  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usableness for physically disabled people (commonly cited as "ANSI A117.1") suffices to satisfy the requirements of subsection (a)(7)b.3.iii of this section. 
d.  In regard to persons with disabilities, discrimination includes, in connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct dwellings in such a manner that the dwellings have at least one building entrance on an accessible route, unless it is impracticable to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. 
(b)  (1)  Nothing in this section, other than subsection (a)(3) of this section, shall apply to: 
a.  Any single-family dwelling sold or rented by an owner, if: 
1.  Such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family dwellings at any one time; 
2.  Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family dwellings at any one time; 
3.  Such dwelling is sold or rented: 
i.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesperson, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesperson, or person; and 
ii.  Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection (c) of this section; but nothing in this subsection (b)(1)a.3.ii shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
b.  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
(2)  In the case of the sale of any such single-family dwelling by a private individual owner not residing in such dwelling at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such dwelling prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
(2)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall require that a dwelling be made available for rental or lease to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(Code 1978, §§ 7-4003, 7-4004) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-202. 
Sec. 54-34. - Discrimination in residential real estate related transactions; appraisals. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "residential real estate related transaction" means any of the following: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance: 
a.  For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or 
b.  Secured by residential real estate; or 
(2)  The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status. 
(Code 1978, § 7-4005) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-204. 
Sec. 54-35. - Unlawful denial of or discrimination in membership or participation in service or organization relating to selling or renting dwellings. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of race, color, religion, sex, disability, familial status, or national origin. 
(Code 1978, § 7-4006) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-203. 
Sec. 54-36. - Coercion, intimidation, threats, or interference. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of such person's having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of such person's having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this article. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-222. 
Sec. 54-37. - Permissible limitations in sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings by religious organizations or private clubs; housing for older persons. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(b)  (1)  As used in this subsection, the term "housing for older persons" means housing: 
a.  Provided under any state or federal program that the administrator determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons as defined in the state or federal program; 
b.  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or 
c.  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. In determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this subsection, the administrator shall develop regulations which require at least the following factors: 
1.  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or, if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; 
2.  That at least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and 
3.  The publication of and adherence to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
(2)  Nothing in this article limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. The provisions in this article regarding familial status shall not apply with respect to housing for older persons. 
(3)  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons by reason of: 
a.  Persons residing in such housing as of March 12, 1989, who do not meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(1)b or c of this section; provided, however, that new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(1)b or c of this section; or 
b.  Unoccupied units; provided, however, that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(1)b or c of this section. 
(4)  Nothing in this article prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-205. 
Sec. 54-38. - Administration. 
It shall be the responsibility of the county board of commissioners to enforce and administer this article. The board of commissioners may delegate any of the functions of the board in the administration of this article. The board of commissioners shall investigate any complaints arising under this article and shall present their findings to the complaining party within 30 days of the written complaint being filed with the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 7-4007) 
Chapter 58 - HUMAN RESOURCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The county board of commissioners may, in its discretion, elect or appoint county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-1. The salaries and expenses thereof are paid out of the county treasury. The county may levy a tax for this purpose, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-4. 
Cross reference— Department of human resources, § 2-101. 
State Law reference— Retirement benefits, etc., under Georgia Firefighters' pension fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-7-100 et seq.; retirement benefits, etc., under peace officers' annuity and benefit fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-80 et seq. 

Sec. 58-1. - Rules and regulations; classification and pay plans. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by state law, all provisions on personnel rules and regulations for employees of any agency, board, commission, department or other branch of county government shall be contained in either this Code or in the "Human Resources Rules and Regulations for Rockdale County" and the "Classification and Pay Plan for Rockdale County," which documents are fully incorporated herein by reference, copies of which are available to the public in the office of the human resources director. 
(b)  The rules and regulations discussed in subsection (a) of this section shall include and establish: 
(1)  General provisions; 
(2)  Ethics and conduct; 
(3)  Classification plan; 
(4)  Pay plan; 
(5)  Recruitment and selection; 
(6)  Methods of appointment; 
(7)  Working test period; 
(8)  Separation; 
(9)  Disciplinary action; 
(10)  Grievances and appeals; and 
(11)  Attendance and leave. 
(Code 1978, § 1-4001) 
Sec. 58-2. - Certain salaries to be individually budgeted. 
(a)  Except for elected officials of the county, all county employees' salaries of $10,000.00 or more per year shall be line-itemed in the county budget by department (or agency) and position. No person shall be employed by the county full-time and paid a salary at a rate of $10,000.00 or more per year unless the position in which that person serves has been line-itemed in the county budget by majority vote of the county board of commissioners as provided in this Code. 
(b)  No part-time or temporary employee of the county shall be employed by the county at a salary rate which, if full-time, would equal $10,000.00 or more per year without the express approval of that person's employment by the county board of commissioners in advance of such employment and the county budget is amended accordingly. 
(Code 1978, § 3-1003) 
Chapter 62 - NATURAL RESOURCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health and sanitation, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 70; solid waste and weeds, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; floods, ch. 106; subdivisions, ch. 122; vegetation, ch. 126; zoning, ch. 130. 
State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HAYNES RESERVOIR MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 62-31. - Preamble. 
(a)  The county recognizes that a safe and reliable source of water is absolutely essential for the continued growth of the county and to ensure that county water needs can be met in drought conditions. The county and the authority recognize that the area's population is growing and the need for water for business and industrial uses is expanding. The county also recognizes that available water resources are limited, that environmental concerns impose restrictions on water availability, and that the cost of developing safe and reliable water resources continues to escalate. The county recognizes that the providing of recreational opportunities including rowing, canoeing, fishing, birdwatching and other activities, inclusive of competitive events related to such activities, is critical to the area's public needs and quality of life, in light of growing concerns for the realization of public health through exercise and recreation. 
(b)  The county has determined that the most practical method of ensuring a safe and reliable source of water for the purposes set out in subsection (a) of this section is to construct a water impoundment project on the waters of Big Haynes Creek, within the confines of the county, which shall be known as the Big Haynes Creek Reservoir. The county recognizes the need to adopt rules, regulations and take such action as is necessary to protect the quality of water in the Big Haynes Creek Reservoir. Therefore, the county has devised this Big Haynes Creek Reservoir Management Plan and Rules and Regulations Concerning Public Use of Big Haynes Creek Reservoir. The purpose of this article and the associated rules and regulations is to set out the activities permitted in the adjacent areas as well as the activities prohibited in those areas. 
(Code 1978, § 9-7001) 
Sec. 62-32. - Purpose and objectives. 
The primary purposes of this article are to set out the parameters to preserve and protect the quality of water in Big Haynes Creek Reservoir and for the utilization by the public of the recreational opportunities allowed by this article. Additional purposes of this article are to furnish guidance and regulations for the management, protection, and preservation of the reservoir's shoreline and environment; to properly establish and maintain acceptable fish and wildlife habitat, aesthetic quality and natural environmental conditions; to provide for protection of the project; and to promote the safe and healthful use of the project and project lands. Big Haynes Creek Reservoir is intended to provide a reliable raw water supply to the surrounding geographic area. The paramount and overriding objective of this article is the protection of the quality of water in the reservoir. The secondary objective of this article is to provide the recreational opportunities subject to certain restrictions established to ensure that recreational opportunities will not adversely impact the water quality of the project. 
(Code 1978, § 9-7002) 
Sec. 62-33. - Authority and jurisdiction. 
This article and all restrictions imposed in this article shall be administered, exercised and enforced by the resource manager, his designated agent, code enforcement officers and deputy sheriff officers of the sheriff's department. Nothing contained in this article shall be considered a delegation of the county's power to enforce any of its ordinances or regulations within or upon the project. Agents and employees of the county are authorized to assist in the enforcement of this plan as set out in this article. 
(Code 1978, § 9-7003) 
Sec. 62-34. - Permits and fees. 
(a)  As with any large multiuse facility, the demand for space on Big Haynes Creek Reservoir must be regulated to encourage proper utilization and promote public safety. It is the intent of this section to describe the activities that are allowed and what permits are applicable. All permit requests are subject to review and may be granted only if public law and regulatory guidance are met. Violations of permit conditions or unauthorized uses will result in corrective action that may include termination of permits, removal of private property, and/or other legal action. Big Haynes Creek Reservoir is a county-owned facility that will require permits to be issued by the reservoir manager for the following types of activity: 
(1)  Access to public recreation areas; 
(2)  Special event activities; 
(3)  Specified acts. 
(b)  The fees associated with these permits and the management and enforcement of these permits will be subject to the provisions of the official Rules and Regulations for Big Haynes Creek Reservoir as adopted by the county. 
(1)  Access to public recreation areas. Subject to the Rules and Regulations for Big Haynes Creek Reservoir, all visitors to the recreation areas shall obtain a one-day permit, multiday permit or annual permit from the reservoir manager. All rights and privileges available to the permittee shall be addressed in the rules and regulations and shall be posted for public information at each area. The reservoir manager shall operate the permitting program in accordance with the rules and regulations in order to provide for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  Special event activities. A permit will be required for recreational use of reservoir recreation areas when more than 12 persons or vessels are involved in an activity. Generally, it is not the intent of this program to deny public use of the project. It is necessary to ensure that: 
a.  Environmental issues are addressed; 
b.  Regulatory guidance is reviewed; 
c.  Public safety is considered; 
d.  Space is available; 
e.  The rights of others are not affected; and 
f.  The activity can, in fact, be authorized in accordance with all laws and regulations. 
Permits issued by the reservoir manager for special events do not relieve the permittee from obtaining similar local or state authorizations that may be required. Examples of events for which a special event activity permit may be required are: festivals, concerts, exhibitions and fishing tournaments. 
(3)  Specified acts within the subzone W-RB. Certain activities which are allowed within the W-RB subzone area will require issuance of a permit prior to engaging in the allowed activity. The allowed activities and those which require a permit are defined by section 62-37. A permit application will be provided by the department of water resources through the office of the director of water resources and will require submission of information detailing the requested activity inclusive of a completion schedule; location of the activity; the type of equipment to be utilized and a plan for restoration, if necessary, inclusive of revegetation and/or the application of mulch. The permit application shall be prepared and submitted by a state registered forester, professional engineer or landscape architect in accordance with best management practices for a natural or enhanced buffer. The permit application will be reviewed by the office of the director of water resources and shall be issued as applied for or denied by the director of the department of water resources or his designee. The permit shall be issued, comments provided by the director of the department of water resources or denied within 15 working days of submission by the applicant. If the permit is denied, the applicant may appeal the decision of the director of the department of water resources to the board of commissioners in writing within ten days of the date of denial. If the board of commissioners fails to act upon the appeal within 30 days, the permit shall stand approved. The department of water resources will be responsible for enforcement of the permit. 
(Code 1978, § 9-7004; Ord. No. 0-1999-9, § 1, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 0-1999-09, § 1, 8-22-2000) 
Sec. 62-35. - Boundary control. 
The project will be surveyed and monumented during the land and easement acquisition phase. Boundaries of land owned in fee-simple by the county, subzone W-RW, shall follow the shoreline of the reservoir at the normal pool elevation of 735 feet mean sea level. 
(Code 1978, § 9-7005) 
Sec. 62-36. - Management policies. 
The reservoir manager shall ensure that the following policies, as adopted by the board of commissioners, are enforced: 
(1)  Water quality management. 
a.  The primary function of the reservoir is that of supplying a safe and reliable source of drinking water which requires that a comprehensive approach to water quality protection is assured. The reservoir manager shall be responsible for the management and control of water quality within the project in accordance with this article and the adopted Rules and Regulations for Big Haynes Creek Reservoir. 
b.  Water quality in the nonreservoir portion (W-NR) of the watershed will be assured by the provisions of this article and administration by the department of public services and engineering. Enforcement of this article in the W-NR area will be provided by code enforcement officers of the department of public services and engineering. 
c.  The assurance of water quality from the areas of the watershed outside the jurisdictional boundaries of the county will be the responsibility of the board of commissioners, the reservoir manager and the department of public services and engineering. All agreements with the other jurisdictions in the watershed must be self regulated. 
d.  However, the county will take the lead in a program of education, technical support and planning with each jurisdiction within the watershed to provide a team approach for water quality protection. 
e.  The county recognizes that one of the most relevant tasks is the establishment of a water quality monitoring program to identify any potential problem areas before they become major problems. A water quality monitoring program will be implemented prior to water impoundment. The program will be reviewed on an annual basis in terms of its adequacy. 
f.  Cleaning vessels with soaps and solvents on the shoreline pollutes the lake. This activity and the unauthorized use of insecticides, herbicides, pre-emergent and fertilizers are prohibited by regulation. Application of these chemicals and construction on adjacent private property may have strong potential to disperse pollutants into the lake. Instances of sedimentation and chemical pollution will be investigated. 
g.  Nuisance aquatic weeds may invade the project. The transport of such weeds is possible and low areas may eventually have seasonal problems unless the general public inspects and cleans their boats and trailers after visiting other waterways known to have aquatic weed pests. Of most concern are hydrilla and Eurasian watermilfoil. 
(2)  Fisheries management. 
a.  The fisheries management program is primarily implemented to enhance and maintain habitats to provide for a sustained recreational fishery. Habitat enhancement is accomplished by conducting various practices such as stabilizing spawning habitats and installation of fish attractors. Maintenance of productive fishery habitats is achieved in part by maintaining an active water quality program. Board of commissioners personnel shall cooperate with the state environmental protection division to resolve water quality problems. Also, the board cooperates with the county health department to correct septic tank pollution and with state engineering department and county department of public services and engineering to resolve soil erosion problems. 
b.  Cooperation with the wildlife resources division is absolutely necessary to manage fish resources. The board of commissioners is obligated to assist in several ways such as fish kill investigation, habitat enhancement, and, occasionally, field monitoring of fish populations. The reservoir manager may enter into cooperative fish attractor projects to provide increased recreational use of sport fishery. 
c.  The wildlife resources division will provide a consultant role to provide technical advice and guidance throughout the design, construction and maintenance of the project. 
(3)  Wildlife management. 
a.  Successful wildlife management at Big Haynes Creek Reservoir can better be achieved by integrating wildlife programs with effective forest management. The goal of wildlife management is aimed at developing, improvising, and maintaining vegetative communities that will serve diverse wildlife. This object is established since different wildlife associate with different plant types. Fulfillment of this goal will provide better opportunities to observe wildlife and to engage in other nonconsumptive uses such as photography and nature study. The maintenance of the reservoir buffer will provide a wildlife corridor around the reservoir. This will allow wildlife to move around the reservoir and provide access to the water's edge. 
b.  Wildlife population regulation, especially game species, is the responsibility of the state department of natural resources. The board of commissioners shall cooperate to support state efforts with population regulation in as far as providing habitat for the production of game species for off-site utilization and assisting with the control of pest species. 
(4)  Endangered species management. It is the intention of the board of commissioners to conserve threatened and endangered species occurring on the project and the ecosystems on which those species depend. No disturbance of threatened or endangered species on the project will be allowed. 
(5)  Wetlands management. The wetlands associated with Big Haynes Creek Reservoir provide a number of natural biological functions. Maintenance of these wetland areas is an important component of the reservoir management plan. All wetland habitats in the project will be preserved. To maintain wetlands, no alteration of wetlands within the project will be allowed. 
(6)  Forest management. 
a.  Forest resources of the project shall be managed to ensure and enhance water quality objectives, promote stormwater infiltration and sheet flow and prevent soil erosion. 
b.  Reservoir buffer area forest and vegetative management objectives are to sustain a healthy forest canopy, understory and herbaceous layer since the objective is to maintain the reservoir buffer area in a natural or near-natural state. Activities within the reservoir buffer will be subject to the issuance of appropriate use permits and/or land disturbance permits issued by the reservoir manager. 
c.  Public recreation area will be subject to forest management practices which will be appropriate for the level of recreational use of the specified area as trails, picnic areas, special bird watching areas, scenic views, the public boating recreational facility, bank fishing areas, etc. 
(7)  Cultural, historical and archeological. It is the further intent of the board of commissioners to protect historical sites and recover historical and archeological data. No specific use or alteration of the project will be allowed unless a cultural resources survey has been conducted. Should the survey identify sites of cultural significance, then no disturbance will be allowed unless mitigated with the approval of the state historical preservation officer. 
(8)  Buffer management. Forest and vegetative management of the reservoir buffer area (subzone W-RB) shall be practiced to sustain a healthy forest plant community consisting of a canopy, understory and herbaceous layer for the purpose of maintaining the area as a natural or enhanced vegetated area around the reservoir. Certain activities within the reservoir buffer area will be subject to the issuance of activity permits issued by the office of the director of the department of water resources. The buffer area will be managed to enhance water quality objectives, promote stormwater infiltration and prevent soil erosion. Land disturbance, subject to appropriate permitting from the department of public services and engineering, may be allowed if the disturbance is necessary to achieve water quality objectives including but not limited to the prevention of soil erosion, sheet erosion and/or channelization. In connection with the management of the reservoir buffer area (subzone W-RB) and the enforcement of this article, the department of water resources and all code enforcement officers shall consider and be guided by the following: 
a.  A goal in management of the W-RD is to produce a multistory plant community with a canopy layer, including but not limited to, pine, oak, hickory, maple, tulip poplar, beech, sycamore, an understory of developing canopy shade tolerant species and normal understory species, including but not limited to dogwood, American holly, sourwood, black gum, persimmon, and other Piedmont trees depending on the aspect and slope of hydrology. 
b.  The goal of minimum cover in the reservoir buffer area (W-RB) is a basal area of 60 square feet per acre. The number of trees desirable in a forested buffer area depends upon the distribution of tree size. A continuous or near-continuous canopy should be maintained as this ensures an intact forest floor. Planted trees should be of sufficient size to be protected from animal damage so that they achieve rapid growth and meet the overall objective of maintaining a healthy and vigorous forest. 
c.  If there are no trees within the vertical portion of a gap in the overstory of the buffer, the planting of new trees or a tree should be considered. If there is an opening in the canopy larger than 25 feet by 25 feet and there are no suitable understory trees in a position to fill the gap, two new trees should be planted. For purposes of this section only, a suitable understory tree shall be defined as any tree normally found in an overstory, such as poplar, oak, hickory, maple, birch, willow and pine, then standing more than five feet tall with a healthy crown. 
d.  Trees with high wildlife value should be considered for planting in forested areas. 
e.  Prolific sprouting and fast growing species, such as sweetgum, with relatively short lifespans compared to other species, which have limited wildlife value, and often crowd out more desirable species, should be discouraged. 
f.  A moderately dense canopy producing sufficient leaf litter to maintain an intact forest floor is sufficient to provide water quality benefits expected of a forested buffer area. 
g.  The removal of forest humus or mulch shall be permitted only when reasonably necessary for construction of vegetated swales or strips in an effort to prevent or remedy soil erosion. 
h.  Land disturbing activity to obtain scenic vistas or establish lawns shall not be allowed. 
i.  Man-induced changes to a forest, under certain conditions and circumstances, may enhance wildlife habitat and aesthetics by accelerating the natural evolution of a forest without harming water quality. 
(Code 1978, § 9-7006; Ord. No. 0-1999-9, § 2, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 0-1999-09, § 2, 8-22-2000) 
Sec. 62-37. - Activities. 
Activities, as distinguished from land uses, are generally those planned, active, participatory functions that occur as a result of a particular use of the land. 
(1)  Activities allowed. Activities allowed, subject to permitting, are specified as follows: 

 
(2)  Prohibited activities. Any activity not expressly allowed by this article is hereby deemed to be prohibited. Gasoline service stations, solid waste landfills, or any other business or activity which generates hazardous or toxic waste is prohibited. 
(Code 1978, § 9-7007; Ord. No. 0-1999-9, § 3, 4-13-1999; Ord. No. 0-1999-17, § 1, 8-24-1999; Ord. No. 0-1999-09, § 2, 8-22-2000) 
Editor's note— Table 1 is on file in the county offices. 
Sec. 62-38. - Rules and regulations. 
The policies of the reservoir management plan in this article are to be implemented by the county in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for Big Haynes Creek Reservoir as adopted by the board of commissioners as referenced in section 62-31. 
(Code 1978, § 9-7008) 
Sec. 62-39. - Administrative review. 
Recommendations made by the board of commissioners' field personnel are subject to review by supervisory and managerial staff. Review may be requested of any decision made at the field level. If reviews made by supervisory and/or managerial personnel are not deemed adequate, then the complaint may be forwarded to the board's office for further review and response. The final administrative review process is exhausted at the board of commissioners level. 
(Code 1978, § 9-7009) 
Sec. 62-40. - Amendments. 
(a)  The board of commissioners is charged with protecting and managing Big Haynes Creek Reservoir within its scope of authority while serving the needs of the general public. It is the intent of the management plan in this article to provide the most benefit to the public and to balance the needs against the physical limitations and natural qualities of the project. In formulating the plan, present and future needs were considered. The reservoir manager will continually monitor the needs of lake users and recommend revisions that will minimize conflicts between various interests. Minor and major changes will be coordinated with the approval of the state department of natural resources. In advance of adopting a major revision to this plan, all proposed revisions will be publicly announced for review and comment prior to being considered at a public hearing conducted by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The plan will be subject to periodic reevaluation and individual segments may therefore need reevaluation and revision. 
(Code 1978, § 9-7010) 
Sec. 62-41. - Enforcement of management plan. 
(a)  Violations of this article shall be tried in the magistrate court of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
(b)  Any person who violates a provision of this article may be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00, the imposition of community service hours not to exceed 200 hours, or imprisonment for not more than 60 days, the imposition of restitution/restoration of a land disturbance violative of the provisions of this article, or each and may be tried and sentenced in accordance with the provisions of the laws of the state. Persons designated by the board of commissioners shall have the authority to issue citations for violation of this article, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, requiring the appearance of any person charged with the violation to appear before the magistrate court of the county. 
(c)  Any person who commits an act against any official or employee of the county that is a crime under the provisions of the United States Code or under provisions of pertinent state law may be tried and sentenced as further provided in federal or state law, as the case may be. 
(Code 1978, § 9-7011) 
Sec. 62-42. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall supersede all other provisions of this Code relative to the watershed protection zoning district. 
(Code 1978, § 9-7012) 
Chapter 66 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ga. Const. art. III, § VI, ¶ IV, provides: "Laws of a general nature shall have uniform operation throughout this state and no local or special law shall be enacted in any case for which provision has been made by an existing general law, except that the General Assembly may by general law authorize local governments by local ordinance or resolution to exercise police powers which do not conflict with general laws." The following are some of the state statutes which include common offenses: Public indecency, O.C.GA § 16-6-8; criminal trespass and damage to property; O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; interference with government property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-24; littering public and private property, O.C.G.A § 16-7-40 et seq.; obstructing or hindering law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A § 16-10-24; transmitting false report of fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; use of "fighting words," obscene and vulgar or profane language, harassing phone calls, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39 et seq.; obstructing highways, streets, sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A § 16-11-43; gambling and related offenses, O.C.G.A § 16-12-20 et seq.; obscenity and related offenses, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 et seq.; fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 30; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 

Sec. 66-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person within the unincorporated areas of the county to: 
(1)  Recklessly or knowingly commit any act which may be reasonably expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering or procession; 
(2)  Use without provocation, in the presence of another, opprobrious or abusive words which may by their very utterance tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace; 
(3)  Purposely or recklessly obstruct any highway, street, sidewalk or other public passage without authority of law in such a way as to render it impassable without unreasonably inconvenience or hazard, and fail or refuse to remove the obstruction after receiving an official request or the order of a police officer that he do so; 
(4)  Willfully obstruct, resist, oppose or hinder any law enforcement officer in the lawful discharge of his official duties; 
(5)  Knowingly, and without authority, enter upon the land or premises of the county after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the county or an authorized representative of the county that such entry is forbidden; 
(6)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(7)  Consume alcoholic beverages or transport open containers of alcoholic beverages on or upon public areas, which shall be defined as the streets or roads in the county or on any county-owned property, with the exceptions of the County Auditorium, the Black Shoals Retreat House, and Costley Mill Park, or any public place of business patronized by the public, with the exception of those businesses duly licensed by the county for consumption of alcohol on the premises; 
(8)  Be a person under 21 years of age who is in possession of or consumes alcoholic beverages outside of the immediate presence of his parent or guardian; 
(9)  Smoke in any building or facility owned or leased by the county when designated and signed as "No Smoking" areas. For the purpose of this section, smoking shall include but not be limited to cigars, cigarettes and pipes; and 
(10)  Knowingly enter upon the land or premises of the county and remain on the premises with no obvious reason, so as to loiter, after receiving notice from the county or an authorized representative of the county that such behavior is forbidden. 
(b)  Penalty for violation. The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1978, §§ 9-1001, 9-1003; Ord. 0-2017-21, § I, 9-19-2017) 
State Law reference— Joint jurisdiction with state law on disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A §§ 16-11-34, 16-11-41. 
Sec. 66-2. - Public indecency. 
(a)  Purpose. This section has been enacted for the purposes, among others, of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare, and morals of the citizens of the county; protecting societal order; reflecting moral disapproval of people appearing in the nude among strangers in public places; and proscribing public nudity across the board. 
(b)  Prohibitions. A person shall be prohibited, while in a public place, from knowingly or intentionally: 
(1)  Engaging in sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Engaging in deviate sexual conduct; 
(3)  Appearing in a state of nudity; or 
(4)  Fondling the genitals of himself, herself or another person. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessible to the public means any area or place, including but not limited to any building, structure or business, where the public is invited and are free to go upon special or implied invitation, including but not limited to such an area or place available to all or a certain segment of the public. 
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; showing the female breasts with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; or the showing of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
Public place means any area or place, including but not limited to any building, structure or business, accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Showing means pointing out or drawing attention to. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Violation of this section shall be subject to the fines and penalties as defined by section 1-11. 
(e)  Exception. Subsection (b)(3) of this section shall not apply when the nudity is part of some larger form of expression that merits First Amendment protection pursuant to the Constitution of the United States of America or the state constitution. 
(Code 1978, § 9-1001.5) 
Sec. 66-3. - Possession of marijuana. 
(a)  Definition. The term "marijuana" means all parts of the plant of the genus Cannabis, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin, but shall not include samples as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-25(3)(P) and shall not include the completely defoliated mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil, or cake, or the completely sterilized samples of seed of the plant which are incapable of germination. 
(b)  Possession of marijuana prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one ounce or less of marijuana within the unincorporated areas of the county. Possession of such substance shall be a violation of this Code. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 0-2001-20, § 1, 8-28-2001) 
Sec. 66-4. - Loitering generally. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering when the person is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a sheriff's deputy shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the deputy failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-34, § 1, 12-21-2006) 
Sec. 66-5. - Loitering for purpose of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in public for the purpose of soliciting or procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-34, § 2, 12-21-2006) 
Sec. 66-6. - Loitering for purposes of engaging in drug-related activity. 
(a)  Legislative findings and intent. 
(1)  The Rockdale County Board of Commissioners finds that the increase throughout the county of loitering in public places for the purposes of unlawful drug-related activity, or in effect, "open air" drug dealing, has become extremely disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses. This activity has contributed not only to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public places, but also to an enhanced sense of fear and intimidation and disorder. 
(2)  Loitering for purposes of unlawful drug-related activity usually includes a dominate presence of those persons engaging in such activity by approaching pedestrians, encouraging the presence of vehicle and pedestrian traffic for the purpose of unlawful drug-related activity in and out of residential areas, to or from motor vehicles or in parking lots. Such presence carries with it an implicit threat to visitors and residents to avoid the use of these public places. The avoidance of such places by law-abiding citizens leads to an increased opportunity for the unlawful criminal activity and furthers the decay of the neighborhood. 
(3)  The county has a strong interest in ensuring that citizens feel safe in their neighborhoods, in safeguarding the economic vitality of its business districts, and in preserving public places for their intended purposes. 
(4)  This section is not intended to limit any person from exercising their right to assemble or engage in any other constitutionally protected activity. This section applies to all persons with the requisite intent to induce another to engage in unlawful drug-related activity. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, as defined in section 66-4, in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public, or any public or private place in order to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to engage in unlawful drug-related activity. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section "unlawful drug-related activity" means conduct which constitutes an offense defined in O.C.G.A. title 16, chapter 13, as amended; conduct which constitutes complicity to commit such an offense by, for example, acting as a lookout; or conduct which constitutes conspiracy to commit such an offense. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section "public place" means an area open to the public or exposed to public view and includes streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles, whether moving or not, and buildings open to the general public, including those which serve food or drink, or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
(c)  A sheriff's deputy who observes a person loitering under circumstances that provide the deputy with a reasonable basis to believe unlawful drug-related activity is occurring or has occurred may detain the individual for the purpose of investigating whether the person is in violation of this section. 
(d)  A sheriff's deputy may not detain an individual under this section unless both of the following elements are satisfied: 
(1)  The person engages in one or more of the following behaviors: 
a.  The person passes or receives from a passer-by, bystander or person in a motor vehicle money, objects having characteristics consistent with controlled substances, and/or an envelope, bag or other container that could reasonably contain such objects or money; 
b.  The person conceals or attempts to conceal an object having characteristics consistent with controlled substances and/or an envelope, bag, clear plastic baggie or other container that could reasonably contain such objects; 
c.  The person flees or obscures himself upon seeing law enforcement officers; 
d.  The person communicates the fact that law enforcement officers are in the vicinity to another person in a manner that suggests that the communication is a warning; or 
e.  The deputy observes the person in possession of any instrument or object that is designed or marketed as useful primarily for one or more of the following purposes: 
1.  To inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce marijuana or a controlled substance into the human body; 
2.  To enhance the effect of marijuana or a controlled substance on the human body; 
3.  To test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of marijuana or a controlled substance; 
4.  To process or prepare marijuana or a controlled substance for introduction into the human body; 
5.  To conceal any quantity of marijuana or a controlled substance; or 
6.  To contain or hold marijuana or a controlled substance while it is being introduced into the human body. 
(2)  One of the following factors applies: 
a.  The deputy is aware that, within the preceding three years, the person has been convicted of an offense defined in O.C.G.A. title 16, chapter 13, or of complicity to commit such an offense, or of conspiracy to commit such an offense with in the preceding three years; 
b.  The deputy has knowledge of a specific reliable tip concerning unlawful drug-related activity at a specific location, and the person who is found loitering is doing so at a time, in a place or in a manner that is otherwise consistent with the details provided in the tip; 
c.  The person is loitering in an area that has been designated a notorious drug-related activity area as defined in subsection (g), below; 
d.  The person is in an area where he is prohibited by court order from being, and the deputy is aware of the court order; 
e.  The deputy knows that the person has been previously convicted of loitering with the intention of engaging in unlawful drug-related activity under this section; or 
f.  Any vehicle the person has approached or communicated through is registered to an individual who has been convicted of an unlawful drug-related activity in the previous three years, and the deputy is aware of that fact. 
(e)  No arrest may be made for a violation of this section unless the arresting deputy first affords the person an opportunity to explain the person's presence and conduct, unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable to afford such an opportunity. No one shall be convicted of violating this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given at the scene was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(f)  If a sheriff's deputy who detains a person pursuant to this section develops probable cause to believe that the person is in violation of this section, the deputy may order the person to immediately leave the location and to remain at least 500 feet away from the location for at least five hours. In the event that person refuses to comply with such an order, the sheriff's deputy may arrest the person and charge him with a violation of this section. 
(g)  The board of commissioners may, by written directive and after consultation with the sheriff, clearly and publicly designate areas of the unincorporated county that are frequently associated with excessive incidents of drug-related offenses, including offenses involving controlled substances, as defined in O.C.G.A. title 16, chapter 13, or marijuana. The sheriff shall file such designations with the clerk to the board of commissioners and with the clerk of the superior court. Prior to recommending such a determination under this subsection, the sheriff shall consult, as he or she deems appropriate, with persons who are knowledgeable about the effects of drug-related activity in areas in which this section may be enforced. Such persons may include, but need not be limited to, members of the Rockdale County Sheriff's Office with special training or experience related to drug-related activity; other personnel of that office with particular knowledge of drug-related activities in the proposed designated area; appointed and elected officials of the area; and community-based organizations. The sheriff shall develop and implement procedures for the bi-annual review and update of any designations made under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-34, § 3, 12-21-2006) 
Chapter 70 - RECREATION AND MAINTENANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2017-34, § 1, adopted December 12, 2017, changed the title of chapter 70, formerly known as "Parks and Recreation" to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Recreation and maintenance department, § 2-94; parks and recreation commission, § 2-134; environment, ch. 42; natural resources, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; vegetation, ch. 126. 
State constitution reference— County parks and recreational areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 
State Law reference— County recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

Sec. 70-1. - Recreation and maintenance director; powers and duties. 
The recreation and maintenance director shall: 
(1)  Establish, conduct, and maintain a recreation system for the county in such a way as to employ the leisure of the people in a wholesome and constructive manner. 
(2)  Provide for, conduct, and supervise public playgrounds, indoor recreation centers, and other recreational facilities owned or controlled by the county. 
(3)  Recommend the setting aside, leasing, or acquisition of lands or buildings within the county for use as parks, playgrounds, recreation centers, or for other recreational purposes, and to provide for the maintenance and improvement of these areas. 
(4)  Manage, plan, and implement the Recreation and Maintenance Master Plan and Strategic Plan. 
(5)  Exercise any other powers and duties as may be delegated from time to time by the county chairperson or the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 4-3001; Ord. No. 2017-34, § 2, 12-12-2017) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq. 
Sec. 70-2. - Use of parks and recreational facilities. 
(a)  Penalty for violation of section. 
(1)  Any person who is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 except that the maximum fine for littering shall be $100.00 for each such conviction. 
(2)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be denied any park permit or other permission to utilize the facilities of any public park or recreational area owned, operated or controlled by the county for a period of 60 days following any conviction for a violation of this section. 
(b)  Regulations. The following regulations shall apply to all public parks and recreation areas owned or leased by the county: 
(1)  Hours of operation; overnight camping. 
a.  No overnight camping shall be permitted in any public park or recreational area. 
b.  The hours of operation for all public parks and recreational areas shall be from sunrise until sundown; however, the hours may be adjusted for any facility by the director of the department of recreation and maintenance of the county. No person shall remain in or upon the grounds of any public park or recreation area during hours when such public park or recreation area is closed. 
(2)  Motor vehicles. No person shall operate any motorized vehicle, including motorcycles, mopeds or any other similar vehicle, in any part of or upon any road in any public park or recreation area except upon roads within such public park or recreational area and in designated parking areas. No motorized vehicle described in this section shall be parked or left standing at any place in any public park or recreational area except in areas designated for such purpose. Motorized wheelchairs shall be permitted. 
(3)  Littering. Garbage, trash, rubbish, litter, or any other waste material or waste liquid generated in any public park or recreational area and incidental to authorized uses shall be either removed from the site or deposited in receptacles for that purpose. No household, commercial, or industrial garbage, trash, rubbish, debris, dead animals or litter of any kind brought from outside the public park or recreational area shall be disposed of in the public park or recreational area. The spilling, pumping, or other discharge of contaminants, pollutants, or other wastes, including but not limited to, sewage, petroleum, industrial and commercial products and by-products on public park or recreational area lands or waters is prohibited. 
(4)  Open fires. No open fires, except in county provided picnic grills and/or fire rings, shall be permitted at any time or at any place in any public park or recreational area. 
(5)  Firearms and explosives. No person shall discharge any firearm or explosive, including firecrackers or fireworks, except with the express written permission of the director of the recreation and maintenance department of the county, in any public park or recreational area. 
(6)  Possession of alcoholic beverages or drugs. With the exceptions of the County Auditorium, the Black Shoals Retreat House and Costley Mill Park, no person shall sell, serve or consume alcoholic beverages, as defined in the laws of this state, in any public park or recreational area; nor shall any person possess, use, or consume any drug or any other controlled substance, as defined in the laws of this state, except as lawfully permitted by the laws of this state, in any public park or recreational area. 
(7)  Damaging vegetation prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to cut trees, tree limbs, shrubbery, flowers or other vegetation or dig up or damage trees, flowers or shrubbery or other vegetation in any public park or recreation area. This section shall not apply to employees of the county or their designees while performing their official duties. 
(8)  Profanity, loud or boisterous language prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to use profanity or loud or boisterous language in any public park or recreational area. 
(9)  Regulations specific to Randy Poynter Lake/Black Shoals Reservoir. In addition to the foregoing subsections, the following regulations shall apply to all real property owned or leased by the county known as the Randy Poynter Lake/Black Shoals Reservoir, the following shall control as to the Randy Poynter Lake/Black Shoals Reservoir: 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle in or upon the Randy Poynter Lake/Black Shoals Reservoir within the designated pool area of 735 mean sea level (msl) unless such person is employed, under contract with Rockdale County Water Resources or the county or under subcontract with a person or entity under contract with such public entities. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter, remain in or upon the Randy Poynter Lake/Black Shoals Reservoir within the designated pool area of 735 mean sea level (msl) unless such person is employed or under contract with Rockdale County Water Resources or the county or under subcontract with a person or entity under contract with such public entities. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for any persons seeking to launch a boat into the Randy Poynter Lake/Black Shoals Reservoir to do so at locations other than the boat ramps provided. Owners of property which adjoins the designated pool area of the reservoir who seek to launch a boat into the reservoir must either use the boat ramps as provided, or utilize the methods provided in section 62-37 of the Black Shoals Reservoir Management Plan. 
d.  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or engage in activities within the area of the Randy Poynter Lake/Black Shoals Reservoir designated and zoned as W-RB unless such area is specifically designated for such use or activity in section 62-37 of the Black Shoals Reservoir Management Plan. 
e.  It shall be unlawful for any person to use or engage in activities within the area of the Randy Poynter Lake/Black Shoals Reservoir designated and zoned as W-RP unless such specific use or activity has been approved in writing by the director of the recreation and maintenance department of the county. 
f.  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, permit or operate a boat with a gasoline-powered engine in the waters of the Randy Poynter Lake/Black Shoals Reservoir. Only sailboats, canoes, rowboats, or other boats propelled by electric motors shall be allowed. All boats on the reservoir shall be taken out one hour before closing of the reservoir. This section shall not apply to employees of the county or their designees while performing their official duties. 
g.  No person shall swim in the waters of the Randy Poynter Lake/Black Shoals Reservoir. 
(10)  Animals. 
a.  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian whose animal is in a recreation and maintenance facility to have physical control of the animal by leash or lead line at all times unless in designated dog park areas where off leash is permitted or approved otherwise, by permit, by the director or the director's designee. It shall be unlawful for any person with an animal, other than service animals (such as guide dogs), as necessary, to access areas of the recreation and maintenance facility which are restricted to animals. It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian of any animal whose animal is in a recreation and maintenance facility to immediately and properly dispose of solid waste deposited by the animal, except for horses on designated equestrian trails. 
b.  It shall the be duty of every animal owner or custodian of any animal whose animal is in a recreation and maintenance facility to have in their possession proof of a current rabies vaccination for their animal. It shall be the duty of every horse owner to custodian whose horse is in a recreation and maintenance facility to have in their possession, proof of a current negative Coggins test for their horse. 
c.  It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian of such animal in a recreation and maintenance facility to immediately remove from such facility said animal upon such animal exhibiting aggressive behavior toward any person or toward any other domesticated animal. For the purposes of this section, aggressive behavior includes, but is not limited to, barking, growling, baring of teeth or fangs, biting or attempts to bite, or any other behavior that could reasonably be expected to scare or intimidate any person or domesticated animal. 
(Code 1978, § 9-5012; Ord. No. 0-2000-5, § I, 3-28-2000; Ord. No. 2010-07, § 2, 5-11-2010; Ord. No. 0-2010-18, § 4, 12-14-2010; Ord. 0-2017-21, § II, 9-19-2017; Ord. No. 2017-34, § 3, 12-12-2017) 
Chapter 74 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Charitable solicitations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS 

Sec. 74-31. - Registration and permit. 
Any charitable organization registered under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5 or exempt from registration under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9 that wishes to solicit contributions on streets and highways within the unincorporated area of the county shall be required to obtain a permit in accordance with the standards and criteria specified in this article. Applications for a permit for such activity shall be made at least 30 days in advance of the date on which the solicitation shall take place. The number of permits issued during a calendar year shall be limited to two per qualified charitable organization. Each permit shall be valid for a period of time not to exceed 90 days. Permits shall be authorized only for solicitation at four-way stop intersections. 
(Ord. No. 0-1997-15, § I(8-3001), 9-23-1997; Ord. No. 0-2000-21, § 1, 9-12-2000) 
Sec. 74-32. - Application. 
The application for a permit to conduct such solicitation shall be made to the sheriff in writing, shall be signed by the person responsible for supervising the solicitation and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of the charitable organization and proof of eligibility and registration pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5 or exception pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9; 
(2)  Dates and times of the proposed solicitation; 
(3)  Names and addresses of all persons expected to participate in the solicitation, along with a signed affidavit from each participant agreeing to hold harmless and indemnify the county; 
(4)  Approved four-way stop intersection locations; and 
(5)  Name, address, phone number and signature of person making application. 
(Ord. No. 0-1997-15, § I(8-3002), 9-23-1997) 
Sec. 74-33. - Review of application. 
The sheriff or his designee shall review the information set forth in the application and have exclusive authority to grant or deny the application. Such permission or denial shall be determined by: 
(1)  Whether the solicitation will or will not reasonably interfere with the normal and safe use of the streets by the general public; and 
(2)  Whether the required factors and criteria have been satisfied. 
In either case, the sheriff or his designee shall indicate his disposition on the application in writing and shall notify the applicant of the action taken. The sheriff or his designee may attach conditions to any permit issued that are intended to protect the safety of the participants and/or the traveling public, such as limitations on solicitation hours due to visibility, the total number of participants per approved location, and similar safety stipulations. 
(Ord. No. 0-1997-15, § I(8-3003), 9-23-1997) 
Sec. 74-34. - Conduct during solicitation. 
Each participant of an authorized solicitation shall wear an orange reflective vest, and an identification tag or other material visible to the vehicular occupants solicited that accurately identifies the charitable organization soliciting. The applicant shall further post adequate notices at least 500 feet in front of the solicitation warning oncoming traffic of the presence of the solicitation in a safe manner and location previously approved by the sheriff or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 0-1997-15, § I(8-3004), 9-23-1997) 
Sec. 74-35. - Revocation of permit. 
Every permit issued under this article is subject to the right, which is hereby expressly reserved, to revoke the permit should a solicitation occur contrary to the provisions of the permit issued, this or other ordinances of the county, the laws of the state or the public safety and welfare as determined by the sheriff or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 0-1997-15, § I(8-3005), 9-23-1997) 
Chapter 78 - SOLID WASTE AND WEEDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 50; natural resources, ch. 62; manufactured and industrialized homes, ch. 114; vegetation, ch. 126. 
State constitution reference— Power of county to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 
State Law reference— Waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-1 et seq.; state grants for solid waste handling systems, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-37.1; cost reimbursement fees, surcharges, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-39; transporting refuse across county boundary for dumping without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; litter control, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-7-40 et seq., 36-1-20. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building materials means any material such as lumber, brick, plaster, gutters or other substances accumulated as a result of repairs or addition to existing buildings, construction of new buildings or demolition of existing structures. 
County, as the word is used in a geographical sense, shall be deemed to refer to the area of the county outside the corporate limits of the City of Conyers therein. 
Dumping means the discharge, deposit, spilling, leaking or placing of any waste into or on any land or water so that such waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any water, including groundwaters. 
Garbage means the byproduct of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors, or which during or after decay, may serve as breeding or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
Hazardous refuse means materials such as poison, acids, caustics, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter and explosives. 
Household trash means every waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing enterprises. 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, scrap tires, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in this section. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beached thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests; or any commercial or industrial property. 
Road and street shall be mutually inclusive, and shall likewise be deemed to include any alley, lane, court and other thoroughfare, however described or designated. 
Scavenge means any unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
Waste means all discarded substances and materials whatsoever exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance or material dumped for the purpose of economic gain. Economic gain can include the saving of money as well as making money. The term "waste" includes, without limitation, sand; gravel; slag; brickbats; rubbish; waste material; tin cans; refuse; garbage; trash; debris; dead animals; bottles; boxes; containers; papers; tobacco products; tires; appliances; mechanical equipment or parts; building or construction materials; tools; machinery; wood; motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts; vessels; aircraft equipment; waste oil; batteries; antifreeze; sludge from a wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; air contaminants from any source or facility; and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or governmental operations. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4002; Ord. No. 0-2000-22, § 1, 9-26-2000; Ord. No. 0-2000-23, § 1, 9-26-2000; Ord. No. 2007-08, §§ 1, 2, 4-10-2007) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-2. - Administration and enforcement. 
The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be the duty of the board of commissioners or its designee. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4003) 
Sec. 78-3. - General prohibition. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter or waste on any public or private property, or any waters in the unincorporated areas of Rockdale County unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter or waste, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter or waste is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or, 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4001; Ord. No. 2007-08, § 3, 4-10-2007) 
Sec. 78-4. - Objects in streets and sidewalks prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or to throw or to leave or abandon on any street in the county any glass bottle or can or the fragments thereof, or any broken glass or crockery of any kind, or nails, tacks, brickbats or any article or object likely to injure barefoot persons using those streets or sidewalks or to injure or puncture tires of vehicles utilizing pneumatic tires for their locomotion. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on the streets or sidewalks in the county any crates, boxes or any similar containers, except authorized trash receptacles. 
(Code 1978, §§ 9-4006, 9-4008) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
Sec. 78-5. - Special refuse disposal problems. 
(a)  The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the supervision and direction of the county health department. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic injection devices before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse, any hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device and without safeguarding the disposal thereof by wrapping or securing such devices in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(c)  Ashes that are to be hauled must have been wetted and cool to the touch prior to collection. 
(d)  Hazardous or liquid waste or highly combustible industrial waste shall not be disposed of in the landfill except under the supervision of the director of public services and engineering. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4011) 
Sec. 78-6. - Duty to ensure cleanliness of areas surrounding businesses 
The proprietor and person in charge of every business and commercial establishment in the county, jointly and severally, is hereby required to keep the driveways, yards, parking lots and areas adjacent thereto and under their control clean at all times and to place sweepings in a container to prevent rescattering. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4012) 
Sec. 78-7. - Owners to provide containers for litter generated by customers, licensees or invitees. 
Every owner, occupant, tenant and lessee using or occupying any commercial, institutional or industrial building or property shall be obligated, jointly and severally, to provide litter containers of that character, size, number and type as may be specified by the director of public services and engineering to be reasonably required to hold litter generated by operations on the premises. Specifically, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the requirement for those containers shall apply to shopping centers, supermarkets, convenience stores, fast food restaurants, service stations and similar establishments, and shall likewise apply to commercial establishments, garages, schools, colleges and churches. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4013) 
Sec. 78-8. - Parking lot owners to provide containers. 
Every owner and every operator of a private or commercial parking lot shall provide litter containers of adequate size, character and number as specified by the director of public services and engineering to contain the litter generated by the operations of that parking lot and shall comply with the requirements of the UDO, including UDO section 226-3. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4014; Ord. No. 0-2006-32, § 8, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 78-9. - Litter, trash and debris resulting from special occasions. 
Litter, trash and debris resulting from special occasions such as holidays, moving or cleanup will be made into bundles weighing not more than 50 pounds each and not more than four feet long, two feet wide and two feet high, and made secure. Empty cartons will be broken down before being placed in bundles. Bundles will be placed at or near the front property line for routine pickup in accordance with the policies of the county. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4015) 
Sec. 78-10. - Garbage storage area to be kept clean. 
Every owner, occupant and lessee of a house, manufactured home or building shall be jointly and severally required to maintain garbage storage areas in a clean condition and to ensure that all garbage is properly containerized. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4016) 
Sec. 78-11. - Construction and demolition sites to be maintained. 
The county requires that all construction site operators control waste, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter and sanitary waste, that may cause adverse impacts to water quality at the construction site. Property owners and prime contractors in charge of a construction site shall be jointly and severally required to furnish litter containers for discarded building materials and other construction litter. All litter from construction and related activities shall be containerized and shall be picked up and placed in containers at the end of each workday. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4017; Ord. No. 0-2013-15, § 1, 12-10-2013) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 42; general provisions of planning and development, ch. 102. 
Sec. 78-12. - Duties of the owner, occupant and lessee with respect to litter. 
The owner, occupant and lessee of all property, jointly and severally, are required to remove all litter and place the litter in proper container, and vacant lots, borders, parking lots, embankments, fences, walls and sidewalks shall be kept free of litter by those persons. Parking lots, shopping centers, convenience stores, drive-in restaurants and all other commercial and industrial enterprises shall see to it that their respective properties are kept litter free. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4018) 
Sec. 78-13. - Community improvement requirements; weed and litter control. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, cause or permit the accumulation of litter or uncut grass or weeds on any parcel, tract or lot of real property under such circumstances that the litter or uncut grass or weeds exceeds a height of ten inches or becomes a nuisance or health hazard, or where such is unreasonably unsightly. It shall be the final responsibility of the property title holder to ensure that any parcel, tract or lot of real property located in the unincorporated area of the county is maintained in a manner protective of public safety, health and general welfare. 
(b)  In the event that such conditions as described in subsection (a) exist and the property is deemed vacant of owner or renter, written notice shall be provided by the county by: 
(1)  Registered or certified mail with postage prepaid deposited in the United States mail or statutory overnight delivery addressed to the property title owner's last known address according to the records of the tax commissioner, or to the occupant at the property address which is the subject of the notice, whereupon service shall be complete upon mailing; and 
(2)  By posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on the parcel, tract or lot of real property. 
(c)  If the property title owner or occupant shall fail to clear the parcel, tract or lot of real property and remove litter, grass or weeds as described in subsection (a) within eight days of service of written notice then the following may occur: 
(1)  A citation may be issued against the property title owner or occupant. A separate violation shall be deemed to occur for each and every day during which any violation of this section is committed or continued following the expiration of the eight-day notice period. 
(2)  The director of the department of planning and development may, at any time following the eight-day notice period, cause the condition to be abated. The director is authorized to cause the weeds, vegetation, garbage, trash or other things thereon that constitute an unsanitary or dangerous condition or health menace to be cut and/or removed from the property and to charge the cost and expense thereof to the property title owner. Any such cost incurred by the county to abate such condition shall constitute a lien on the property and such lien shall have the same status and priority as a lien for taxes. 
(3)  Both a citation and abatement proceeding may be instituted. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4019; Ord. No. 0-2000-3, § 1, 2-8-2000; Ord. No. 2008-07, § 1, 6-17-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-16, § I, 10-25-2015; 0-2017-05, § 1, 4-25-2017) 
Sec. 78-14. - Yard trimmings. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(b)  Yard trimmings, disposal restrictions. 
(1)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with other forms of municipal solid waste. 
(2)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion. 
(3)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting or other handling. Yard trimmings shall be bundled and staked in lengths not to exceed four feet. If placed in containers, biodegradable containers only shall be used. 
(4)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch, or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. The following practices are specifically considered to be acceptable and meet the intent of this requirement: 
a.  Naturalized, low maintenance landscaping requiring little or no cutting; 
b.  Grass recycling by mowing it high and letting it lie; 
c.  Stacking branches into brush piles for use as wildlife habitats and for gradual decomposition into the soil; 
d.  Composting on the site where the material was grown, followed by incorporation of the finished compost into the soil at that site; 
e.  Chipping woody material on the site where such material was generated. 
f.  Collecting yard trimmings and transporting them to another site to be chipped or composted for later use; and 
g.  Chipping woody material for later use as fiber fuel. 
(5)  Recognizing that the practices cited in subsection (b)(4) of this section may not be feasibly adopted by an individual property owner or lessee, nothing in these regulations shall prohibit the collection and removal of yard trimmings from individual properties to an approved place of disposal provided the restrictions of subsections (b)(1), (b)(2) and (b)(3) of this section are met. 
(6)  Yard trimmings may be deposited at the county recycling and transfer station subject to the provisions of the county recycling and transfer operations policy adopted by the board of commissioners October 8, 1996. Yard trimmings deposited at the county recycling and transfer station shall be handled according to the applicable provisions of subsections (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), and (b)(4) of this section, except that the requirement that yard trimmings be stacked and bundled in lengths not to exceed four feet shall not apply to yard trimmings delivered to the recycling transfer station by a property owner or leasee personally. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4020) 
Sec. 78-15. - County recycling and transfer station. 
(a)  Rules regarding the manner and operation of the recycling and transfer station shall be set by the director of the department of transportation subject to the approval of the board of commissioners. During the hours of operation designated by the director of public services and engineering, acceptable waste shall be received for disposal from any resident of the county upon payment of the prescribed fee. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to and no person shall enter the recycling and transfer station except when an attendant is present and during the hours and days of operation. All materials properly delivered and deposited at the recycling and transfer station shall immediately become the property of the county. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to and no person shall deposit waste of any kind outside the gate or entryway of the recycling and transfer station. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to and no person shall move, remove or cross any fence, gate, barrier or sign at the recycling and transfer station. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to and no person shall scavenge in any manner at the recycling and transfer station without the express written permission of the director of the department of transportation or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 0-2000-22, § 4, 9-26-2000; Ord. No. 2010-18, § 1, 12-14-2010) 
Sec. 78-16. - Legal status provisions. 
(a)  If any federal or state law or any other county ordinances require or impose more restrictive standards than provisions of this chapter, those laws or ordinances shall govern. If this chapter requires or imposes more restrictive standards than any federal or state law or any other county ordinances, this chapter shall govern. 
(b)  Should any state law preempt or otherwise supersede this chapter, upon such a finding by the judge of the county magistrate court, the judge may bind the alleged offender over to the county superior court for violation of that state law. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4021) 
Sec. 78-17. - Violation and penalties. 
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) of this section, the offender shall reimburse the county for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is removed or is ordered removed by the county; and 
(3)  In addition, in the sound discretion of the magistrate court: 
a.  The offender may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  The offender may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and, 
c.  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4023; Ord. No. 0-2000-23, § 3, 9-26-2000; Ord. No. 2007-08, § 4, 4-10-2007) 
Secs. 78-18—78-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTERING, DUMPING, BURNING OFFENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 46. 

Sec. 78-41. - Littering in public places prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw hulls, peelings or other litter upon the sidewalk or in or upon the floors of churches, public halls, theatres, buses, auditoriums, schools and other similar public places. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, store, dump, park or broadcast any junk, metal, brickbats, stones, plaster, lumber, trash, garbage, litter, paper or similar rubbish and junk upon any public street, road or sidewalk in the county. 
(Code 1978, §§ 9-4005, 9-4007) 
Sec. 78-42. - Transportation of refuse. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to transport any garbage, trash, refuse or similar cargo upon the public, thoroughfares in the county if the garbage, trash, refuse or similar cargo is of a character or substance which is likely to be deposited from the motor vehicle onto the public rights-of-way unless the garbage, trash, refuse or similar cargo is secured by containers, tarpaulin or other device in any fashion as to effectively prevent such deposit on the public right-of-way. 
(b)  The duties and responsibilities imposed in subsection (a) of this section shall be strictly applicable, jointly and severally, to the owner of motor vehicles, the operator thereof and the person from whose home or business establishment the garbage, trash, refuse or similar cargo originated. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4010) 
Sec. 78-43. - Dumping, burning or deposit of waste prohibited. 
(a)  The owner, occupant and lessee of all property, jointly and severally, are required to remove all waste and place the waste in proper containers. It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, or lessee to maintain, cause or permit the accumulation of waste on any property. It shall be the final responsibility of the property title holder or his agent to ensure that any land and/or building located in the unincorporated area of the county be maintained in a manner protective of public safety, health and general welfare. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump waste unless authorized to do so by law or by a duly issued permit: 
(1)  In or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; 
(2)  In or on any lake, river, canal, or stream; or 
(3)  In or on any private property, unless prior consent of the owner has been given and unless such dumping will not adversely affect the public health and is not in violation of any state law, rule or regulation. 
(c)  No property owner nor any person shall bury or burn waste without prior authorization and written permission from the county fire department or applicable regulatory agency, including but not limited to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the state environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources, and/or the state forestry service. Nothing in this section shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 0-2000-22, § 2, 9-26-2000) 
Sec. 78-44. - Evidence of violations. 
(a)  Whenever waste is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever waste which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this chapter is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2000-22, § 3, 9-26-2000) 
Sec. 78-45. - Violation and penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates this ordinance shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) of this section, the offender shall reimburse the county for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is removed or is ordered removed by the county; and 
(3)  In addition, in the sound discretion of the magistrate court: 
a.  The offender may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  The offender may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and, 
c.  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(b)  The weight and volume of the dumped material shall be considered by the county magistrate court in assessing any penalty under this article. Each day that a continuing violation of this article occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-2000-22, § 5, 9-26-2000; Ord. No. 2007-08, § 5, 4-10-2007) 
Sec. 78-46. - Deposit of garbage, trash, litter, brush and weeds prohibited; burying or burning of litter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep, throw or deposit any garbage, trash, brush, stagnant water, litter or other debris into, upon or along a drain, gutter, street, road, sidewalk, vacant lot or in the open upon any public or private property or water ways within the county; provided however, that nothing in this section shall prevent the placing of any items on private property at or near the front property line thereof for routine pickup in accordance with the policies of the county. 
(b)  No person shall bury or burn litter without prior authorization and written permission from the county fire department or applicable regulatory agency, including but not limited to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the state environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources, and/or the state forestry commission. Nothing in this section shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4004; Ord. No. 0-2000-23, § 2, 9-26-2000) 
Sec. 78-47. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of section 78-46, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of section 78-46 is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Code 1978, § 9-4022) 
Chapter 82 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the county saved from repeal, § 1-13(4); drunkenness in public places, § 10-1; natural resources, ch. 62; parks and recreation, ch. 70; peddlers and solicitors, ch. 74; objects in streets and sidewalks prohibited, § 78-4; telecommunications, ch. 90; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94; utilities, ch. 98; floods, ch. 106; house relocating; oversized loads, ch. 110; manufactured and industrialized homes, ch. 114; subdivisions, ch. 122; vegetation, ch. 126; zoning, ch. 130. 
State constitution references— Powers of county as to streets, roads and stormwater systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4), (6). 
State Law reference— State, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; removal and relocation of utility facilities necessitated by construction of public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-170 et seq. 

Sec. 82-1. - Street repairs. 
The department of public services and engineering shall maintain and repair the county-owned streets and sidewalks as may be needed and directed by the chairperson of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 4-1001) 
Sec. 82-2. - Street excavations. 
(a)  No county right-of-way or county road, street or sidewalk shall be cut or excavated in any way except upon receiving written permission of the director of the department of public services and engineering or such other department head designated by the chairperson of the board of commissioners. An application shall be submitted to the planning office on a form provided by the county and contain but not be limited to an accurate description of the excavation to be done, the location of the excavation, and any additional information the county may designate. Upon the submission of the completed application, the request shall be reviewed and granted or denied by the appropriate department head. 
(b)  Any right-of-way or county road, street or sidewalk excavated under this section shall be replaced and restored to its original condition or better, including but not limiting to the regrassing of the right-of-way or easement, if damaged by the excavation, within 30 days of the beginning of the excavation work for the area for which permission is granted. The inspection by the county of the right-of-way excavated shall be conducted in conjunction with the applicable standards as adopted by the county and/or state and shall include but not be limited to the following: the utility street cut standards as adopted by the county and/or all applicable soil erosion and sediment control provisions adopted by the county and set out in chapter 118 or as provided by applicable state law. 
(c)  The applicant shall give notice of the completion of excavation and restoration work required by this section to the director of the department of public services and engineering or other designated department head as determined by the chairperson of the board of commissioners. Upon notification, the restoration shall be inspected to ensure proper completion. 
(d)  Prior to the commencement of the excavation and upon submission of his application, the applicant shall post a performance bond in an amount deemed appropriate by the director of the department of public services and engineering in relation to the excavation contemplated but in any event, not less than $5,000.00. In conjunction with the posting of the performance bond, the applicant shall execute a bond agreement as provided by the department of public services and engineering. Such bond shall be released, by the county, upon the proper completion of the excavation in question pursuant to subsection (b) of this section and the submission of a written request by the applicant for release. If the applicant is involved in more than five excavation jobs in a given calendar year, the bond requirement of this section may be satisfied by the posting of a bond in an amount not less than $20,000.00 or an amount deemed appropriate by the director of the department of public services and engineering as related to the type and number of excavations. 
(e)  If the excavation is commenced in violation of this chapter or if the excavation is commenced and not completed pursuant to this chapter or in the event the excavation as performed fails to pass the inspection provided in this section, the applicant may be subject punishment as provided in section 1-11 for each day of violation. 
(Code 1978, § 4-1002) 
Sec. 82-3. - County road and street priorities. 
(a)  Pursuant to part I, section 2-62(c)(15), the board of commissioners shall annually establish a county road priority schedule. The county road priority schedule may be adopted or amended by simple motion approved by a majority of the board of commissioners. The county road priority schedule shall provide, in the order of highest to lowest priority, for the improvement, reconstruction or general maintenance of all county roads and streets. The county road priority schedule may include light maintenance such as "pothole" repair or shoulder and right-of-way maintenance, but such may be left to the discretion of appropriate county officials and personnel. 
(b)  Any such county road priority schedule shall be strictly followed by all county officials and personnel and no road, street, sidewalk, lane or the like shall be serviced or improved in any manner without the road, street, sidewalk, lane or the like being included on such a list or exempt therefrom under this section. 
(c)  No road, street, sidewalk, lane or the like shall be serviced or improved in any manner except in the order of priority of the schedule provided for under this section without approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1978, § 4-1003) 
Sec. 82-4. - Expenditure of funds for maintenance of public ways. 
The chairperson of the board of commissioners or the full board itself shall not expend any funds for the maintenance, repair and upkeep of roads or passageways lying within the county other than those roads, passageways and public ways reflected on the official highway map of the county, such map being incorporated in this section by reference. Provided, however, that insofar as streets, roads or highways not shown on the official county road map are concerned, that: 
(1)  Upon legal dedication and acceptance of such roads by the county; or 
(2)  a.  Upon a factual showing of public necessity deemed to be adequate by the board of commissioners; and 
b.  Upon a sufficient legal basis being propounded to establish that the street, road or thoroughfare is legally a public road in the opinion of the county attorney; 
then, and only then, shall the county undertake to maintain, repair, grade, and otherwise work those roads. 
(Code 1978, § 4-1004) 
Sec. 82-5. - Work on private property. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the official policy of the county that only county-owned real or personal property shall be improved at county expense, except upon authorization of the board of commissioners. The term "county-owned real or personal property" shall include real or personal property leased or rented by the county. The sole exceptions to this rule are that: 
(1)  County equipment and authorized staff may be employed on private property to protect lives and property during an emergency, as such emergency may be declared in the discretion of a majority of the board of commissioners; 
(2)  County equipment and authorized staff may be used to bury dead horses, cows and other livestock on private property provided that the actual expenses to the county, of such services are reimbursed to the county; 
(3)  County equipment and authorized staff may enter upon and work on private property whenever such entry and work is mandated by federal regulations, state statute or local ordinance or other law; 
(4)  County equipment and authorized staff may enter upon and work on private cemeteries in the event of an emergency as declared by a majority of the board of commissioners and whenever property ownership cannot be established. 
(5)  County equipment and authorized staff may enter upon and work on private property whenever such work is required to inspect, maintain, protect, replace, or improve existing county-owned infrastructure, provided that the affected private property owners have signed written agreements allowing such entry and work. 
(b)  Any county employee, elected official or any other person who knowingly directs, causes or requires county equipment or forces to be used to improve non-county-owned real or personal property in violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1978, § 4-1005; Ord. No. 0-2013-04, § 1, 5-14-2013) 
Sec. 82-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 0-2006-32, § 9, adopted Nov. 28, 2006, deleted § 82-6 in its entirety. Former § 82-6 pertained to street light districts and derived from Code 1978, § 4-1006. 
Chapter 86 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution of the county promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county, or any evidence of the county's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-13(2); any ordinance or resolution levying or imposing charges, fees or taxes now due or accrued saved from repeal, § 1-13(5); administration, ch. 2; board of tax assessors, number and term, § 2-137; finance, § 2-171 et seq.; excise tax on alcoholic beverages, § 10-171 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference— Issuance of notes, etc., in anticipation of taxes, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2; revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. title 48; county taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-220 et seq.; excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Acceptance of checks by the tax commissioner. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-146, the county tax commissioner is hereby authorized to receive, in payment of any taxes, fees, interest or like payment due that office, any personal, company, certified, treasurer's or cashier's checks, or bank, postal or express money orders; provided those payments are accepted only under the conditions set out in this section. 
(b)  Payment pursuant to this section shall be accepted only after the presentation by the taxpayer of adequate proof of the taxpayer's identity and address to the tax commissioner or a designee thereof. 
(c)  A proportional deduction shall be made by the tax commissioner in any tax or fee payment to each appropriate government agency for any check or other payment accepted under this section and returned to the tax commissioner unpaid or dishonored for any reason; provided the tax commissioner has tendered a written demand for payment by certified mail to the taxpayer's last known address within 30 days of notification that the check or payment would not be honored and, provided further, the tax commissioner initiates, within 40 days of the demand being mailed, at least one of the rights and remedies against the taxpayer allowed by law for the enforcement of the payment of those taxes or fees if the payment was not made within 20 days of the demand being mailed. 
(d)  Failure to follow the procedures set out in this section shall result in the tax commissioner's being personally liable for the acceptance of any check or payment returned dishonored for any reason. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2001) 
Sec. 86-2. - Manufactured home registration for tax purposes. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "manufactured home" means a manufactured home or mobile home as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131, provided, however, that those manufactured homes or mobile homes which qualify the taxpayer for homestead exemption under state law shall not be subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Each year every owner of a manufactured home in the county, subject to taxation under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-440 et seq., shall obtain from the tax commissioner of the county a manufactured home location permit. This permit shall be applied for and obtained at the time the owner returns his manufactured home for taxation or on May 1, whichever occurs first. The issuance of the permit by the tax commissioner shall be evidenced by the issuance of a decal, which shall reflect the county of issuance and the calendar year for which the permit is issued. The decal shall be promptly attached and displayed on the manufactured home by the owner. Failure to attach and display the decal shall constitute a misdemeanor charge and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(c)  Except as provided for those manufactured homes specifically excluded from the force and effect of this section, it shall be a condition precedent to issuance of any permit required by this section that the owner of the manufactured home shall submit to the tax commissioner proof that all applicable state, county and municipal ad valorem taxes have in fact been paid, together with all applicable permit fees as provided for in this section. 
(d)  Each application for a permit required by this section shall be accompanied by a fee of $3.00 which shall be paid to the tax commissioner before the permit shall be issued. All permit fees collected by the tax commissioner under the provisions of this section shall be paid into the county treasury no later than the end of the calendar month beginning not less than ten days after the collection of the fee. 
(e)  The tax commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered, subject to the specific provisions of this section and the laws of this state, to prescribe application, permit and decal forms and thereafter to alter and change the application, permit and decal forms; and the tax commissioner is empowered to require that applicants furnish such information in writing as may be reasonably required to effectuate the purposes of this section. 
(f)  The issuance of any permit under the provisions of this section shall in no way be construed as superseding or signifying compliance by the owner of the manufactured home with requirements for the location of manufactured homes as the requirements may be prescribed with an appropriate resolution or other actions of the Conyers-Rockdale County Planning Commission nor shall the issuance of any permit under this section in any way preclude or estop the governing authority of the county or its authorized agent from enforcing all applicable manufactured home and zoning ordinances and regulations of the county. 
(g)  The tax commissioner shall issue with each location permit and decal as prescribed in this section a written notice to the recipient of the permit that the county preserves its rights to enforce all applicable manufactured home zoning ordinances and regulations. 
(h)  All wholesale and retail dealers of manufactured homes doing business in the county shall return their inventory on the first workday of each calendar year to the tax commissioner's office. This return shall consist of a list of all manufactured homes in their possession and located within the county on January 1 of that year. The list shall show the identification numbers of each manufactured home along with a physical description of the manufactured home descriptive enough to allow the value to be determined and therefore assessed. The tax commissioner shall determine the tax due on each dealer manufactured home, which shall be due and payable on or before May 1 of the calendar year. 
(i)  Unless specifically exempted in this section, no person shall own or have located within the limits of the county any manufactured home unless application for a permit shall have been made and a permit received as provided by this section. Failure to have a permit as required by this chapter shall be a violation of this Code, for which the penalty shall be as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1978, § 3-1001; Ord. No. 0-2000-47, § 21, 12-30-2002) 
Secs. 86-3—86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 
Related laws reference— Authority to regulate businesses, part I, § 2-71 et seq. 

Sec. 86-31. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "county" is used in this article, it shall be construed to mean Rockdale County, Georgia. 
(b)  As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Business license means that license issued pursuant to the regulations set forth in chapter 22, article II. 
Dominant line means the type of business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
Location and office mean any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue raising purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business. 
Person means natural persons as well as sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioner of profession or occupation" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the county as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business, but excluding impact fees imposed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 and other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2034) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-32. - Occupation tax required. 
Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the county or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in this state exerting substantial efforts within the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall apply for and pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, professional or occupation in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2031) 
State Law reference— Tax on sale of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; specific, business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 
Sec. 86-33. - Purpose and scope. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is imposed for revenue purposes only and not regulatory purposes. The occupation tax applies to those businesses and occupations covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-28. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2032) 
Sec. 86-34. - License displayed. 
A business license issued by the county demonstrating compliance with the provisions of this article and payment of applicable occupation taxes shall be conspicuously displayed in the place of business if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the county. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the county, such business license shall be shown to the director of the department of public services and engineering or his designee or to any sheriff's deputy of the county upon request. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2033) 
Sec. 86-35. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $25.00 shall be required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal, amendments, reprinting of a business license, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $10.00 shall be required on all non-profit organizations for the initial startup, renewal, amendments, reprinting of registration certificate, or reopening of those accounts. 
(c)  Regulatory fees imposed under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-8 and 48-13-9 on applicable businesses, professions and occupations shall be elsewhere set forth in this Code. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2035; Ord. No. 1997-19, § 1, 12-9-1997; Ord. No. 0-2010-09, § 4, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 0-2016-09, § I, 9-27-2016) 
Sec. 86-36. - Occupation tax levied; schedule and restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the unincorporated part of the county, and upon applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner computed on a full-time position basis or full-time position equivalent basis. For purposes of this computation, an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee. The average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. 
(b)  The tax rate determined by the number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and may be developed and updated from time to time by the county: 

 
(c)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(d)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies the offices of which are located outside the county. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2036) 
Sec. 86-37. - Businesses with no location in the state. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the county and the business or practitioner has one or more employees who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the county for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2037) 
Sec. 86-38. - Line of business to be identified. 
The occupation tax application and business license of each business operated in the county shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2038) 
Sec. 86-39. - Multiple locations in the county. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2039) 
Sec. 86-40. - Practitioners of state-regulated professions. 
Practitioners of professions described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on the number of employees; or 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the county relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2040) 
Sec. 86-41. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2041) 
Sec. 86-42. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Occupation tax pursuant to this article shall be imposed for each year as follows: 
(1)  An administrative fee of $10.00 shall be imposed. A business license shall be issued upon payment of such tax and administrative fee and full compliance with chapter 22, article II. 
(2)  Occupation tax and administrative fees shall be imposed for each calendar year. Such occupation tax and administrative fee shall be due and payable on January 1 of each such calendar year, and shall, if not paid by January 31 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency and collection as prescribed in this article. 
(b)  Should any occupation tax imposed pursuant to this article become delinquent, the person liable for such tax shall be liable for and pay interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month on such delinquent tax. In addition, should any occupation tax remain delinquent for a period of 90 days from its due date, the person liable for such tax shall be liable for and pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. 
(c)  No person shall commence any new profession, trade, or calling in the county without having first applied for and paid the occupation tax and administrative fee pursuant to this article. Any person commencing a new business after January 1 but prior to July 1 in any year shall pay 100 percent of the tax that would have been imposed for the entire year, plus the yearly administrative fee. When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the business or occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year, except that: 
(1)  Local governments which tax according to the criterion described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(a)(3) are authorized to levy their customary rate on the gross receipts of the business or practitioner from the commencement of the business; 
(2)  The administrative fee authorized as a component of an occupation tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(e) shall not be reduced; and 
(3)  A practitioner of a profession or occupation who elects as his occupation tax the amount described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(g)(3) shall receive no reduction in such amount. Such tax shall be delinquent if not obtained 30 days following the commencement of the business and interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month on such delinquent tax shall be imposed. In addition, should such tax remain due and unpaid for 90 days from such due date, a penalty of ten percent of such delinquent tax shall apply. 
(d)  Application for business licenses and payment of occupation taxes pursuant to this article shall be administrated by the department of public services and engineering. Applications shall be made on forms provided by such department and shall include all required information. Businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations doing business in the county shall provide as a part of such application the site of any location or office and payment of occupation taxes or regulatory fees to other local governments. Business licenses shall be issued by the department of public services and engineering following proper application, payment of taxes and fees, and full compliance with this article, chapter 22, article II, and all other applicable Code requirements. If any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to pay occupation tax shall, after such occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the county, any profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first paid such occupation tax and obtained the appropriate business license, such offender shall, upon conviction in the county magistrate court, be punished as provided in section 1-11. Such punishment shall be in addition to all other remedies provided by this article and chapter 22, article II. 
(e)  In addition to the remedies in this section, the sheriff may proceed to collect delinquent occupation taxes and penalties associated therewith in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2042) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-22. 
Sec. 86-43. - Businesses with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the county only employees who work within the county will be counted for taxing purposes. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2043) 
Sec. 86-44. - State registration. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before a the county business license may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2044) 
Sec. 86-45. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, zoning compliance, building code compliance, additional license or permit requirements, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business license show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2045) 
Sec. 86-46. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to pay the necessary occupation tax and obtain the required business license for such business as described in this article, in section 22-31, and elsewhere in this Code, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain such license. Every person commencing business in the county shall likewise comply with this article and obtain the necessary business license before commencing the business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so complied and obtained such required license shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2046) 
Sec. 86-47. - Revenue collection officer subpoena powers. 
The county department of public services and engineering and its duly designated officers and inspectors or its successors shall be classified as deputy marshal business inspectors with full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2047) 
Sec. 86-48. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common or contract carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2048) 
Sec. 86-49. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to employees of any part of a business when such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2049) 
Sec. 86-50. - More than one place of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place, such business shall be required to obtain the necessary license for each location and pay an occupation tax in accordance with this article for each location. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2050) 
Sec. 86-51. - Returns confidential. 
Except as allowed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-15(c), it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the county to divulge or make known in any manner information on gross receipts received by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession provided to the county for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner. Pursuant to state law such information shall be deemed confidential and exempt from disclosure as a public record. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the county shall be classed as "employees" for purposes of this section. Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the publication by county officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items hereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States and other local governments. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2051) 
Sec. 86-52. - Inspections of books and records. 
(a)  The county department of public services and engineering, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The director of the department of public services and engineering or his designee shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the county and upon demand of the revenue collection officer such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the county within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the business license currently existing to do business in the county. Adequate records shall be kept in the county for examination by the revenue collection officer at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of 125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount deficient will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(b)  Each business is required to allow the county to inspect its state department of revenue Form ST-3 for the past 24 months for the purposes of allowing the county to determine: 
(1)  If Form ST-3 properly lists the county as the location of the store; and 
(2)  The amount of local option sales tax and special location sales taxes being remitted to the state department of revenue. 
At the request of the county, inspection shall be on demand at reasonable times. If the business is owned by a corporation headquartered outside of the county, the business shall have not more than 15 working days to produce the form to the county. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2052; Ord. No. 0-1998-21, § 1, 11-25-1998) 
Sec. 86-53. - Business license to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
The failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or failure to make any of such returns or applications within the time required in this article, or failure to make a true return, or providing false information in the application or return, or failure to amend an application or return to set forth the truth, or failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 86-52, shall constitute grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any occupation tax receipt or business license granted by the county under this article or chapter 22, article II, permitting the owner of such business to do business for the current year. Business license suspensions and revocations shall be governed by chapter 22, article II, and the failure to comply with this article and pay all required occupation taxes shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation thereunder. No business license shall be granted by the county for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the director of the department of public services and engineering or his designee in accordance with the provisions of this article. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2053) 
Sec. 86-54. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in the county after the license for such business has been revoked as provided in section 86-53, or who are hereby required to pay occupation tax, and who fail to pay such tax within the time and in the manner provided in this article, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the county request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2054) 
Sec. 86-55. - Amendment, repeal of provisions. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the board of commissioners to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2055) 
Sec. 86-56. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The board of commissioners may by subsequent ordinance provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax or provide for a credit against occupation tax owed by one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and shall comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2056) 
Sec. 86-57. - Application of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed when taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. The parts of ordinances heretofore and hereafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions of this article, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2057) 
Sec. 86-58. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until charged by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the board of commissioners. All provisions of this article related to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2058) 
Sec. 86-59. - Requirements of public hearing. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(b)  In any year in which revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the board of commissioners shall conduct at least one public hearing as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2059) 
Sec. 86-60. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
When there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2060) 
Sec. 86-61. - Other provisions. 
The provisions of this article for application and payment of occupation tax shall be in addition to those regulations governing the issuance and revocation of business licenses generally in chapter 22, article II. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2061) 
Secs. 86-62—86-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL/MOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22. 

Sec. 86-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County means all areas within the geographical borders of the county. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. The term "hotel" does not include any jail, hospital, asylum sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention or other buildings in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. However, the term "occupant" shall not include state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business, and who occupy rooms in any hotel as defined in this article for a period of five or more consecutive days. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the county, including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of these premises, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating that hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guestroom in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding that date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose the tax provided in this article. 
Quarterly period means the quarter of any year as follows: The first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2066) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-92. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There is hereby levied and assessed and there shall be paid a tax of five percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the county. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2067) 
Sec. 86-93. - Persons liable for tax; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a guestroom in a hotel in this county is liable for the tax. The liability of such person is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the county except that a receipt from an operator maintaining a place of business in this county or from an operator who is authorized by the finance director, under such rules and regulations as he may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is, for the purposes of this article, regarded as an operator, maintaining a place of business in this county, which receipt is given to the occupant pursuant to section 86-94, is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2068) 
Sec. 86-94. - Collection of tax by operator, receipt of occupant; rules for collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the county as provided in section 86-91, and renting guestrooms in the county, not exempted under section 86-96 shall, at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant, and on demand give the occupant a receipt therefor. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that these credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The finance director shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of tax. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2069) 
Sec. 86-95. - Unlawful advertising regarding tax. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guestroom, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2070) 
Sec. 86-96. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed under this article: 
(1)  Upon a permanent resident; 
(2)  Upon a corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, or for one or more such purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual; or 
(3)  Upon any person exempted by law. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2071) 
Sec. 86-97. - Registration of operator, form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the county shall immediately register with the finance director on a form provided by the director. This registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the finance director may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner; and in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. The finance director shall, after this registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come readily to the notice of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. This certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be returned immediately to the finance director upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon the sale or transfer of the business at that location. 
(b)  If the finance director deems it necessary in order to facilitate initial registration under this article of persons engaged in business or prior to the date of imposition of tax as set forth in this article, he may prescribe provisions therefor other than those provided in this section. Those provisions shall be made to effect the purposes of this article. For those purposes, those provisions shall be in lieu of those provided in this article. The registration and the certificate thereof shall have the same effect as that provided in this article. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2072) 
Sec. 86-98. - Determinations, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. The tax shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of any hotel in this county. All amounts of these taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the finance director quarterly on or before the last day of the months of April, July, October and January next succeeding each respective quarterly period as set forth in section 86-91. 
(b)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; execution. On or before the last day of the month following each quarterly period, a return for the preceding quarterly period shall be filed with the director, in such form as he may prescribe, by every operator and by every person liable to payment of tax under this article during that quarterly period who has not paid the tax, and made return in regard to the related occupation which is the subject of the tax. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period and such other information as required by the finance director. 
(d)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the revenue collector. 
(e)  Collection fee allowed operators. Each person collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting, and paying the amount due if the amount due is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(f)  Extension of time for filing a return and paying tax. For a good cause, the finance director may extend, but not to exceed one month, the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension of time may be granted. Any person to whom an extension of time has been granted, who makes a return and pays the tax within the period of extension, shall pay in addition to the tax, interest on the amount thereof at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, for a period of this extension to the time of return and payment. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2073) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-52. 
Sec. 86-99. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 15th day after the close of the quarterly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the finance director may offset overpayments for a period or periods against underpayments for another period or periods, against penalties and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Penalty; negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 15 percent of the amount of this deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made due to fraud or an intent to evade any provisions of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice of finance director's determination; service. The finance director, or his designated representative, shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by certified mail. If by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the finance director. In case of service by certified mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 15th day of the calendar month following the quarterly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2074) 
Sec. 86-100. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in the finance director's possession or may come into his possession. Upon the basis of the estimate, the finance director shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the county, adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest. In making a determination, the finance director may offset overpayments for a period or penalties, and against the interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the last day of the month following the close of the quarterly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty provided in section 86-101. 
(e)  Giving of notice; manner of service. Promptly after making this determination, the finance director shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by certified mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2075) 
Sec. 86-101. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. 
Any person who fails to pay any tax to the county or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the county within the time required shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the tax or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 86-99(b) or 86-100(c). 
(Code 1978, § 3-2076) 
Sec. 86-102. - Collection of tax. 
(a)  Security, finance director may exact; amount of sale; notice of sale; return of surplus. The finance director, whenever he deems it necessary to ensure compliance with this article, may require any person subject thereto to deposit with him such security as the director may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the finance director, but shall not be greater than twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which he files returns, determined in such a manner as the director deems proper, or $10,000.00, whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased by the finance director subject to the limitations provided in this article. The finance director may sell the security at public auction, with the approval of the board of commissioners, if it becomes necessary to do so in order to recover any tax or any amount required to be collected, interest or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served upon the person who deposited the security personally or by certified mail; if by certified mail, service shall be addressed to the person at his address as it appears in the records of the finance director. Upon any sale, any surplus above the amounts due shall be returned to the person who deposited the security. 
(b)  Notice of delinquency to persons holding credits or property of delinquent; time for; duty of persons so notified. If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid by him, or if a determination has been made against him which remains unpaid, the finance director may, not later than three years after the payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the county having in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the delinquent, or owing any debts to the delinquent. After receiving the notice, the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of the credits, other personal property or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the finance director consents to a transfer or disposition or until 20 days elapse after the receipt of the notice, advise the finance director of all these credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. 
(c)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the finance director may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state or of the United States in the name of the county to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(d)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover this amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the finance director showing that he has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(e)  Liability for failure to withhold; certificate of notice of amount due; time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required, he becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the finance director shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the director of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the director to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold the purchase price as provided in this subsection. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out his business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(f)  Refund of tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county under this article, it may be refunded provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the finance director within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be audited and shall be made on forms provided by the finance director. If the claim is approved by the finance director and the board of commissioners, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid; and the balance may be refunded to this person, his administrators or executors. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2077) 
Sec. 86-103. - Administration of article. 
(a)  Authority of finance director. The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The finance director shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the county and the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes under this article. 
(c)  Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in the county shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the finance director may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The finance director or any person authorized in writing by him may, at reasonable times, examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any person renting guestrooms and any person liable for the tax and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the tax, the director may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance director when he requires and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy and such other information as the director may require. 
(f)  Disclosure of business of operators; limitation on rule. The finance director or any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses or expenditures, or any particulars thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having that administrative duty under this article. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2078) 
Sec. 86-104. - Applicability. 
This article shall not apply to any person as to whom, or to any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the board of commissioners to impose the tax. This article specifically shall not apply to any person not licensed by or required to be licensed by the county for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodging or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2079) 
Sec. 86-105. - Penalty for fraudulent returns, reports. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the finance director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, is guilty of and punishable for a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report who makes any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due required by this article to be made, is guilty of and punishable for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2080) 
Sec. 86-106. - How funds used. 
The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(4.6)(A). The finance director shall maintain a separate accounting of the proceeds generated under this article. 
(Code 1978, § 3-2081; Ord. No. 2006-33, § 1, 12-21-2006) 
Chapter 90 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 130; telecommunications facilities, § 130-20. 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 90-1—90-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 90-31. - Definitions. 
The definitions used in section 86-31 shall likewise apply to this part of this article. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access channels means those channels on the CATV system which are reserved for carriage of program material provided by persons other than the operator, including the channel or channels used for public, educational, government and leased access as required in this article or by the FCC. 
Applicant means any person submitting an application to the county for a franchise to operate a CATV system under the terms and conditions set forth by the county board of commissioners. 
Board means the present governing body of the county or any successor to the legislative powers of the present county board of commissioners. 
CATV means community antenna television. 
Chairperson means the existing or any succeeding chief administrative officer of the county, or his designee. 
Channel means a band of frequencies, six megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum which is capable of carrying either one audio-video television signal and a number of nonvideo signals or several thousand nonvideo signals. 
Commercial subscriber means a purchaser of any service delivered over the system who or which is not a residential subscriber. 
Community antenna television system (CATV system) means any facility which operates for hire the service of receiving and amplifying programs broadcast by one or more television and/or radio stations and any other programs and telecommunications services of any type, including audio, video or data originated by a cable television company or by another party, and distributing these programs and services by wire, cable, microwave or other means, whether these means are owned or leased, to persons who subscribe to this service. This definition does not include: 
(1)  Any system with fewer than 50 subscribers; or 
(2)  Any master antenna television system. 
County means the County of Rockdale, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Federal Communications Commission means that agency as presently constituted by the United States Congress or any successor agency. 
Franchise means an initial authorization or renewal thereof authorizing the construction and operation of a CATV system. 
Grantee and franchisee mean the person to whom or to which a franchise is granted by the county board of commissioners under this article or anyone who succeeds the person in accordance with the provisions of the franchise. 
Grantee channels means the channels on the system which are reserved for programming offered or originated by the grantee in accordance with the FCC television signal retransmission and/or cablecasting rules and regulations. 
Gross subscriber revenue means all revenue derived from the monthly charges from all subscribers or users of regular CATV subscriber service. 
Master antenna television system means any system which serves only the residents of one or more apartment dwellings under common ownership, control or management and any commercial establishment located on the premises of that apartment house and which transmits only signals broadcast over the air by stations which may be normally viewed or heard locally without objectionable interference and which does not provide any additional services over its facility. 
Pay television means the delivery over CATV system of video signals to subscribers for a fee or charge (over and above the charge for basic service) on a per-program, per-channel or other subscription basis. 
Residential subscriber means a purchaser of any service delivered over the system to an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession. 
Street means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkways, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by the county for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the county which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the county and its grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmissions over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a CATV system. 
(Code 1978, §§ 7-1001, 7-3001) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-32. - Grant of authority. 
The board is hereby authorized to grant one or more franchises to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system within the county for a maximum initial period of 15 years, and may renew each franchise for a maximum period of ten years subject to the conditions and restrictions as provided in this article. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3002) 
Sec. 90-33. - Franchise term. 
The franchise granted in this article shall terminate 15 years from the date of grant, and may be renewed for successive ten-year terms, following a public proceeding affording due process, on the same terms or conditions as contained in this article, or such different or additional terms and conditions as may be lawfully specified by the board and consistent with the requirements of the FCC. These additional terms or conditions may only be adopted following notification of the franchisee seeking renewal. No person shall operate a CATV system as defined in this article in the unincorporated areas of the county without a franchise issued under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3003) 
Sec. 90-34. - Application for CATV franchise. 
(a)  No CATV initial franchise shall be issued except on a written application and upon a form approved by the board. 
(b)  The form shall set forth any facts in detail as the board may deem appropriate including: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, partnership or unincorporated association, its statement shall contain the names and addresses of all persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in and to the prospective franchisee's business operation, and in and to the prospective franchisee if awarded to the proposer. The term "equitable interest" shall include all assignments for value, as well as all contingent assignments of any rights or privileges under the prospective franchise, and shall also include any benefit, payment or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a franchise under this article. 
(2)  If the applicant is a nonpublic corporation, the statement shall furnish directors and shareholders of the corporation together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(3)  If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, as defined by the rules and regulations of the Federal Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall contain the states in which incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
(4)  A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in rendering the service. 
(5)  The source of funds for operation of the system respecting the installation and maintenance of all CATV facilities; and shall demonstrate the financial ability to provide and extend service to proposed subscribers at a reasonable cost. 
(6)  A detailed schedule of the facilities to be employed and the general routes of the cables used in redistributing signals, the service area or areas, the commencement and completion dates of construction of the CATV system and the proposed dates the service will be available to the area or areas named. 
(7)  A detailed plan of construction including proposed construction schedule and/or schedule of service for the franchise area. 
(c)  The board may request and the applicant shall provide such other information as the board may reasonably deem appropriate. 
(d)  All applications shall be open to public inspection, shall be kept on file a reasonable length of time at the discretion of the board, and any intentional misrepresentation in an application shall be grounds for the revocation and termination of the franchise. Before issuing a franchise, the county shall conduct a public hearing. 
(e)  All applications shall be signed and verified by the applicants whose relationship to the applicant shall be set forth and shall bind the applicant to the provisions thereof to the degree possible, consistent with FCC rules. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3004) 
Sec. 90-35. - Franchise payment. 
(a)  The grantee shall pay to the county on or before the 15th of each month following initiation of service, an amount equal to five percent of the gross revenues on all cable service revenues, including but not limited to gross subscriber revenues, advertising, pay cable and leased channel revenues of the grantee derived from cable television operations in the unincorporated areas of the county during the preceding calendar month. No other fee, charge or consideration shall be imposed. The grantee shall submit to the county 90 days after the expiration of each calendar year during the period the franchise shall be in force a financial statement showing in detail the gross annual revenues, as defined in this article, of the grantee during the preceding year. The grantee shall provide a notarized affidavit as to the accuracy of this financial statement at the time of filing. 
(b)  If the franchise should be forfeited prior to the end of the franchise term, the grantee shall immediately submit to the county a financial statement prepared as before required, showing the gross revenues of a grantee, as defined in this article, for the time elapsed since the last period for which a grantee has paid to the county the required percentage of gross revenues, and the grantee shall pay the county not later than 30 days following the termination of the franchise, a like percentage of these revenues and any other sums legally due and owing to the county. 
(c)  If any payment is not made on or before the applicable date fixed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, a penalty of ten percent of the amount due is assessed and the total sum due shall bear interest from this date at the annual rate of eight percent. 
(d)  The county shall have the right to inspect a grantee's records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and shall have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under the franchise. No acceptance of any payment by the county shall be construed as a release of or an accord or satisfaction of any claim the county might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this article or for any other performance or obligation of a grantee under this article. 
(e)  Payments made by a grantee to the county pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be considered a business and occupation tax but shall be in addition to any and all other taxes or fees which are now or hereafter required to be paid by any law of the United States, the state, or the county, other than county business and occupation taxes. 
(f)  Only in the case of an initial franchise, a grantee shall maintain throughout the term of the franchise a faithful performance bond running in favor of the county, written by a state-approved corporate insurance surety, in surety, in a sum no less than the highest monthly franchise payment by the grantee to the county in the preceding calendar year plus ten percent thereof. Such bond shall be based initially on a reasonable estimate by the county of the highest monthly franchise payment for the initial year of operation. The amount thereof for all damages resulting from the failure of the grantee to make any payment of all fees or amounts required in this article to be paid to the county. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3005) 
Sec. 90-36. - Insurance. 
(a)  At all times during the term of the franchise, the grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the county certificates of insurance for the following: 
(1)  A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees, from any and all claims by any person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or persons occasioned by the operations of a grantee under a franchise granted under this article or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $500,000.00 per personal injury or death of any one person and $500,000.00 for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(2)  Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees from and against all claims by any person for property damage occasioned by the operation of grantee under the franchise granted under this article or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability of $250,000.00 for property damage to two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(3)  Two hundred fifty thousand dollars for all other types of liability. This insurance shall be kept in full force and effect by the grantee until the legal termination of this agreement including any time required to complete any required removal of poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the CATV system as defined in the franchise. 
(b)  All of the insurance contracts required in this section shall be in a form satisfactory to the board, and shall be issued and maintained by companies authorized to do business in the state, and they shall require 30 days' written notice of any cancellation to both the county and a grantee under this article, and certificate evidencing such insurance shall be filed with the board. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3006) 
Sec. 90-37. - Indemnity. 
A grantee shall at its sole cost and expense fully indemnify, defend and save harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions and employees against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damage arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of grantee's CATV system authorized under this article. The county shall give the grantee immediate written notice of any such claims, suits or actions and the grantee shall, at its option, have the right at its expense to assume the defense, including settlement, on behalf of the county or other aforementioned parties with regard to such claims, suits or actions. 
(1)  Damages or penalties shall include but shall not be limited to damages arising out of copyright infringement and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV system authorized under this article, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise. 
(2)  If the grantee does not assume the defense of the county, a grantee shall pay all expenses incurred by the county in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned in subsection (1) of this section. These expenses shall include but not be limited to all out of pocket expenses such as reasonable attorney fees and all other costs of litigation. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3007) 
Sec. 90-38. - Bonds and records of grantee. 
(a)  A grantee shall, upon request, file with the county chairperson a copy, true and accurate, of maps and/or plats of all existing and proposed installations upon the streets. These maps and plats shall conform to the requirements of the county chairperson and shall be kept continuously up to date. 
(b)  A grantee shall continually keep on file with the county a current list of its shareholders, holding over three percent of the outstanding stock, and officers with their current addresses. 
(c)  All books and records of a grantee concerning its operations with the county shall be made available for inspection and audit during normal business hours by the county chairperson or his designee within 30 days after any request for this inspection or audit shall be made. 
(d)  Copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions established by a grantee for the operation of a CATV system under the franchise shall be filed with the county, upon request, and at the local office of a grantee. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3008) 
Sec. 90-39. - Rates. 
The county may regulate rates for basic cable service to the extent permitted by and consistent with applicable federal law. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3009) 
Sec. 90-40. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)  All transmissions and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a grantee within the county shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of the streets. The CATV system shall be constructed and operated in compliance with all adopted county and national construction and electrical codes and shall be kept current with new codes. 
(b)  Except when absolutely necessary to service a subscriber, and then only when expressly permitted in writing by the county chairperson under such conditions as he shall prescribe for the public welfare, a grantee shall not erect or authorize or permit others to erect any poles or facilities within the streets of the county for the conduct of its CATV system but shall use the existing poles and other equipment of the appropriate electrical power and telephone and other utility companies under such terms and agreements as a grantee negotiates with these companies. The county shall cooperate with a grantee in negotiating and obtaining permission to use these facilities. 
(c)  No poles, cables, equipment or wires for the construction, maintenance and operation of the CATV system shall be installed or the installation thereof commenced on any existing pole within the county until the proposed location, specifications and manner of installation of these poles, cables, equipment and wires shall have been set forth upon a plat or map showing the existing poles, streets, alleys or highways within the county where these installations are proposed and submitted in writing by a grantee to the county chairperson and approved thereby in writing. 
(d)  Should a grantee be required in the conduct of its business to locate property within the streets of the county other than property which may be attached to utility poles, then in that event, before a grantee shall install or shall permit any other person to install for grantee any of this property in the street, the nature of this property shall be disclosed to the county chairperson for his approval as to the need thereof and as to the location within the street and only installed under such conditions as the chairperson shall prescribe concerning this location or installation. 
(e)  Whenever the county or state shall require the relocation or reinstallation of any property of a grantee in any of the streets of the county, it shall be the obligation of a grantee upon notice of this requirement to immediately remove and relocate or reinstall any property as may be reasonably necessary to meet the requirements of the county or state. This relocation, removal or reinstallation by a grantee shall be at the sole cost of a grantee. 
(f)  Whenever in any place within the county all the electric and telephone utilities shall be located underground, it shall be the obligation of a grantee to locate or to cause its property to be located underground in any place within the county after a grantee shall have previously installed its property, nevertheless, a grantee shall at the same time or immediately thereafter remove and relocate its property also underground in these places. Facilities of a grantee placed underground at the property owner's request in an area where electric utilities are aerial shall be installed with the additional expense paid by the property owner. 
(g)  The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging the streets of the county so as to prevent the branches of these trees from coming in contact with a grantee's wires and cables. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the county and at the expense of a grantee. 
(h)  In case of disturbance of any street caused by a grantee, a grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the county chairperson, replace and restore this street in as good a condition as before the work involving this disturbance was done. Provided that where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut, a grantee shall replace the full width of the existing walk and length of the section or sections cut, a section being determined as the area marked by expansion joints or scoring. 
(i)  A grantee shall maintain, repair and keep in good condition for a period of one year following this disturbance all portions of a sidewalk or street disturbed by it or its agents provided the maintenance and repairs shall be made necessary because of defective workmanship or materials supplied by grantee. 
(j)  A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the state or county, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of the building. The expense of this temporary removal or raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting it and a grantee shall have the authority to require this payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for these temporary wire changes. If there is a disagreement between a grantee and a holder of a permit, this disagreement will be resolved by the county chairperson. 
(k)  If at any time in case of fire or disaster in the county it shall become necessary in the judgment of the county chairperson or the fire chief to cut or move any of the wire cables, amplifiers, appliances or other fixtures of a grantee, this may be done and the repairs hereby rendered necessary shall be made by a grantee, at its own cost and expense and without charge against the county. 
(l)  A grantee's work, while in progress, shall be properly executed at all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices as are reasonably required to protect all members of the public having occasion to use the portion of the streets involved, or adjacent property. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3010) 
Sec. 90-41. - Initial system installation schedule. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the acceptance of the franchise, a grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems or their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
(b)  The grantee shall, within one year from the date a franchise is granted governing cable television operations in and for the area of the county designated by the county, extend energized trunk cable to 20 percent of its designated area and shall extend energized trunk cable to the remaining portions of its designated area within four years thereafter unless additional time is granted by the board upon request by grantee for good cause shown which shall mean not less than service along all county paved roads within the franchise area that meet the required homes per mile standard set forth in section 90-42. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3011) 
Sec. 90-42. - System extension to new subscribers. 
(a)  A grantee, whenever it shall receive a request for service from at least five subscribers within 1,200 feet of its system, shall extend this system to this subscriber at no cost to the subscriber for system extension other than the usual connect fees for all subscribers. The 1,200 feet shall be measured in extension length of grantee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall not include length of necessary service drop to the subscriber's home or premises. Provided, however, that should any subscriber require more than 200 feet of "drop" cable to be extended from the public way or easement to the subscriber's receiver, the grantee may charge the subscriber the actual cost of this extension over 200 feet. 
(b)  In addition, the board may upon complaint from any potential subscriber residing in the county order the extension of the system to this subscriber after opportunity for hearing and notice to a grantee. The board in its discretion may order this extension to any subscriber only upon reasonable contribution from the subscriber to the cost of the extension. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3012) 
Sec. 90-43. - Type and capacity of equipment to be installed. 
The applicant shall specify in its proposal the type and capacity of the equipment to be installed and a grantee shall be required to update this section of its proposal in keeping with the generally accepted standards of the industry. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3013) 
Sec. 90-44. - Operation standards. 
(a)  The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with generally accepted standards of the industry to the end that the subscriber may receive the highest and most desirable form of service. 
(b)  In determining satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this section, the following, among other things, shall be considered: 
(1)  That the CATV system is installed and remains capable of using all band equipment and of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum and that it shall have the further capability of converting UHF for distribution to subscribers on the VHF band; 
(2)  That the CATV system as installed is capable of transmitting and passing an entire color television signal without the introduction of material degradation of color fidelity and intelligence; 
(3)  That the CATV system is designed and capable of 24 hours a day continuous operation; 
(4)  That the CATV system is capable of and will produce a picture upon any subscriber's television screen in black and white or color (provided the subscriber's television set is capable of producing a color picture) that is undistorted and free from ghost images and accompanied by proper sound assuming the technical, standard production television set is in good repair and that the television broadcast signal transmission and its path are satisfactory. In any event, the picture produced shall be as good as the state of the art allows; 
(5)  That the CATV system shall transmit or distribute signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures and good sound in all television receivers of all subscribers without causing cross modulation in the cables or interference with other electrical or electronic systems; 
(6)  That the CATV system as installed shall have at least a 60-channel capacity; 
(7)  That a grantee shall provide without charge one outlet connected by a standard installation to each public office building, fire station, police station and public school that is passed by its cable upon specific request in each instance. If more than one outlet is requested at any of the locations or if the installation is a nonstandard installation, a grantee shall install at the cost of time and material only; and in no event will there be a monthly service charge at the locations for basic cable service; 
(8)  That a grantee shall provide at least one free dedicated noncommercial public access channel to be available on a nondiscriminatory basis; 
(9)  That a grantee shall provide all other free educational and governmental access channels when and as required by the Federal Communications Commission; and 
(10)  That the cable television system shall be installed with the capacity for two-way communication in accordance with the regulations of the FCC now in effect or which may be promulgated. 
(c)  A grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. These interruptions insofar as possible shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3014) 
Sec. 90-45. - Supervision by the county. 
(a)  A grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the CATV system subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the county who have jurisdiction in these matters and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances and departmental rules and regulations. 
(b)  The CATV system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the county. 
(c)  The county chairperson may from time to time issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the CATV system as are consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  If at any time the powers of the board or any agency or official of the county are transferred by law to any other board, authority, agency or official, the transferee shall have the powers, rights and duties previously vested under this article or by law in the board or any agency or official of the county. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3015) 
Sec. 90-46. - Grantee's duty to remove its properties from the public streets. 
(a)  Following a grantee's commencement of service through and over its CATV system, a grantee shall promptly remove from the public streets where its properties are located all or any part of the facilities so located when one or more of the following enumerated conditions occur: 
(1)  A grantee ceases to operate the CATV system for a continuous period of six months from the date of the occurrence; 
(2)  A grantee fails to construct the system as provided in this article; 
(3)  The franchise is terminated, not renewed or revoked pursuant to notice as provided in this article; and 
(4)  Any public improvement and/or at the request of the county for removal or relocation. 
(b)  A grantee shall be entitled to receive notice in writing from the county setting forth one or more of the occurrences enumerated in this article or any other occurrence provided for in this article and shall have a reasonable period from the date upon which the notice is received to remove these properties as required in this article. 
(c)  The board may, upon written application therefor by the grantee, approve the abandonment of any facilities referred to in subsection (a) of this section in place by grantee and under any terms and conditions as may be agreed to by the grantee and the board. Upon abandonment of these facilities in place, the grantee shall cause to be executed, acknowledged and delivered to the county such instruments as the county attorney shall prescribe and approve transferring and conveying the ownership of this property to the county. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3016) 
Sec. 90-47. - Operational reports. 
(a)  Within six months from the acceptance date of the franchise, a grantee shall submit to the county chairperson an installation plan for the initial construction area of the county indicating the date on which a grantee expects the installation of the CATV system to be completed and available for service to subscribers in that area of the county. 
(b)  A grantee shall furnish the county chairperson with progress reports indicating in detail the area of construction of the CATV system. These periodic reports shall be furnished at three-month intervals, the first report to be made three months after the new construction commencement date. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3017) 
Sec. 90-48. - Cablecasting. 
The grantee shall make available public, educational and governmental access to the cable system as required in this article and/or by the Federal Communications Commission. Time shall be provided on a first come, first served basis except that a grantee shall endeavor to grant channel time to as many different persons as is practical, it being the intention of the board that this access cablecasting serve as a significant source of diversified expression. In order that there is a maximum opportunity for freedom of expression by members of the public, this programming shall be free from any control by a grantee as to program content, except as is required to protect a grantee from liability under applicable law or regulations. It is the intent of the county that its cablecasting and access requirements at all times remain consistent with the requirements of the Federal Communications Commission and the FCC rules to the extent they are applicable, are incorporated in this article by reference and shall expressly supersede any inconsistent provisions in this article. The grantee shall also make available, without charge, to the board upon the request of the board the equipment and qualified persons necessary to transmit live election results via character generator on an access channel of the grantee's system. The request for such service shall be consistent with FCC requirements and will be conducted in a manner so as not to unduly interfere with the cable television operations of the grantee. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3018) 
Sec. 90-49. - Removal of facilities upon request. 
Upon termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of the subscriber upon his written request. This removal shall be at no cost to the subscriber. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3019) 
Sec. 90-50. - Emergency use of the facilities. 
In the event of an emergency or disaster, a grantee shall upon request of the county chairperson make available its facilities to the county at no cost for emergency use during the period of this emergency or disaster and shall provide such personnel as necessary to properly operate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3020) 
Sec. 90-51. - Compliance with state and federal laws. 
(a)  A grantee shall at all times comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal governments, of any administrative agency thereof, and if any state or federal law or regulations shall require a grantee to perform any service or shall prohibit a grantee from performing any service or shall permit a grantee to perform any service in conflict with the terms of the franchise or of any law or regulation of the county, then the superior law or regulation shall govern. 
(b)  A grantee shall be subject to all county ordinances and grantee shall also be subject to all applicable rules and regulations which, from time to time, may be promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission for CATV systems. 
(c)  If the board determines that a material provision of this article is affected by subsequent legal action, the board shall have the right to modify any of the provisions in this article to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this article. These modifications shall only be adopted following the notice to the grantee and a full public proceeding affording due process. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3021) 
Sec. 90-52. - Restrictions against assignment. 
(a)  The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred either in whole or in part or leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person either by the act of a grantee or by operation of law without the consent of the board. The granting, giving or waiving of any one or more of these consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent or consents. 
(b)  The consent or approval of the board to any assignment, lease, transfer, sublease or mortgage of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the county in and to the streets. 
(c)  Prior approval of the county shall be required where ownership or control of more than 50 percent of the right of control or stock interest of grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert. By its acceptance of the franchise, a grantee specifically agrees that his acquisition occurring without prior approval of the board shall constitute a violation of this article by a grantee. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or pledge of the CATV system equipment or any party thereof or a leasing by a grantee from another person of the CATV system equipment or part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise. 
(e)  Upon receipt from the grantee of a written request for approval of any transaction subject to this section, the county shall have 120 days within which to approve or disapprove such transaction and, if no such action is taken within such 120-day period, the transaction shall be deemed approved by the county. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3022; Ord. No. 0-2002-08, § 1, 3-26-2002) 
Sec. 90-53. - Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. 
A grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or any other respect, make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person or subject any person to any undue prejudice or disadvantage; provided, however, connection and service charges may be waived or modified during promotional campaigns of the grantee. Nothing in this section shall prevent grantee from taking reasonable business actions in light of a particular person's credit record or other similar circumstance. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3023) 
Sec. 90-54. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to all of the rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the county, the county reserves as an additional and a separate and distinct power the right to terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee under this article for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A grantee shall by act or omission substantially violate any material term or condition of this article and, within 30 days following written demand by the county shall fail to effect compliance. 
(2)  A grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under the franchise with the county or subscribers or potential subscribers. 
(b)  A grantee shall not be declared in default or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this article in any case in which performance of this provision is prevented for reasons beyond its control. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3024) 
Sec. 90-55. - Procedures. 
(a)  Any inquiry, proceeding, investigation or other action to be taken or proposed to be taken by the board in regard to the operations of grantee's cable television system other than as provided in subsection (c) of this section shall be taken only after 30 days' public notice of this action or proposed action is published in a local daily or weekly newspaper having general circulation in this county; a copy of this action or proposed action is served directly on grantee; and the grantee has been given an opportunity to respond in writing and/or at hearing as may be specified by the board, and general members of the public have been given an opportunity to respond or comment in writing on the action or proposed action. 
(b)  The public notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response and the person or persons in authority to whom this response shall be addressed, and any other procedures as may be specified by the board. If a hearing is to be held, the public notice shall give the date and time of this hearing, whether public participation will be allowed and the procedures by which this participation will be allowed and the procedures by which this participation may be obtained. The grantee is a necessary party to any hearing conducted in regard to its operations. 
(c)  An informal complaint shall be submitted to the county chairperson or a designee thereof in writing and shall contain: the name and address of the complainant, the name of the cable system against which the complaint is made, and a complete statement of facts upon which the complaint is based. 
(1)  Upon receipt of any informal complaint, the county chairperson shall forward a copy to the system complained of or may take the question up by correspondence with the system. Within that time as may be prescribed by the chairperson, the system will be called upon to satisfy the complaint or advise the chairperson of its refusal or inability to do so. If the system satisfies the complaint, it shall so notify the chairperson in accordance with the provisions of subsection (2) of this section. The chairperson will forward a copy of the system's notice of satisfaction to the complainant. If the system refuses or is unable to satisfy the complaint, it shall so notify the chairperson, and the chairperson will forward a copy of this notice to the complainant, with a statement of the procedure to be followed to further prosecute the complaint. 
(2)  If a system satisfies any complaint brought to its attention by the chairperson, a statement must be filed with the chairperson setting forth when and how the complainant has been satisfied. 
(3)  When a complaint has not been satisfied, pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, the complainant may file a formal complaint with the board in the form and manner to be specified thereby. The complaint to the board must be filed within six months from the date of the chairperson's statement accompanying a copy of the system's notice of refusal or inability to satisfy the complaint, and the complaint to the board must make reference to the date of the complaint filed with the chairperson and that it is based on the same facts as the complaint filed with the chairperson. If no complaint is filed with the board within the six-month period, the complainant will be deemed to have abandoned his complaint, and this complaint will be deemed dismissed. 
(d)  All inquiries, proceedings, investigations or other actions to be taken or proposed to be taken by the board in regard to the operation of the grantee's cable television system shall take place in a timely manner. In no case shall the initiation of these actions be delayed more than 30 days from the date of a request by the grantee for the action or from the date the board formally decides that the inquiry, proceeding or investigation is to be initiated. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3025) 
Sec. 90-56. - Grantee to have no recourse. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided in the franchise, a grantee under this article shall have no recourse whatsoever against the county for any loss, cost or expenses or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the county to grant all or any part of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting a franchise, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the county to grant the franchise. 
(c)  A grantee by acceptance of the franchise acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the county or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed in this article. 
(d)  A grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of these terms and conditions. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3026) 
Sec. 90-57. - Failure of county to enforce the franchise; no waiver of the terms thereof. 
A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise by any failure of the county upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any terms or conditions. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3027) 
Sec. 90-58. - Time of the essence. 
Whenever the franchise shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of a grantee, this time shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of a grantee to perform within time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the county to revoke the franchise. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3028) 
Sec. 90-59. - Grantee will not contest validity of franchise. 
A grantee agrees by the acceptance of the franchise that it will not at any time set up against the county in any claim or proceeding any condition or term of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void or that the county had no power or authority to make this term or condition, but shall be required to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their entirety. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not bar any claim or proceeding challenging the continued validity of any terms and conditions of the franchise based on applicable laws, rules or regulations adopted by the county, state or federal authorities subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3029) 
Sec. 90-60. - Rights reserved to the county. 
Without limitation upon the rights which the county might otherwise have, the county does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers and authority: 
(1)  To exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the full extent that these powers may be vested in or granted to the county; 
(2)  To determine through the board any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other factors of the franchise; and 
(3)  To grant additional franchises with the county to other persons for the conduct of CATV under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3030) 
Sec. 90-61. - Employment regulations. 
A grantee shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of age, sex, race, creed, color or national origin. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3031) 
Sec. 90-62. - Headend construction. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, a grantee must agree to commence construction of the headend equipment within six months from the date of the grant by the board of the right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the county, and which headend shall be completed within 18 months from the date of the grant of the right, privilege and franchise, as provided in this article. 
(Code 1978, § 7-3032) 
Chapter 94 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Courts, ch. 30; junk vehicles, § 42-31 et seq.; parking of motor vehicles in shopping center parking lots, § 42-76; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; traffic and parking requirements, § 130-17. 
State Law reference— County traffic regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; removal of junked motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; motor vehicles and traffic, O.C.G.A. title 40; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; speed restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-180 et seq.; general powers of local authorities as to traffic, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; local speed limits generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(10); abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
In cases where traffic upon the roads of the county may become blocked or congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, a sheriff's deputy may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person, who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be guilty of an ordinance violation, and shall upon conviction be subject to section 1-11. 
(Code 1978, § 8-1001; Ord. No. 2014-09, § 1, 8-12-2014) 
Sec. 94-2. - Vehicle cover required. 
No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this county unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the county. 
(Code 1978, § 8-1002) 
Sec. 94-3. - Traffic, speed, truck parking and other zones, signs and traffic control devices. 
(a)  Upon approval by resolution of the board of commissioners, the director of public services and engineering is authorized to designate and maintain by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices: 
(1)  Crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; 
(4)  Speed, parking, truck or other traffic control zones; 
(5)  Stop, yield, one-way and other directional devices; and 
(6)  Any other sign, marking, device or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the roads and streets of the county. 
(b)  All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this section for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the county. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic control devices of the county. 
(c)  No person shall be charged with violating a traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device unless appropriate signs, markings or devices are in fact operating or in existence on the streets involved. 
(d)  Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this section shall be a misdemeanor triable in the county probate court as a violation of state traffic laws. 
(e)  All traffic zones, markings, signs or other traffic control devices authorized prior to the adoption of this section shall continue in effect unless amended or changed as provided in this section. 
(Code 1978, § 8-1003; Ord. No. 0-1998-2, § 1, 1-13-1998) 
State Law reference— Magistrate court jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; authority to post traffic control devices, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50; obedience to traffic control devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20. 
Sec. 94-4. - Mailbox support structures. 
It shall be unlawful to erect within or adjacent to the right-of-way of any public street in unincorporated areas of the county upon which the permanent posted speed limit, not including temporary restrictions for school hours and similar circumstances, exceeds 35 miles per hour any mailbox support structure except a single wooden post not exceeding four inches by four inches in size or a single metal pole not exceeding two inches in diameter. Existing mailbox support structures which do not meet the requirements of this section may continue to be utilized; but in the event of their removal or destruction by any means, they shall be replaced only by a conforming structure. 
(Ord. No. 1998-15, § 1, 6-23-1998) 
Sec. 94-5. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
Whenever a sheriff's deputy finds a vehicle or a large assemblage of vehicles stopped, standing or parked upon any alley, road, street, highway or right-of-way that creates an immediate public safety hazard or would prevent public safety vehicles, which shall include, but not limited to, law enforcement, fire and EMS vehicles, from traveling on or otherwise using such alley, road, street, highway or right-of-way, the sheriff's deputy is hereby authorized: 
(a)  To require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the vehicle to a position off of the alley, road, street, highway or right-of-way; or 
(b)  To provide for the removal of the vehicle to the nearest vehicle impound or other place of safety if the owner or other person in charge of the vehicle is unable or refuses to immediately move the vehicle to a position off of the alley, road, street, highway or right-of-way; or 
(c)  When acting in accordance with the provisions of this subsection, a sheriff's deputy shall not be required to demonstrate that the area was properly marked with no parking signage. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09, § 2, 8-12-2014) 
Secs. 94-6—94-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED 

Sec. 94-31. - Speed limits. 
(a)  The speed limits for on system roadways are set out in the table for on system roadways in this section and proper signage shall be erected by the state department of transportation indicating such speed limits. 
(b)  The speed limits for off system roadways are set out in the table for off system roadways in this section and proper signage shall be erected by the county indicating such speed limits. 
(c)  The following speed zones are hereby established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law: 
LIST OF ROADWAYS  FOR  ROCKDALE COUNTY 
ON SYSTEM 

 
***SCHOOL ZONE HOURS ARE EFFECTIVE*** 
A.M. — From 30 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time — SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 
P.M. — From 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time — SCHOOL DAYS ONLY 
OFF-SYSTEM 

 
*** SCHOOL ZONE HOURS ARE EFFECTIVE *** 
A.M. — From 30 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time — SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
P.M. — From 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time — SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
(Ord. No. 0-2001-24, § 1, 9-11-2001; Ord. No. 2010-02, § I, 3-23-2010; Ord. No. 0-2011-05, § 1, 2-22-2011; Ord. No. O-2016-08, §§ 2, 3, 8-9-2016) 
Secs. 94-32—94-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRUCKS 

Sec. 94-61. - Certain trucks restricted to truck routes. 
All motor vehicles having a gross weight in excess of 36,000 pounds, including the load thereon, or having an overall length in excess of 30 feet, except vehicles designed to carry passengers, are prohibited from using any street within the unincorporated portions of the county except those authorized by this article and designated as truck routes except when the terminal, parking lot or repair garage or headquarters of the restricted motor vehicle is not on a designated truck route; ingress to and egress from those places shall be made by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters and nearest designated truck route. 
(Code 1978, § 8-2001) 
Sec. 94-62. - Certain trucks prohibited. 
No vehicle shall be operated on any public road maintained by the county with a total gross weight, in excess of 56,000 pounds unless the vehicle is making a pickup and delivery on that road. Provided, however, the maximum gross weight shall not exceed 73,280 pounds. 
(Code 1978, § 8-2002) 
Sec. 94-63. - Tire and weight restrictions. 
No wheel on any vehicle operated upon any public road maintained by the county, equipped with high pressure, pneumatic solid rubber or cushion tires shall carry a load which exceeds 8,000 pounds by more than 13 percent, or an axle load which exceeds 16,000 pounds by more than 13 percent; no wheel equipped with low pressure pneumatic tires shall carry a load which exceeds 9,000 pounds by more than 13 percent, or any axle load which exceeds 18,000 pounds by more than 13 percent. An axle load shall be defined as the total load on all wheels the centers of which may be included between two parallel transverse vertical planes 40 inches apart. If the driver of any vehicle can comply with the requirements of this section by shifting or equalizing the load on all wheels or axles and does so when requested by the proper authority, that driver shall not be held to be operating in violation of this section. 
(Code 1978, § 8-2003) 
Sec. 94-64. - Inspection authorized. 
Any person driving or in charge or control of any of the restricted vehicles defined in section 94-63, when upon streets other than those designated as truck routes, shall be prepared to present for the inspection of police officers his log book, weight slips, delivery slips or other written evidence of his destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a street other than a designated truck route. 
(Code 1978, § 8-2004) 
Sec. 94-65. - Temporary truck routes. 
If any designated truck route, or portion thereof, shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, restricted vehicles as defined in this article shall use other temporary truck routes as may be designated by the county. 
(Code 1978, § 8-2005) 
Sec. 94-66. - Truck routes; posting. 
Only state road system highways, including all federal highways, are hereby designated as truck routes for purposes of section 94-61. These routes may be so posted by the county and other county roads may be posted by the county to give special notice that trucks are hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1978, § 8-2006) 
Sec. 94-67. - Parking prohibited. 
No commercial vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross combination weight over 14,000 pounds shall be parked on any public road maintained in the county that has a right-of-way width of less than 70 feet (such roads are commonly referred to as rural local roads, urban local streets or subdivision streets) if the immediately adjacent property is zoned to any residential district as defined in chapter 106 of the UDO. This section shall not apply to regulated commercial vehicles or trailers that are loading, unloading or temporarily servicing adjacent premises. 
(Code 1978, § 8-2007; Ord. No. 0-2006-32, § 12, 11-28-2006) 
Chapter 98 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, adopted Mar. 27, 2007, repealed Ch. 98 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 98 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 98 pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete history of former Ch. 98 see the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 22; environment, ch. 42; health and sanitation, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; telecommunications, ch. 90; floods, ch. 106. 
State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; waste management, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-1 et seq.; regulations of county board of health governing septic tanks, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; codes relating to construction, livability, sanitation, equipment, occupancy, etc. of buildings, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-1 et seq.; contracts to provide industrial wastewater treatment services, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-2. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL STANDARDS AND DEFINITIONS FOR WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 1. - ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICES 

Sec. 98-1. - Scope. 
(a)  Chapter 98 is intended to regulate water and wastewater use within Rockdale County, as well as the Rockdale County Water System and the Rockdale County Wastewater System, wherever located. These regulations shall be in addition to those contained elsewhere in the Code. Article I sets forth general standards (division 1) and definitions (division 2) applicable to the Rockdale County Water System and Wastewater System. Additional regulations primarily governing the water system are set forth in article II. Additional regulations primarily governing the wastewater system are set forth in article III. Notwithstanding this organization by articles, all sections of this chapter shall apply to both the water system and the wastewater system to the extent set forth in or implied by each section, including but not limited to the enforcement and penalties provisions of division 8 of article 3. The director shall administer and enforce this chapter except where otherwise provided. 
(b)  Rockdale County operates and maintains the water system and wastewater system which serve customers within and without the geographic boundaries of the county. The county shall have the authority to fix and determine rates, charges and fees required for the provision, consumption, operation, maintenance, extension and expansion of its water and wastewater systems. The county, in the exercise of its governmental responsibility to provide for the health, safety and welfare of all consumers of its utility services as well as the public at large, has the authority and responsibility to enact and to periodically amend this ordinance and its policies and procedures to ensure compliance in operation and practice of the water and wastewater systems with all applicable state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007; Ord. No. 2007-29, § 1, 12-20-2007) 
Sec. 98-2. - Establishment of water and wastewater service. 
(a)  The process for establishing water and wastewater service shall be as described in sections 98-34 and 98-91 respectively. 
(b)  Incidental costs and indemnification. All costs and expenses incidental to a water or wastewater connection shall be the responsibility of, and paid by, the property owner(s). The property owner(s) shall indemnify the county against any loss or damage to county water or wastewater facilities that are directly or indirectly caused by the connection. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-29, § 6, adopted Dec. 20, 2007, deleted § 98-3 in its entirety. Former § 98-3 pertained to water and wastewater service deposit and derived from Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, adopted Mar. 27, 2007. 
Sec. 98-4. - Inspection and emergencies. 
The director, and the sheriff's department, shall have the right at all reasonable hours to enter upon any premises where county water and/or wastewater is connected for the purpose of inspecting the pipes and fixtures, setting and repairing meters, turning water on or off, examining the sanitary conditions incident to the use of the water or wastewater, and enforcing this chapter generally. The director may stop the supply of water in case of emergency, and shut off for repairs or extensions, the director being the sole judge of the time and necessity therefor, reasonable notice being given when practicable. These provisions shall be in addition to all other inspection, enforcement and penalty provisions provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-5. - Water or wastewater connections—Generally. 
(a)  No person shall connect to any water or wastewater line maintained, leased or owned by the county without written authorization from the county in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Upon the application for new water or wastewater service connections, the applicant shall pay to the county all required fees as fixed from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-6. - Water and wastewater fees required for building permit. 
Any applicant for a building permit must first pay all applicable water and wastewater connection fees and obtain all applicable water and wastewater permits before a building permit may be issued. See also section 98-89 for additional wastewater restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-29, § 6, adopted Dec. 20, 2007, deleted § 98-7 in its entirety. Former § 98-7 pertained to water and wastewater billing and rates—generally and derived from Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, adopted Mar. 27, 2007. 
Sec. 98-8. - Expansion, design, construction and acceptance of water and wastewater connections and facilities. 
(a)  Property owner(s) or developer(s) of existing or proposed private structure(s), land disturbance or other development ("development") may apply for connection to or expansion of the county wastewater system only if each of the following preliminary requirements are met: 
(1)  Wastewater system availability exists within the county's wastewater treatment plant system designated to receive new flow from the proposed project; 
(2)  No portion of the subject property is located within the areas designated to be served by septic systems only as set forth in the current Rockdale County Water and Wastewater Master Plan, and the request would not otherwise conflict with said plan; and 
(3)  All of the requirements of Article III - Wastewater System are met. 
(b)  Authorization, design and construction of all water and wastewater facilities shall be subject to each of the following conditions: 
(1)  Design and construction of all water and wastewater facilities shall conform to the latest edition of the Rockdale County Water and Wastewater Standards and Specifications, as adopted from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  No connection to, expansion, or improvement of the county water or wastewater conveyance systems by private persons shall be authorized or initiated without prior written approval from the director, which approval shall be consistent with all of the provisions of section 98-8. 
(3)  The owner or developer shall pay the entire cost of connection to the water and wastewater conveyance system. All materials, labor, and required land interest or easements for all water and wastewater facilities shall be furnished, acquired and paid for by the owner or developer. 
(4)  The owner or developer shall execute a dedication agreement in a form acceptable to the director before initiating any construction of water or wastewater facilities. The dedication agreement shall clearly specify the terms and conditions under which water and wastewater facilities are to become property of the county. 
(5)  The owner or developer shall pay all required connection, inspection and associated fees before connecting to water or wastewater facilities. 
(6)  Rockdale Water Resources shall review and approve all plans and inspect all work for conformance to the latest edition of the Rockdale County Water and Wastewater Standards and Specifications and perform a final inspection before acceptance. All required inspections must be passed. 
(7)  Installation of water and wastewater facilities shall be performed by a certified utility contractor licensed by the State of Georgia. 
(8)  Water and wastewater facilities to be dedicated to the county shall become the property of the county upon completion and final acceptance of such facilities. Final acceptance of such facilities shall be issued in writing only. 
(9)  The owner or developer shall furnish "as-built" records of all water and wastewater facilities constructed. Specifications for such records shall be as described in the latest edition of the Rockdale County Water and Wastewater Standards and Specifications. 
(10)  The owner or developer shall warrant all water and wastewater facilities constructed for a period of two years. A bond shall be provided in the amount described in the latest edition of the Rockdale County Water and Wastewater Standards and Specifications. The warranty period shall begin on the date of written final acceptance of the work. 
(c)  The county shall not accept any water or wastewater facilities, or issue a final plat for subdivision, or issue a certificate of occupancy for any new structure, unless the provisions of this section 98-8 have been satisfied, or waived upon good cause shown by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  The county may extend, connect to or modify any water line or wastewater line dedicated to the county without compensation to those responsible for original construction of the line. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007; Ord. No. 0-2008-04, § 1, 2-12-2008; Ord. No. 2017-07, § 1, 5-23-2017) 
Sec. 98-9. - Sizing and location of water and wastewater lines. 
(a)  It being the intent of the county to provide the best possible water and wastewater service to its customers, affording adequate pressure and supply, and to anticipate and meet future demands placed on the water and wastewater system, all lines constructed and installed by the county or other persons shall meet the following criteria: 
(1)  Water and wastewater lines to be dedicated to the county shall be installed along public thoroughfares and rights-of-way. The board of commissioners may approve an alternate location upon determination that a hardship (other than financial) would be created by this requirement. 
(2)  Water and wastewater lines installed on all existing or future thoroughfares or drainageways shall conform to the current Water and Wastewater System Master Plan on file in the office of the director. 
(3)  Water and wastewater lines to be installed in new developments shall be sized and constructed as follows: 
Residential/Office/Institutional: 
Eight-inch water lines on all subdivision through streets. Smaller lines may be authorized on permanent cul-de-sac streets on a case-by-case basis and at the sole discretion of the director. 
Eight-inch sewer lines and six-inch service lines on all streets unless design flow rate and/or slope requires a larger size. 
Commercial/Industrial: 
Twelve-inch water lines on all streets or rights-of-way. 
Eight-inch sewer lines and six-inch service lines on all streets unless design flow rate and/or slope requires a larger size. 
(b)  When, in the opinion of the director, the pipe size specified in this section that will connect a residential subdivision, development, or user to the water or wastewater system, is larger than would normally be required to serve the requirements of such subdivision, development, or user, the county may participate financially in the cost to increase the line size upon the adoption by the board of commissioners of a motion to that effect. Such participation shall be limited to paying the difference in the cost of material of the size necessary to serve the development and the larger diameter pipe. No other rebates or reimbursements shall be considered by the county. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-10. - Water and wastewater service lines; responsibility. 
(a)  All water or wastewater service lines running from the meter, or, in the case of wastewater, the street right-of-way, to the customer's property shall be the responsibility of the customer. 
(b)  The county owns and maintains water service lines from the main through the meter inclusive. The county owns and maintains wastewater service lines from the main or manhole to the street right-of-way. 
(c)  All water service lines shall have a suitable backflow preventer installed on the customer's side of the water meter. The customer shall own and maintain the backflow preventer. All wastewater service lines shall have a suitable sewer clean-out installed at the right-of-way limit or easement limit. The customer shall own and maintain the clean-out. 
(d)  Any installation of, or change to, the connection at the meter on the customer's side shall be the responsibility of the customer, provided all such work shall be performed under the supervision of the county. The county reserves the right to maintain and replace meters. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-11. - Contracts for water and wastewater service. 
The county and the board of commissioners shall be expressly authorized and empowered to contract for a period not exceeding 50 years with any public agency, public corporation, county, town or authority, and they with the county, for water, sewer or other activities and transactions as such subdivisions are by law authorized and any and all contracts concerning water and sewage heretofore so entered into by the county or the board of commissioners, are expressly ratified and approved. That contract may be extended for an additional period if changes in the law occur during the contract running period. This authorization shall be cumulative of all other powers authorized and delegated to the county, the board of commissioners and other governmental subdivisions, cities, towns and counties by other laws of whatever kind and nature and this enactment shall not limit or restrict such power or authority in any way. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the exercise of the powers and authority so authorized. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-12—98-19. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 98-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air gap means a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel. An "approved air gap" shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel—in no case less than one inch (2.54 cm). 
Approved backflow prevention assembly means an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association. 
Authorized flow means total wastewater discharge treatment capacity available to provide service within a wastewater treatment plant system as determined by EPD through NPDES permits issued to the WWTP(s) operating within said system. 
Authorized representative of nondomestic user means: (1) a president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions, or (2) the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures if the nondomestic user is a corporation; a general partner or proprietor if the nondomestic user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively; or a duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if (1) the authorization is made in writing by the individual designated above, or (2) the authorization specifies either an individual or position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facilities from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matter for the company; and the written authorization is submitted to the county. 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public water supply. These auxiliary water supplies may include water from another spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These natural waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control. 
Backflow means the undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases, or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable supply of water from any source or sources. 
Backflow preventer means an approved backflow prevention assembly as defined in this division. 
Biochemical oxygen demand means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Board of commissioners means the duly elected Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County, Georgia. 
Building drain means that part of the piping of a building which collects wastewater inside the walls of the building and conveys it to outside the building wall. 
Capital cost recovery charge and CCR means a charge assessed to new users of the wastewater or water systems based on a fair and reasonably proportionate share of the capital costs of said system attributable to user demands on said system. 
Chairperson means the chairperson of the board of commissioners. 
Commercial waste means nontoxic, non-hazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities. Fats, oil, grease, food scraps and other grease trap contents generated by a food service establishment or institutional food preparation facility. Any waste residue produced from vehicle washing that discharges to a sand trap or interceptor. 
Commercial waste generator means a commercial establishment that generates commercial waste. 
Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the water. 
County means Rockdale County, Georgia, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia or the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. 
Cross-connection means any unprotected connection or structural arrangement between a public or a customer's potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any contaminate. 
Customer means every person, firm or organization responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the county in obtaining, having or using wastewater connections to the county wastewater system and in obtaining, having or using water or other related services furnished by the county for the purpose of disposing of wastewater through such system. 
Department means Rockdale Water Resources, which operates the Rockdale County Water System and the Rockdale Wastewater System. 
Direct discharge means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to the waters of the state. 
Director means the director of Rockdale Water Resources or that person's designee. 
Domestic user means any user of the county wastewater system who discharges wastewater into the wastewater system from a residential unit. 
Domestic wastewater means that wastewater discharged into the wastewater system from domestic sources such as toilets, washing machines, dishwashers, sinks, showers and bathtubs from normal household usage. 
Drainage basin means an area defined by topography within which any water that falls is tributary to the specified watercourse as shown on an official map identifying the drainage basins existing within the county promulgated and maintained by the county. 
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly means an assembly composed of two independently acting, check valves, including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard (i.e. pollutant). 
Degree of hazard means a term for evaluating the potential risk to public health based on available information and categorization of potential sources of pollution or contamination and the adverse effect of the contamination or pollution upon the potable water system. 
Environmental Protection Agency and EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Environmental protection division and EPD means said division within the State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Existing flow means actual wastewater treatment plant flow as reported to EPD adjusted by the director to account for extreme weather events and previously approved wastewater allocations. 
Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG) means material recovered as a substance soluble in a solvent using an EPA approved method for analysis for oil and grease from animal, vegetable, and hydrocarbons of petroleum origin. 
Federal categorical pretreatment standard and Federal pretreatment standard means any regulation containing discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with pretreatment standards cited in the Clean Water Act. 
Floatable oil and grease means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by flotation from wastewater. 
Food service establishment means establishments for the preparation or serving of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products. The term includes but is not limited to restaurants; coffee shops; cafeterias; short order cafes; luncheonettes; taverns; lunch rooms; places manufacturing, wholesaling, or retailing sandwiches, salads or other fast foods; soda fountains; institutions, both public and private; food carts; itinerant restaurants; industrial cafeterias; catering establishments; food vending machines and vehicles and operations connected therewith; and similar facilities by whatever name called. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
Grease trap or interceptor means a structure or device designed and installed to separate and remove food wastes and grease from the waste stream while allowing the balance of the liquid waste to discharge to the wastewater collection system by gravity. 
Grit means matter consisting of sand, gravel, cinders, or other heavy solid materials that has settling velocities or specific gravities greater than those of organic putrescible solids normally encountered in domestic wastewater. 
Hazardous waste means any waste exhibiting hazardous characteristics as defined in 40 CFR 261. 
Health department means the county department of health. 
Health hazard means any condition, device or practice affecting the water supply system and its operation which could create a danger to the health the public. 
High strength wastewater means wastewater which contains quantities of specified constituents which exceed the quantities normally encountered in domestic wastewater (see section 98-170). 
High strength wastewater surcharge means the charge made in excess of the normal wastewater service charge for all high strength wastewater (see subsection 98-170(a)). 
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks. 
Industrial fluids means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration which would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into a wastewater system or a water supply. This may include, but not limited to: polluted or contaminated used waters; all types of process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system which may deteriorate in sanitary quality; chemical in fluid form; plating acids and alkalis; circulated cooling water connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling waters that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation to canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used industrially, for other processes, or for fire fighting purposes. 
Infiltration means groundwater which leaks into the wastewater system through cracked pipes, joints, manholes or other openings. 
Inflow means water that flows into the wastewater system from the surface, streams, roof drains, downspouts or other such source. 
Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts a wastewater treatment plant its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal. 
National pollution discharge elimination system permit and NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1342). 
Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers, watercourses, ponds, ditches, lakes or other bodies of surface water or groundwater. 
New source means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under the Clean Water Act. 
Nondomestic user means any user of the county wastewater system who discharges wastewater into the wastewater system from a structure other than a residential unit. 
Nondomestic wastewater means the wastewater generated from nondomestic users as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits a wastewater treatment plant into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the wastewater treatment plant's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
Permitted flow means the wastewater flow authorized by the NPDES permit governing operations at a wastewater treatment plant. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, organization, company, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. 
Pit privy means a pit in the earth used for the disposal of human or animal wastes. 
Premises means any location where there is a water service connection or a wastewater service connection. 
Pretreatment and treatment means the reduction of pollutants the in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a nondomestic user. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooling and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a common sewer system or portion thereof controlled by a governmental agency or public utility, in this case the county. 
Reduced pressure zone backflow prevention assembly means an assembly containing two independently acting check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include properly located resilient seated test cocks and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a non-health (i.e. pollutant) or a health hazard (i.e. contaminant). This device shall be permitted to be installed where subject to continuous pressure conditions. 
Response plan means a comprehensive enforcement guide which designates alternative enforcement options for each type or pattern of noncompliance as developed by the county. 
Sand trap or interceptor means a structure or device designed primarily for the accumulation and removal of grit or sand. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
Sewer and sewage and wastewater and sanitary sewer mean the spent water of a community, and shall be interpreted to include the pipe or conduit or conveyance system that carries said spent water. 
Sewer service lateral means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called "house connection." 
Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) below, shall apply to: 
a.  Industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; 
b.  Any other industrial user that: 
1.  Discharges an average of 25,000 GPD or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
2.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment plant; or 
3.  Is designated as significant by the county on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater treatment plant's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(2)  Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (1)b above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the wastewater treatment plant's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the county may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
Standard industrial classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended. 
Storm drain and storm sewer means a conduit for conveying surface water, groundwater or subsurface water from any source. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
Surcharge means a separate charge by the county for the handling and treatment of high strength wastewater. 
System conveyance availability means that adequate physical conveyance capacity exist to transport existing and projected new flow to the wastewater treatment plant or convey water supply from the water treatment plant. 
Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
Used water means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a customer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor. 
Wastewater. See "sewer." 
Wastewater allocation and allocation means apportioning wastewater treatment capacity to a specified type and intensity of use at a specified location within a particular wastewater treatment plant system in accordance with the procedures of chapter 98 article III. 
Wastewater availability means that existing flow within a wastewater treatment plant system is less than 95.00 percent of authorized flow within said system, provided remaining system authorized flow is at least 50,000 GPD. 
Wastewater connection permit means a conditional permit issued by Rockdale Water Resources authorizing wastewater service for a specific wastewater allocation subject to its terms and conditions and stating that all associated fees and charges, including capital cost recovery charges, have been paid. 
Wastewater plant availability means that the individual treatment plant has not exceeded 95.00 percent of its available capacity to accept additional wastewater. 
Wastewater system and wastewater facilities mean the total wastewater disposal facilities owned and operated by the county, including all structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and nondomestic wastewater and to dispose of the effluent, as well as the administrative framework which operates those facilities. 
Wastewater system availability means that the total available flow capacity within the county's wastewater system has not exceeded 95.00 percent of its available capacity, based upon the calculation of system capacity remaining after average daily flow, pre-paid capacity requests which have not been connected to the system and inflow and infiltration allowances have been subtracted from total waste water system capacity. The county's wastewater system is composed of all county owned wastewater treatment plants within Rockdale County. 
Wastewater treatment plant system means that portion of the wastewater system that is connected to one or more wastewater treatment plants, including said plant(s). 
Water and wastewater system and county water and wastewater system means the total county water system and county wastewater system considered in the aggregate as a whole. 
Wastewater treatment plant or WWTP means a facility or plant which receives influent wastewater and treats it to a level acceptable to EPD to allow discharge of the effluent to a surface water. 
Water purveyor means a supplier of water, including the department, but also includes property owners supplying water for their own use. 
Water service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, (i.e., where the water purveyor may lose jurisdiction and sanitary control of the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system). If a water meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream end of the water meter. Water service connection shall also mean water service connections from fire hydrants and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
Water system and water facilities mean the total water treatment and distribution facilities owned and operated by the county, including all structures, equipment and processes, as well as the administrative framework which operates those facilities. 
Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water, either continuously or intermittently. 
Waters of the state means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes watercourses waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the State of Georgia or any portion. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 1, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 2017-08, §§ 1, 2, 5-23-2017) 
Sec. 98-21. - Abbreviations. 
When used in this chapter, the following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 

 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-22—98-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - STANDARDS FOR DELIVERY OF WATER SERVICES 

Sec. 98-33. - Separate water meters. 
(a)  Each separate house, duplex unit, office, garage apartment, or other structure, whether domestic or nondomestic, shall be served by a separate water meter unless otherwise specifically exempted by the board of commissioners or otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Shopping centers and similar developments serving multiple nondomestic tenants shall be served by a single master meter. 
(c)  Each residential unit in a multi-family development, including apartments, condominiums, townhomes, and mixed-use developments with a residential component, shall be furnished with a sub-unit meter in addition to the master meter for the development. Such sub-unit water meters shall be installed, owned and managed by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-34. - Water connection. 
(a)  Water service connection application. Water service shall not be established by the county to any property without proper application having first been made to the department on forms provided by the department. All applications shall be made by the owner, agent or occupant of the property to be served. No water service shall be established or connected until said application is reviewed and approved by the director consistent with all pertinent requirements of this chapter. All rates, connection fees and charges shall be paid as provided herein or otherwise established by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Fees. Applicants requesting connection to the county water system must first pay all applicable fees and charges associated with the application process. These include but are not limited to administrative water meter purchase/installation, field inspections, and capital cost recovery charges (CCR). A complete listing of applicable fees and charges may be found in the rate schedule maintained on file in the office of the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-35. - Water rates/independent water systems. 
(a)  The following regulations shall apply to independent water supply systems buying water from the county: 
(1)  Definition of water supply system. A supply system which has been certified and sanctioned by the State of Georgia pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.). 
(2)  Requests. Each request for water by such a water supply system shall be evaluated based on the anticipated user's needs and the county's ability to meet the needs of the user. 
(3)  Minimum and maximum use. If the county grants assistance to the requesting water supply system, the minimum established under this article shall be billed to the user whether or not that amount is actually used by the system. 
a.  Minimum. A minimum amount of water to be allowed the user shall be established by the county at the time the county decides to assist the user. 
b.  Maximum. The maximum number of gallons which may be supplied to the using system shall be three times the minimum usage. 
(4)  Rates. Using systems shall pay for the minimum use gallons established in this section, whether or not the water is actually used, at a rate of 100 percent of the current water rate. Usage of water over the minimum amount and up to the maximum amount allowed shall be charged at the same rate. 
(5)  Usages over the maximum. Usage of water in excess of the maximum amount established in this section shall not be allowed except by special request to the director and then only for a designated time period. If the special request for above the maximum usage is granted by the director, the rate of charge shall be that in effect at the time of the request. 
(6)  Ability. The county shall furnish water under this section subject to the discretion of the county based upon the water supply needs of county customers. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-36. - Billing and water disconnection. 
(a)  All water bills shall be due and payable by the date specified on the bill. Failure to pay the bill by the due date shall result in the imposition of such delinquent penalties as fixed from time to time by the county. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided in this article, the bill shall be delinquent and service may be disconnected by order of the director when the bill becomes more than 30 days delinquent, provided no service shall be disconnected prior to being given notice. 
(c)  Unless otherwise provided in this article, any customer whose water service has been cut off or disconnected by the county shall not have water service restored until all fees and charges due are paid in full and an additional fee for reconnection of service as fixed from time to time by the county is paid. Reconnections made after regular business hours and on weekends shall be made only upon customer's request and for the established after hours reconnect fees. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided in this article, the chairman of the board of commissioners or his designee shall be vested with the authority to determine any and all cases of hardship and waive any penalties stated in this article or chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-29, § 6, adopted Dec. 20, 2007, deleted § 98-37 in its entirety. Former § 98-37 pertained to damaging or tampering with water meter or water lines; discontinuing services and derived from Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, adopted Mar. 27, 2007. 
Sec. 98-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-29, § 6, adopted Dec. 20, 2007, deleted § 98-38 in its entirety. Former § 98-38 pertained to appeal of service disconnection; notice of contested charges; hardship cases; meter tests and derived from Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, adopted Mar. 27, 2007. 
Sec. 98-39. - Landlord's water liability. 
The county shall not hold responsible any owner or landlord for indebtedness of a prior owner, prior occupant, or prior lessee. The county shall hold responsible and seek reimbursement for unpaid charges only from the person who incurred the charges. The county shall not impose a lien against real property to secure unpaid charges for water furnished unless the owner of such real property is the person who incurred the charges. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-40. - Procedures during periods of water shortage and drought. 
(a)  In order to maintain adequate pressure and supply for customers of the water system, the director may implement demand management measures consistent with demand management measures implemented by either the State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, the Atlanta Regional Commission, the water system's water conservation plan, the water system's drought management plan, or the provisions of water supply contracts with third parties, individually or collectively. Subject to the foregoing, the director, upon determining adequate pressure and water supply cannot be maintained by the system, may implement demand management measures. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall be presented the demand management measures implemented by the director for consideration and upon ratification the measures shall become effective. The measures shall remain in effect until the conditions prompting implementation have diminished sufficiently to eliminate concern and/or the agencies, plans or contracts referenced in subsection (a) of this section authorize the discontinuance of such measures. The director shall be authorized to discontinue the demand management measures subject to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  The public shall be notified through the news media of the demand management measures as ratified by the county. Additional notification may be provided by mailing notices with monthly water bills or by posting notices at the office of the board of commissioners or on the county's official website or by other means determined by the director. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to engage in any activity that is prohibited by the demand management measures ratified by the board of commissioners. It shall be a violation of this section for any water customer to cause or permit any activity at the water customer's address for water service that is prohibited by such measures. It shall be the final responsibility of the water customer for the water service address of the customer to ensure that no activity is conducted at the address of the customer that is in violation of such measures. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, the term "outdoor water usage" shall be defined as lawn and garden watering, noncommercial washing of motor vehicles and the filling of swimming pools. 
(f)  Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and may be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00. However, for any first alleged violation of this section, a written warning will be given. Subsequent violations will result in the issuance of a citation. 
(g)  The director shall have the authority to terminate water service for a water service address upon two convictions under this section 98-40 related to that water service address. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-41—98-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 

Sec. 98-55. - Short title, authority and applicability. 
(a)  This division shall be known and may be cited as the Rockdale County Cross-Connection Control and Backflow Prevention Ordinance. 
(b)  Rockdale County has the authority to adopt this article pursuant to article 9, section 2, paragraph I and article 9, section 2, paragraph III of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Title 12, Chapter 5, Art. 3, Part 5 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, which is known as the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977 and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Rules for Safe Drinking Water, Ga. Comp. R. and Regs. Ch. 391-3-5 (the "Rules"), as amended. 
(c)  The following documents are adopted by reference as if set forth herein: the Rules; the Manual of Cross Connection Control, 9th ed., Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California, 1993; the Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross Connection Control, American Water Works Association Manual of Water Supply Practices, Manual 14, 2nd ed., 1990; the Georgia State Amendments to the Standard Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition; and the Cross Connection Control Manual, United States Environmental Protection Agency, June 1989. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-56. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the control of cross connections and backflow into the public potable water supply of Rockdale County. The public potable water supply will be protected from contamination or pollution by isolating within the customer's internal distribution system(s) or the customer's private water system(s) such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water systems. 
(b)  It is the policy of the county board of commissioners to promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between the customer's in-plant potable water system(s) and non-potable water system(s), plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems. 
(c)  It is the policy of the county board of commissioners to provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control, which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. 
(d)  The county board of commissioners hereby delegates to the Department of Rockdale Water Resources the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program, for prevention of backflow and for the enforcement of the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-57. - Reserved. 
Sec. 98-58. - Water system. 
This division shall apply to all water delivery facilities that provide potable water to the public for consumption. It is recognized that the county owns and/or operates and maintains some of these facilities and that the customer may own other of these facilities. The county's system shall consist of all those facilities of the water system used for production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water, (including the water meter), to the water service connection where the customer's system. The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the county's system that are used in conveying potable water delivered by the department to customers, (including any required backflow prevention devices used in conjunction therewith). 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-59. - Backflow prevention and cross connection control required. 
The department shall not allow, install or maintain any water service connection to the county's system to any premises unless the water supply is protected from potential backflow and cross connection as required by the laws of the State of Georgia, the Rules of the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, the State of Georgia Plumbing Code and this division. An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service line to a customer's system immediately downstream of the water meter or as close as physically feasible to the water meter. No backflow prevention assembly other than as specified in this section shall be allowed, installed or maintain without the express written approval of the director. If, in the judgment of the director, an approved backflow prevention assembly is required at either the customer's water service connection or within the customer's private water system for the safety of the county's system, the director shall give written notice said customer to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly(s) at a specific location(s) on his premises. The director's judgment shall be based on the rules and on all policies that the county may adopt to implement this division. 
Within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the director that installation of cross connection protection or backflow prevention assemblies is required, a customer shall install such approved protection or assemblies at the customer's sole expense. 
In all cases, a backflow prevention assembly shall be installed before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
(1)  In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the department, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
(2)  In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substance are handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the water purveyor's system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
(3)  In the case of premises having (1) internal cross connections that cannot be permanently corrected or protected against, or (2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line. 
(4)  In the case of any premises where there is pollution or polluted water that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double check valve backflow prevention assembly. 
(5)  In the case of any premises where there is any contamination which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
(6)  In the case of any premises where there are actual or potential unprotected cross connections, the public water system shall be protected by an approved backflow prevention assembly at the water service connection. 
(7)  In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly on each water service connection to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-60. - Authority to discontinue service. 
The director may discontinue water service to any premises when a backflow prevention assembly required by this division is not installed, tested and maintained. The director may also discontinue water service for failure, refusal, or inability on the part of the customer to install, have tested and maintain said assembly(s), for removal or bypass of said assembly(s) or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. The director shall not allow water service to be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-61. - Inspection of customer's system. 
The director shall have the right at any reasonable time to enter the customer's premises and to inspect the piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections and for compliance with this division and the county's backflow prevention policy, unless conditions exist as described in subsection 98-59(7) of this division. The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the department to determine whether unprotected cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this division, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the department shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with the laws of the State of Georgia, regulations and codes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-62. - Department approval required. 
Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be a make, model and size approved by the department. The EPD and the department have approved the following testing laboratory to test and approve backflow prevention assemblies: 
Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research 
University of Southern California 
KAP-200 University Park MC-2531 
Los Angeles, California 90089-2531 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-63. - Field test, repair and replacement required. 
It shall be the responsibility of the customer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have a field test performed by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester upon installation and at least once per year thereafter. In those instances where the director deems the hazard to be great enough he/she may require field tests at more frequent intervals. These tests shall be at the expense of the customer and shall be performed by the department or by a certified tester approved the department. The director shall see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The customer shall repair, overhaul or replace defective assemblies at their expense. Records of such tests, repairs and overhaul shall be kept and made available to the director upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-64. - Existing approved assemblies may remain. 
Backflow prevention assemblies that do not meet the requirements of this division but were approved by the testing laboratory identified in section 98-62 of this division and were installed before or on the effective date of this division may, in the discretion of the director, remain so long as the director is assured that said assemblies will satisfactorily protect the water purveyor's system. The customer shall be required to establish to the director's satisfaction that any such backflow prevention assembly has been properly maintained. Moreover, the inspection and testing requirements established in section 98-61 and section 98-63 of this division shall apply to any such backflow prevention assemblies. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than the minimum maintenance or when the director finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-65. - Authority to implement ordinance. 
The director is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable rules and policies with respect to the enforcement of this division. All such rules and policies shall be consistent with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-66, 98-67. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - FIRE HYDRANTS AND FIRE LINES 

Sec. 98-68. - Spacing of fire hydrants. 
(a)  Public fire hydrant spacing. 
(1)  All water mains in the county shall have fire hydrants installed at least every 500 feet. Hydrant distance shall be measured along the centerline of the street or roadway. 
(2)  In all nonresidential or mixed-use areas, in order to meet minimum required hydrant water flow, additional hydrants shall be installed where designated by the fire chief or authorized designee. 
(b)  Private fire hydrant spacing. Private fire hydrants shall be located so that all parts of a building are within 500 feet of one or more fire hydrants. 
(c)  Variance. Any variance for fire hydrant spacing must be approved by the fire chief or authorized designee. Such variances must be noted on appropriate site drawings. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-69. - Fire lines. 
(a)  Any non-residential building or structure served by water lines designed, constructed, and dedicated for the sole purpose of fire sprinkler supply or private fire hydrants, shall be served by a double detector check valve/backflow preventer or reduced pressure zone backflow device as appropriate and determined by the director. All dedicated fire lines shall be either metered or equipped with a flow detection device. The customer will be billed monthly for the fire line connection. Any water usage detected on a full metered fire line or a fire line with a detector meter will be billed to the customer. 
(b)  Fire lines installed for residential or non-residential services shall be installed per Rockdale County Water Resources specifications. No other connections are allowed to a dedicated fire line that is intended for use other than that of fire suppression. 
(c)  Any fully metered fire line or a fire line with a flow detection device found to have more than three instances of usage over any given twelve month period will lose fire line status and assume domestic status due to the evidence of regular usage. Fire lines with flow detection devices will be required to be fully metered at the owner's expense. Once a fire line reaches domestic status, the customer will be subject to the current domestic base and volumetric rates. Further, once a fire line reaches domestic status, it can only reacquire fire line status after a period of one year has passed with less than four occurrences of usage. 
(d)  Procedures for billing. 
1.  All fire line users will be billed a monthly availability charge. There will be no volumetric charge for water usage associated with periodic testing of the fire suppression system when advanced notification of testing is provided to RWR. 
2.  Private systems owners who test fire hydrants will be allowed a once per year volumetric allowance for testing and flushing privately owned hydrants. 
3.  A special ordinance provision (section 98-269) is provided to address the billing of residential fire lines that are served by way of a master meter. 
4.  Structures equipped with fire lines that are receiving fire line service but are not being billed by RWR for such service shall be subject to fines and penalties as identified in Division 8 of Chapter 98 - Utilities Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007; Ord. No. 2018-08, § 1, 5-8-2018) 
Sec. 98-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WASTEWATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-71. - Compliance with state and federal water pollution control laws. 
This article sets forth uniform requirements for persons who cause wastewater to be discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the county and enables the county to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). The federally mandated objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the county wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the county wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  Improve the opportunity by the county to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludges from the county wastewater system; 
(4)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the lands and waters of the county and provide for penalties and fines; and 
(5)  Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the county wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-72—98-88. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WASTEWATER APPLICATION AND CONNECTION PROCESS; FEES AND RELATED CHARGES 

Sec. 98-89. - Wastewater service connection restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter or the UDO to the contrary, each of the following restrictions shall apply to wastewater connection permits: 
(1)  No preliminary subdivision plat, land disturbance permit, building permit or other permit, for any use, project or development that requires or will require wastewater service shall be authorized or issued unless a wastewater connection permit specific to the use, project or development has been issued and validated by Rockdale Water Resources. 
(2)  All wastewater service connections shall require a two-step process. First, the entire wastewater connection permit application process shall be followed, including adherence to all procedures in this chapter, assignment of a wastewater allocation, and payment of all required fees and charges, including but not limited to the CCR. Second, the wastewater connection permit shall be validated by an authorized representative of the Rockdale Water Resources engineering division in the manner set forth in this article. 
(3)  Wastewater connection permits shall be strictly limited to the project identified on the face of said permit. Wastewater connection permits shall also be limited by all other restrictions associated therewith, including all time limitations. 
(4)  Wastewater connection permits shall not be transferred to any other location, use, or project. 
(5)  Wastewater connection permits shall be subject to all of the conditions on the face of the permit as well as all other restrictions found in this chapter 98. 
(6)  No wastewater connection permit shall be valid, and no property interest, vested right, or reliance of any kind shall in any way be associated with either said permit or the procedures for securing said permit set forth in this article, until said permit has been properly validated by Rockdale Water Resources. No rights whatsoever to connect to the wastewater system exist until a properly validated wastewater connection permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-90. - Wastewater permit authorization when no availability exists. 
(a)  Except as authorized in subsection (b), no domestic or nondomestic wastewater connection permit shall be issued unless wastewater plant availability or wastewater system availability, as defined in section 98-20, exist. 
If wastewater plant availability does not exist then that particular plant can only accept wastewater and issue connection permits under restricted conditions, pursuant to subsection (b). Restriction of plant capacity when no plant availability exists is required to ensure that the critical needs and the best interest of Rockdale County are addressed during the period required to reduce the wastewater treatment plant's capacity utilization to less than 95.00 percent. Once the wastewater treatment plant's capacity utilization is less than 95.00 percent of its authorized flow, provided that the remaining wastewater treatment plant system's authorized flow is at least 50,000 GPD, then the restrictions shall be removed and sewer connection permits made available to the general public. 
If wastewater plant availability does not exist for two or more plants within the same wastewater treatment plant system, then the total available flow capacity within the county wastewater system must be evaluated to determine whether wastewater system availability exists. 
(b)  If wastewater plant availability or wastewater system availability does not exist, the director may authorize wastewater connection permits only for the following categories of users, subject to the restrictions listed below: development authorities located in Rockdale County or the City of Conyers; the Conyers-Rockdale Economic Development Authority; the Rockdale County Community Revitalization and Improvement Program; Rockdale County Sewer Relief and Residential Construction Support Program, which shall be used to provide sewer service to residential users with failing septic tank systems that cannot be feasibly repaired as determined by the county's health department, and, for new individual single-family detached residential users. 
Under no circumstances shall wastewater connection permits authorized by this subsection result in a condition in which remaining system authorized flow within a wastewater treatment plant system is 50,000 GPD or less. 
When "no wastewater system availability" exists, the following restrictions and allocation plans shall also apply to the remaining five percent of the county wastewater system's total capacity: 
(1)  Requests for wastewater connection permits authorized by this subsection shall not exceed five percent of the total remaining flow capacity within the county wastewater system, which includes the required capacity reservation of 50,000 GPD. 
(2)  Requests for wastewater connection permits by the Rockdale County Community Revitalization and Improvement Program shall be limited to 23 percent of the remaining five percent of the county wastewater system's total capacity. 
(3)  Requests for wastewater connection permits from the Rockdale County Sewer Relief and Residential Construction Support Program shall be limited to one percent of the remaining five percent of the county wastewater system's total capacity. 
(4)  Requests for wastewater connection permits from the Conyers-Rockdale Economic Development Authority shall not exceed 51 percent of the remaining five percent of the county wastewater system's total capacity. 
(c)  Requests for wastewater connection permits by a development authority identified in subsection (b) shall be subject to each of the following: 
(1)  Said requests shall be approved only by an intergovernmental agreement, which agreement may address connection to the county wastewater and water systems, CCR charges and other cost recovery fees, and other provisions to adequately protect the best interest of the water and wastewater systems; 
(2)  Said requests shall be accompanied by a resolution of the authority authorizing the request and certifying that the request is necessary to achieve unique and extraordinary revitalization, development or redevelopment within its jurisdiction consistent with all state and local laws applicable to the authority; and 
(3)  Said requests shall not exceed 20,000 GPD per development authority. 
All requests for wastewater connection permits under subsection (b) shall adhere to the application and review requirements of this chapter, including article III and the connection requirements set forth in article I, except as otherwise provided in an intergovernmental agreement under subsection (c)(1). No wastewater connection permits shall be issued if any portion of the property subject to the requested permit is located within the areas designated to be served by septic systems only in the Rockdale County Water and Wastewater Master Plan. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007; Ord. No. 0-2007-18, § 1, 9-25-2007; Ord. No. 2017-09, §§ 1, 2, 5-23-2017) 
Sec. 98-91. - Procedures to obtain wastewater service. 
No wastewater service shall be established or provided without proper application, evaluation of the requested wastewater allocation, and issuance and validation of a wastewater connection permit. The following procedures shall govern this process. These procedures may be implemented by additional administrative rules and requirements consistent with this chapter as established by the director. 
(1)  Wastewater service connection application. Wastewater service shall not be connected to any property without proper application having first been made to the department on forms provided by the department. No such application shall be tendered or accepted for initial review unless wastewater availability exists at the time of application under section 98-90. All applications shall be made by the owner of the land upon which a wastewater connection is desired, or the owner's authorized agent. The application shall be supplemented by the owner's drawings, plans, specifications, and other such information which, in the judgment of the director, is pertinent to the desired connection in accordance with the requirements set forth in article III. Wastewater connection service charges and all other fees and charges shall be paid as stipulated in article III. No wastewater service application may be tendered or accepted except in compliance with the procedures set forth in article III. No wastewater connection permit shall be issued or vali-dated unless a wastewater allocation has been secured pursuant to article III and wastewater availability exists on the date of such allocation. Available wastewater capacity shall be allocated subject to the provisions of article III and the provisions of this chapter 98. 
Validation of a wastewater connection permit shall occur upon placement of an official marking on the face of said permit by an authorized representative of the Rockdale Water Resources engineering division indicating all fees and charges have been paid and all procedures completed, as well as the date and time of validation. 
(2)  Evaluation of wastewater allocation requests and issuance of connection permits. Wastewater allocations and connection permits shall be subject to the provisions particular to each of the project categories as follows: 
a.  Process for an individual single family residential unit on a platted lot. The procedure to obtain wastewater allocation and a connection permit for an individual single family residential unit on a lawful lot of record existing prior to March 28, 2007, shall require the requesting party to submit a completed application for wastewater service and connection as provided by Rockdale Water Resources. Applications will not be provided to the requesting party or accepted by Rockdale Water Resources if wastewater availability does not exist at the time of request for or submission of the application. Neither the determination of wastewater availability status nor the providing or acceptance of an application to the requesting party shall constitute any right whatsoever to a wastewater allocation or otherwise bind the county to provide wastewater service to the project. The application must be submitted to Rockdale Water Resources for review and approval. All application fees must be tendered with the application. If the application is approved by Rockdale Water Resources consistent with all requirements of this chapter, a wastewater allocation will be assigned for the requesting unit. No wastewater allocation shall be assigned unless wastewater availability exists on the date of assignment. Following assignment of allocation, and upon payment by the requesting party of all charges and fees, including CCR, the allocation shall be finalized and the wastewater connection permit validated by Rockdale Water Resources. 
b.  Process for all other projects not requiring preliminary plat. The procedure to obtain wastewater allocation and a connection permit for a project for which a preliminary plat is not required by Chapter 302 of the UDO shall require the requesting party to first obtain and submit a project description form as provided by Rockdale Water Resources. The project description form will not be accepted by Rockdale Water Resources if wastewater availability does not exist at the time of request for or submission of said form. Upon tender of a completed project description form to Rockdale Water Resources, the requesting party will be required to attend a joint pre-design meeting which will be scheduled by the department of public services and engineering and include Rockdale Water Resources. If the requesting party successfully completes pre-design review by appropriate county departments and if wastewater availability exists for said project, the requesting party will be issued an application form, as provided by Rockdale Water Resources, for wastewater service and connection. Neither the determination of wastewater availability status nor the providing or acceptance of an application to the requesting party shall constitute any right whatsoever to a wastewater allocation or otherwise bind the county to provide wastewater service to the project. The completed wastewater service and connection application will be accepted by Rockdale Water Resources only with concurrent submittal of land disturbance and construction plans and payment of all required charges and fees. If the application is approved by Rockdale Water Resources consistent with all requirements of this chapter, a wastewater allocation will be assigned for the project. No wastewater allocation shall be assigned unless wastewater availability exists on the date of assignment. Following assignment of allocation, and upon payment by the requesting party of all charges and fees, including CCR, the allocation shall be finalized and the wastewater connection permit validated by Rockdale Water Resources. 
c.  Process for projects requiring preliminary plat. The following wastewater allocation and connection permit procedures shall apply to all projects for which a preliminary plat is required by Chapter 302 of the UDO: 
1.  The requesting party shall obtain and complete a project description form as provided by Rockdale Water Resources. The project description form will not be accepted by Rockdale Water Resources if wastewater availability does not exist at the time of request for or submission of said form. 
2.  Upon tender of a completed project description form to Rockdale Water Resources, the requesting party will be required to attend a joint pre-design meeting which will be scheduled by the department of public services and engineering and include Rockdale Water Resources. The project description form shall be submitted no later than 48 hours prior to the scheduled pre-design meeting. 
3.  If the requesting party successfully completes pre-design review by appropriate county departments and if wastewater availability exists for said project, the requesting party will be issued an application form, as provided by Rockdale Water Resources, for wastewater service and connection. Neither the determination of wastewater availability status nor the providing or acceptance of an application to the requesting party shall constitute any right whatsoever to a wastewater allocation or otherwise bind the county to provide wastewater service to the project. 
4.  Upon successful completion of steps 1. through 3. above, the requesting party shall proceed with the process necessary to secure a preliminary plat as provided by Chapter 302 of the UDO. The preliminary plat shall be submitted to the public services and engineering department in accordance with Chapter 302. Technical review of the preliminary plat is required from both public services and engineering and Rockdale Water Resources. Upon approval of technical review of the preliminary plat by all departments and prior to the submission of the preliminary plat to the Conyers Rockdale Planning Commission for hearing and action, the requesting party shall submit the completed application form referenced in paragraph (iii) above to Rockdale Water Resources. If the application is approved by Rockdale Water Resources consistent with all requirements of this chapter, a wastewater allocation will be assigned for the project. No wastewater allocation shall be assigned unless wastewater availability exists on the date of assignment. Following assignment of allocation, and upon payment by the requesting party of all charges and fees, including CCR, the allocation shall be finalized and the wastewater connection permit validated by Rockdale Water Resources. The validated wastewater connection permit shall be immediately transmitted by the requesting party to the department of public services and engineering. Said transmittal must occur prior to the meeting of the Conyers Rockdale Planning Commission for which the preliminary plat is presented for approval. Failure by the requesting party to secure and transmit the validated wastewater connection permit prior to the planning commission meeting in question will result in automatic termination of the wastewater allocation and the wastewater connection permit and denial of the preliminary plat, provided that the planning commission shall have the authority to defer final action on the preliminary plat for good cause shown until its next regularly scheduled meeting and provided further that no more than one such deferral shall be authorized and that the 60 day refund period set forth in subsection 98-94(a) shall be tolled for the period of said deferral. 
5.  The decision on the final preliminary plat approval shall be made by the Conyers Rockdale Planning Commission in accordance with the applicable requirements of Chapter 302 and this chapter. 
6.  In the event the preliminary plat is not approved by the Conyers Rockdale Planning Commission, the wastewater allocation and the wastewater connection permit shall be immediately terminated and all charges and fees paid by the requesting party to Rockdale Water Resources for issuance of the wastewater connection permit shall be refunded except for the application fee attributable to processing said application. 
d.  Process for projects within incorporated Rockdale County. The following wastewater allocation and connection permit procedures shall apply to all projects partially or completely geographically located within the limits of the City of Conyers: 
1.  All of the procedures set forth in subsection 98-91(b)(1), (2) or (3) shall be followed according to the type of project requested, with the exception that required pre-design review meetings shall be conducted by appropriate city personnel rather than the Rockdale Department of Public Services and Engineering, and the transmittal of validated wastewater connection permit shall also be to said appropriate city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-92, 98-93. - Reserved. 
Sec. 98-94. - Wastewater system charges and fees. 
(a)  Capital cost recovery charge. All wastewater allocations shall be assessed a capital cost recovery charge ("CCR"). The CCR applicable to the wastewater allocation and connection permit shall be paid by the requesting party in accordance with the applicable provisions of section 98-91 of this article. In the event the CCR is not paid at the time specified by section 98-91 of this article, the wastewater allocation for which the CCR is due will be denied and become null and void, will not be allocated to the requesting party, and the county will not be bound to provide wastewater service to the project in question. 
A partial refund of the CCR paid to the county may be secured by the requesting party subject to the provisions of this paragraph. Ninety percent of the CCR will be refunded to the requesting party if a written request for refund is received by Rockdale Water Resources within 60 days from the date of issuance of the validated wastewater connection permit. Ten percent of the CCR shall be nonrefundable. If no written request for refund is received by the Rockdale Water Resources within said 60-day period, all of the capital cost recovery charges shall become the property of and be retained by Rockdale County for uses associated with its wastewater system and no refund of any kind shall be authorized. 
(b)  Wastewater availability fee. Upon the issuance of a validated wastewater connection permit, Rockdale Water Resources shall assign a specified number of sewer taps to the allocation set forth in said permit. In the event any sewer tap so assigned is not connected physically to the assigned domestic or nondomestic structure within three years from the date of issuance of the validated wastewater connection permit, each of the unconnected sewer taps will be assessed a monthly wastewater availability fee ("WAF"). The WAF will be equal to the monthly charge in effect at the time of assessment for the treatment of 6,000 gallons of wastewater by the county. The WAF will be assessed on a monthly basis until the sewer tap is physically connected to a structure and the account for said structure is activated for wastewater service. In the event the wastewater allocation represented by an unconnected sewer tap is surrendered to Rockdale Water Resources, no further WAF shall be incurred for that sewer tap. There shall be no refund issued for such returned wastewater allocations or the associated sewer taps. 
(c)  Pump station maintenance fee. A fee shall be assessed for pump stations to provide the county a means of funding pump station operating costs during the initial years of operation. 
(d)  Application, administrative, inspection and other fees. Additional fees may be charged and collected for applications, inspections, special administrative processes, and other matters, all as established by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Special administrative fees for wastewater pre-treatment participants system. The county may adopt charges and fees relative to special administrative services as necessary, to include the following: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the county's pretreatment program; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures; 
(4)  Fees for reviewing construction plans and completed construction; 
(5)  Fees for permit applications; 
(6)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(7)  Fees for consistent removal by the county of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; and 
(8)  Other fees as the county may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of the nondomestic users program. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this subsection and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the county. 
(f)  Base rate fee. A base rate fee shall be applicable to water or wastewater customers who have active water or wastewater accounts but have no measurable usage. Said base rate fee is applied to offset Rockdale Water Resources fixed costs associated with system operations. 
(g)  Wastewater service charge for usage. There are levied and assessed rates, fees and/or charges for the service, maintenance, operation and amortization of the county wastewater system, based on the amount of water consumed per month by each customer for whom wastewater service is available from the county. The charges for wastewater service shall be as shown in the rate schedule available at the office of the county clerk. 
(h)  Surcharge for high strength wastewater. See section 98-170 for provisions regarding the surcharge for high strength wastewater. 
(i)  Holding tank (including septic tank) haulers and discharges. 
(1)  A fee shall be charged for the permitting of authorized holding tank waste haulers. 
(2)  A fee shall be charged for the disposal of the contents of holding tanks, when authorized, into the county wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-95—98-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS 

Sec. 98-111. - Permit required for opening, altering or connecting to public wastewater facilities. 
No person, other than authorized county employees or county authorized agent, shall uncover, make any connections to, use, alter, or disturb any public wastewater line, or appurtenance thereto, without first obtaining an approved set of plans, and a written permit from the director or his designee. 
All new wastewater connections or taps constructed to provide wastewater service for applicant shall be made to existing county wastewater facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-112. - Wastewater connection. 
Upon the issuance of a wastewater allocation by Rockdale Water Resources to a requesting party and payment of the applicable CCR all costs and expenses incidental to any necessary connection shall be borne by the requesting party. The requesting party shall indemnify the county against any loss or damage to the county water or wastewater facilities that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-113. - Separate service to separate buildings. 
(a)  A separate and independent wastewater connection shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private wastewater line is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. 
(b)  In the instance described in subsection (a) of this section, the front building water and/or wastewater line may be extended to the rear of the building and the whole considered as one building; however, in such case, the county does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for maintenance of or damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to nondomestic users. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-114. - Utilization of previously used wastewater pipes and materials. 
Previously used wastewater pipes and materials may be utilized in connection with new buildings only when found, on examination and test by the director or his designee, to be in good, serviceable condition and to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-115. - Compliance with technical codes. 
The size, materials of construction, methods of construction, slope, and alignment of all wastewater facilities construction shall conform to the technical codes and specifications described in this section. To the extent that any conflicting provisions exist in these technical codes and specifications, the provisions of the earliest mentioned document shall prevail. 
(1)  Standard Plumbing Code if in effect in the county or the plumbing code in effect in the county as it presently exists or may be amended. 
(2)  Standard Building Code if in effect in the county or the building code in effect in the county as it presently exists or as it may be amended. 
(3)  One and Two-family Dwelling Code if in effect in the county or the dwelling code in effect in the county as it presently exists or as it may be amended. 
(4)  The current standards for residential and commercial development in the county as it presently exists or as it may be amended. 
(5)  Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, latest edition (for wastewater system construction). 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-116. - Elevation of wastewater connections, check prior to pouring foundation. 
It shall be the obligation of the owner of the building being connected to the county wastewater system to determine the elevations, grades and alignment of sewer lines necessary to serve the building prior to the pouring of the building foundation or footings, and to design and construct the connecting sewer in accordance with the information obtained. Whenever possible, a sewer service lateral shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the county wastewater system, the wastewater carried by such building drain shall be lifted by the approved means into the county wastewater system. Operation and maintenance of such a lifting system shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-117. - Conditions to determine if building is served by the public wastewater system. 
The county wastewater system is designed to provide gravity service to the ground level of buildings, and above. Basements and below grade living areas may or may not be served by gravity by the county wastewater system. A building is considered to be served by the county wastewater system for purposes set forth in this chapter whenever wastewater service is provided to the ground level floor. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-118. - Connection of downspouts, drains, etc., to wastewater system prohibited. 
No person shall make connections of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a sewer service lateral or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to the county wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-119. - Wastewater construction requirements. 
(a)  Construction procedures. The following are construction procedures for wastewater connections: 
(1)  All pavement cuts shall be made by sawing prior to excavation to eliminate uneven and ragged edges. 
(2)  All backfill beneath roads, sidewalks or other paved areas shall be compared to 95 percent standard proctor using mechanical tamping equipment in six-inch lifts. It shall be the responsibility of the person making the wastewater connection to demonstrate to the director or his designated representative that 95 percent compaction has been obtained. 
(3)  All road cuts shall have an eight-inch thick concrete cap (3,000 psi in 28 days) which shall extend not less than 12 inches beyond the edges of the backfilled ditch. 
(4)  Final asphalt patches shall match the existing pavement type, quality and thickness as closely as possible. Special care shall be exercised to match the existing slopes and grades for a smooth transition. 
(b)  Inspection of connections by the county. The applicant for a sewer service lateral connection permit shall notify the director when the sewer service lateral is ready for inspection and connection to the county wastewater system. The connection and testing shall be made in the presence of the director or his designee. 
(c)  Guarding excavations. All excavations for sewer service lateral installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights in compliance with all OSHA and State of Georgia Department of Transportation requirements so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to a good as new condition in a manner satisfactory to the county. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-120. - Restoration of disturbed public property. 
(a)  All wastewater construction work conducted on the public right-of-way or any public property shall be conducted only with proper permission from the director. 
(b)  All disturbed areas as a result of such construction shall be restored to a condition that is as good as new. The scheduling of such construction activities shall be as approved by the director if such scheduling approval is determined to be in the public's best interest. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-121. - Reserved. 
Sec. 98-122. - Limitation on construction of permanent structures near wastewater easements. 
No permanent structures shall be constructed within ten feet of the edge of a permanent wastewater easement on front and rear setbacks, or within two feet on side setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-123. - Capping and sealing of discontinued wastewater connections. 
All wastewater service connections for which service has been discontinued as a result of the demolition of the structure being served by the connection, or for any other reasons, shall be properly and permanently capped and sealed to prevent the entrance of groundwater or surface water into the wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-124. - Wastewater lift stations. 
(a)  Lift stations serving two or more structures. All wastewater lift stations installed in the county which serve two or more structures shall be designed and constructed in strict conformity to the county standards. Engineering plans shall be prepared for all wastewater lift stations and such plans shall be approved by the Rockdale Water Resources prior to construction. Following the construction and acceptance by the county of a wastewater lift station, title to the lift station may be conveyed to the county subject to the discretion of and acceptance by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Lift stations serving a single building. Unless otherwise approved by the county, all wastewater lift stations serving a single building shall be owned, operated and maintained by the building owner. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-125. - All wastewater facilities construction plans must be approved by the county. 
Rockdale Water Resources shall have review authority over all wastewater facilities constructed in the county. Thereafter, all wastewater facilities construction plans, whether in incorporated or unincorporated areas, shall be approved by Rockdale Water Resources prior to the commencement of construction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-126—98-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL USE OF PUBLIC WASTEWATER FACILITIES 

Sec. 98-141. - Generally. 
(a)  Unauthorized connections prohibited. No person shall make an unauthorized water or wastewater connection nor obtain unauthorized water or wastewater services. Persons making unauthorized connections or obtaining unauthorized service shall be subject to a fee as set forth in the county water and wastewater fee schedule, published separately, and shall also be punished as provided in subsection 98-248(a). 
(b)  Requirements to prevent cross connections. The construction and operation of all water and wastewater system piping shall be in such a manner so as to eliminate cross connections or the possibility thereof. It is the intent of this section to protect the public health by providing regulations whereby the possibilities for the contamination of the water supply due to cross connections with the wastewater system are greatly reduced or eliminated. For that reason the provisions and requirements contained in the county cross connection program are adopted herein by reference. 
(c)  Malicious damage to equipment. No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct and punished as provided by Rockdale County ordinance. 
(d)  Devices used to move sewerage from the building to the service lateral of the wastewater system are the responsibility of the property owner and will not be repaired or maintained by the county. 
(e)  Property owners are responsible for construction and maintenance of the service line from the premises served to the point of connection with the county service lateral. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-142. - Wastewater system—Guidelines and prohibited discharges. 
(a)  Toilets required. 
(1)  No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. All toilets shall either be connected to the county wastewater system or to an approved private wastewater disposal facility that complies with the provisions of division 6 of this article. 
(2)  The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the county and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the county, is required at the owners expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein. All toilet facilities shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(b)  Discharge of polluted waters to a storm sewer or natural outlet prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the county or into any storm sewer or any sewer which connects to the storm sewer system of the county any polluted water or wastewater. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the county any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the provisions of this article. No provision of this article shall be construed to relieve the owner of a discharge to any natural outlet of the responsibility for complying with applicable state and federal regulations governing such discharge. 
(c)  Septic tanks and pit privies prohibited, except as provided in this article. The use of septic tanks, privies or any other means of wastewater disposal other than into the county wastewater system is prohibited except as provided for in division 6 of this article. 
(d)  Discharge of holding tank contents (including septic tanks) into county wastewater system regulated. 
(1)  General. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or entity to place, empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge into any manhole, catchbasin or other opening into the county wastewater system, or any system connected with and discharging into the county wastewater system, the contents of any holding tank, including septic tank wastes, sludge, sewage or other similar matter or material, except as provided in subsection (f)(2) of this section. 
(2)  Permit required. The director is authorized to issue permits to discharge the contents of holding tanks and septic tanks (from both domestic and nondomestic sources) at locations specified by the director and under his supervision upon application to the director on a form provided by the county. Such permit shall stipulate the locations and times for which the permittee will be allowed to discharge septic tank wastes and to whom each load must be reported and what information (e.g., the source of the load) must be provided by the permittee when reporting. 
(3)  Charges. A charge shall be made for the privilege of discharging the contents of holding tanks and septic tanks, as provided in a separate fee schedule. 
(a)  Charges. A charge shall be made for the privilege of discharging the contents of holding tanks and septic tanks, as provided in a separate fee schedule. 
(b)  County restrictions. Only domestic waste originating/generated within Rockdale County will be allowed to discharge into the county wastewater system. 
(4)  Manifest form. All holding tank and septic tank waste haulers shall be required to complete a manifest form provided by the county regarding the quantity, nature and source of the waste being deposited in the county wastewater system. 
(5)  Equipment required. All equipment, such as trucks, tanks, pumps and hoses used in the collection and/or transportation of the contents of holding tank and septic tank waste shall be modern equipment in good repair. 
(6)  Revocation of permits and other penalties. Permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the chairperson or his designee, continued dumping of such matter into the county wastewater system will be injurious to the system or treatment processes. Permits may be suspended or revoked for willful, continued or persistent violations of this section. 
(7)  Discharge of grease trap contents. Discharge of grease trap contents into the county wastewater system is prohibited. (See section 98-168.) 
(8)  Penalties. In addition to possible suspension or revocation of a permit, any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(e)  Requirement to mitigate infiltration/inflow. It shall be the obligation of all users of the county wastewater system to reduce to the extent reasonably possible all infiltration and inflow. Infiltration and inflow shall be reduced by using watertight pipe and construction materials in all private portions of the wastewater system as well as those wastewater systems which are to be deeded to the county. 
(f)  Prohibited discharges. The prohibited discharges set forth in section 98-161 are incorporated herein by reference. 
(1)  Prohibited discharges. The prohibited discharges set forth in section 98-161 are incorporated herein by reference. 
(2)  Discharge from domestic septic tanks is not subject to BOD/COD concentration limits as identified in section 98-161. 
(g)  Connection of private system users prohibited. No discharges from a private water system shall be allowed to the county wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007; Ord. No. 2017-15, §§ 1,2, 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 98-143. - Master plan. 
A master plan for wastewater facilities shall be prepared by Rockdale Water Resources. Such master plan shall be reviewed and comprehensively updated as circumstances require or as directed by the director. Projected flows and recommendations contained in the master plan shall be consistent with the county comprehensive land use plan, available and accurate regional forecasts of population and employment, and any project specific information which is available at the time the plan is developed or updated. Water resources shall periodically compare flows being treated at the wastewater treatment facilities with the permitted capacities of the treatment facilities and shall project flows in each drainage basin over the following ten-year period. When these projections indicate that total flow will likely equal or exceed 85 percent of total authorized flow within the following five years, water resources shall prepare and submit to the board of commissioners for their review and action recommendations for expansion, and a detailed schedule including planning, design, permitting, construction and startup of needed proposed facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-144—98-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - NONDOMESTIC (INDUSTRIAL; COMMERCIAL; INSTITUTIONAL) USE OF PUBLIC WASTEWATER FACILITIES 

Sec. 98-161. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  General prohibitions. 
(1)  A user may not introduce into any POTW any pollutant which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in subsection (b) of this section apply to each user introducing pollutants into a POTW whether or not the user is subject to other national pretreatment standards or any national, state or local pretreatment requirements. 
(2)  Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The county may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes into the county wastewater system: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters, containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment facility. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to sewers, structures, equipment or personnel. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshing, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(5)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances in sufficient quantity to cause the OSHA limits to be exceeded in the manholes, or any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance or hazard to life or preventing entry into sewers for the maintenance, inspection, and repair thereof. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentrations as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which will cause interference with the POTW, or constitute a "slug," as defined in section 98-72. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed. 
(10)  Any waters or wastes which, by interaction with other waters or wastes in the county wastewater system, release obnoxious gases, form solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(11)  Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius) or causing the temperature at the influent to a treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius.) 
(12)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastewater with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(13)  Oil (petroleum based, biodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin) in amounts causing pass through or interference. 
(14)  Any substance which may cause the water pollution control facility effluent or any other products of the water pollution control facility such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse. 
(15)  Any substance which will cause the water pollution control facility to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(16)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes, ink wastes, and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(17)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except as provided in section 98-142(f)(2). 
(18)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(19)  No user shall discharge wastewater which exceeds the concentration limits set forth below unless such discharger has been issued a permit by the county to discharge wastewater in excess of the limits set forth below. Such limits are instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits. 
Such limits are subject to revision in cases where pollutants contributed by users result in interference or pass through, and such violation is likely to recur, the county shall have the option to develop and enforce specific effluent limits for industrial users, and all other users, as appropriate which, together with appropriate changes in the POTW treatment plant's facilities or operation, are necessary to ensure renewed and continued compliance with the POTW's NPDES permit or sludge use or disposal practices. 
LOCAL CONCENTRATION LIMITATIONS FOR THE ROCKDALE COUNTY, GEORGIA 

 
If a TTO scan indicates that an organic compound is present at quantifiable levels greater than the parameter detection limit, then the director of the department of water resources shall determine the need to issue a discharge permit in order to control the concentration of the specific organic compound into the county wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007; Ord. No. 2016-11, § 1, 9-27-2016) 
Sec. 98-162. - Federal and state requirements. 
(a)  State laws and regulations. Any laws or regulations promulgated by the State of Georgia relative to the construction or use of wastewater facilities which are more strict than the regulations provided in this Code are incorporated herein by reference, and such regulations may be enforced by the county. 
(b)  Federal pretreatment standards. 
(1)  The federal government has adopted regulations governing wastewater discharges from certain industries into publicly owned wastewater treatment works. These federal regulations are generally referred to as the federal pretreatment standards or the federal categorical pretreatment standards, as set forth in 40 CFR 403 et seq. Any portion of these federal standards which are more strict than the regulations provided in this Code are incorporated herein by reference, and such regulations may be enforced by the county. 
(2)  It is the affirmative obligation of all industrial users regulated by the federal pretreatment standards, inclusive of the federal categorical pretreatment standards, to comply with the federal standards whether or not the industry has received notification from the county or any other jurisdiction of the existence and nature of the federal standards. 
(c)  Modifications to federal pretreatment standards. 
(1)  From time to time the federal government may alter existing federal pretreatment standards or promulgate new standards. None of the provisions contained in this Code shall prevent the timely implementation of new or altered federal standards by the industries to whom the new or altered standards apply. Where new or altered federal standards are more strict than the standards presently being imposed by the county, the county may, without prejudice, immediately revise any industrial wastewater discharge permits to reflect the new or altered standards. If the industrial user is unable to immediately conform to the new or altered standards, a reasonable schedule for compliance shall be provided by the director of the department of water resources. 
(2)  Where the county's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the county may apply to EPD for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. Consistent removal shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system 95 percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in 40 CFR 403.7(c)(2), General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution, promulgated pursuant to the Clean Water Act, as amended. The county may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division is obtained. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-163. - Wastewater questionnaire. 
(a)  All nondomestic users shall, upon the request of the county, complete and submit to the county a wastewater questionnaire. The wastewater questionnaire shall be on a form provided by the county and shall be used for the purpose of determining whether the industry is a significant contributing industry and for other purposes. The wastewater questionnaire shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and location if different from the address. 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, U.S. Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended. 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including but not limited to those shown in subsection 98-161(b)(18). 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution. 
(5)  Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any. 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, wastewater connections and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation. 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged. 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by the county, state or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the discharge standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable discharge standards. 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the discharge standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment must be set forth. The completion date in this schedule shall represent a reasonable time frame when considering the circumstances of each individual situation. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of the pretreatment facilities required for the user to meet the applicable discharge standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.  The completion date for any pretreatment final compliance shall not exceed 12 months. 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the county, including, as a minimum, whether or not it has complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production. 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day). 
(12)  Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system. 
(b)  The county will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-164. - Sampling and testing procedures. 
(a)  Sampling procedures. When wastewater sampling is required by the county of any user for any purpose, the following sampling procedures shall be utilized: 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (2) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite collection techniques where feasible. In the event flow-proportional sampling is infeasible, samples may be obtained through 24-hour time-proportional composite sampling or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. Samples shall be taken of increments of not more than one hour, properly refrigerated and composited in proportion to the flow for a representative sample. The frequency of sampling, sampling chamber, metering device, sampling methods, and analysis of samples shall be subject, at any time, to inspection and verification by the county. Sampling and measuring facilities shall be such as to provide safe access for authorized personnel of the county for making such inspection and verification. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(b)  Testing procedures. 
(1)  All wastewater monitoring samples required by the county shall be tested by an independent laboratory for the parameters required, with the results submitted to the county on the original laboratory report sheets signed by an authorized company representative. The requirement for utilization of an independent laboratory may be waived by the county when the required tests are performed by the county or other approved agency or when duplicate ("split") samples are provided to the county and the county's testing results of such duplicate samples show a reasonably good correlation with the user's in-house testing results. 
(2)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-165. - Significant contributing industries. 
All significant contributing industries (see definition of significant contributing industry in section 98-72) that discharge process wastewater effluent into the county wastewater system shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Sampling manhole. In order to provide for accurate sampling and measurement of industrial wastes, each significant contributing industry shall provide and maintain on each of its industrial waste outlet sewers, a large manhole or sampling chamber to be located outside the plant. If inside the plant fence, there shall be a gate near the sampling manhole with a key furnished to the county. There shall be ample room provided in each sampling manhole to enable convenient inspection and sampling by the county, or its agent. In certain sampling manholes where noxious fumes may accumulate, the county may require a fume exhaust system to protect the life and health of the county employees who are required to enter the sampling manhole. The fume exhaust system shall extract the fumes from the bottom of the manhole and provide not less than one air change per minute. The manhole shall include a waterproof 120-volt (120V), single phase electrical outlet at or near the installation. 
(2)  Provision for flow monitoring. Each sampling manhole shall contain a properly installed primary flow monitoring device such as a Parshall flume, Palmer-Bowlus flume, or other similar device as is approved by the county. Plans of the proposed sampling manhole and monitoring device shall be prepared by a registered engineer and submitted to the county for review and approval. 
(3)  Discharge permit required. It shall be unlawful for any significant contributing industry, as determined under this article, to discharge wastewater into the county wastewater system without a county issued discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-166. - Discharge permits. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  All industries proposing to connect to or to contribute nondomestic wastewater to the county wastewater system shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the county system. 
(2)  All existing nondomestic wastewater generating industries connected to or contributing to the county wastewater system shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  All permitted users wishing to continue contributing to the county wastewater system beyond the expiration date of the current permit shall apply for a new wastewater discharge permit. 
(4)  Upon determination by the county, based on information contained in a permit application or other information at its disposal, that a nondomestic user should be issued a permit for its wastewater discharge an industrial user discharge permit shall be issued. 
(b)  Application. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the county an application in the form described by the county and accompanied by a fee as set by the county from time to time. Existing users shall apply for a discharge permit within 60 days of notification by the county that a discharge permit is required. Proposed new users shall make application not less than 90 days prior to connecting to or contributing to the county wastewater system. Permitted users shall make application not less than 60 days prior to the expiration date of the current permit. Each discharge permit application shall be accompanied by a completed questionnaire as described in section 98-165. 
(c)  Permit modifications. Each nondomestic user must notify the county at least 60 days in advance of any significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater, or any other circumstances that may necessitate the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit where one does not exist, or cause the conditions in its discharge permit to become inaccurate or unrepresentative. Such changed circumstances include, but are not limited to: significantly altered production practices or processes, plant expansions or reductions or modifications to pretreatment facilities. Then and in that event, the industry shall apply to the county for a wastewater discharge permit or permit modification, as applicable. 
(d)  Conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the county. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits issued to industrial users identified as significant must contain the following: 
a.  Statement of duration; 
b.  Statement of transferability requirements; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable general and categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record keeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable general and categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and state and local law; and 
e.  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may also contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
a.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater which is to be discharged by the permittee into the county wastewater system; 
b.  Limits on the monthly and/or daily average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
c.  Limits on monthly and/or daily average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
d.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
e.  Specifications for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
f.  Compliance schedules; 
g.  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see subsection (h)); 
h.  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans and records relating to wastewater discharges as specified by the county and affording the county access thereto; 
i.  Requirements for notification of the county of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the county wastewater system; 
j.  Requirements for notification of accidental discharges as per section 98-169; 
k.  Requirements for flow monitoring devices; 
l.  Requirements for certification of pretreatment facility operator; and 
m.  If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, user shall notify the county within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. User also shall repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the county within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation; and 
n.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the county to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(e)  Permit discharge appeals. Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the county to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the county fails to act within 30 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the superior court for the county within 30 days. 
(f)  Suspension, revocation or denial. 
(1)  Procedure. When the director has reason to believe that any one of the conditions enumerated in subsection (2) below exists, he shall give written notice thereof to the permittee. Said notice shall set forth the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the director of the department of water resources. The hearing date shall not be less than 15 days from the mailing of such notice by certified mail to the permittee at the address shown on the permit or at permittee's last known address. At the hearing, the permittee shall have an opportunity to refute the allegations set forth in the proposed permit revocation notice. 
If after the hearing the director finds that any one of the conditions hereinafter enumerated in subsection (2), below, exists, he shall have the right to suspend, revoke or deny the permit. 
(2)  Any of the following is reason for permit suspension, revocation or denial: 
a.  Failure to notify the county of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
b.  Failure to provide prior notification to the county of changed condition; 
c.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
d.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
e.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
f.  Refusing to allow the county timely access to the facility premises and records; 
g.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
h.  Failure to pay fines; 
i.  Failure to pay wastewater charges; 
j.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
k.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
l.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility; or 
m.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or the ordinance. 
(3)  Any user causing immediate endangerment or health risk may be required to immediately cease discharging into the system. 
(4)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit. 
(g)  Duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period as determined by the county, not to exceed three years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the county during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in subsection (o)[(f)] above are modified, conditions change, or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(h)  Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation. 
(i)  Reporting requirements. 
(1)  Periodic compliance reports. All users who have been issued discharge permits are required to submit compliance reports at the intervals set forth in each user's individual permit. The compliance reports shall address the discharge parameters and all other information indicated as being necessary to report as shown in the user's permit. This report shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user. 
(2)  Baseline report. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under section 98-162, whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to a POTW shall be required to submit to the county a report which contains the information listed in paragraphs a through g of this subsection. Where reports containing this information already have been submitted to the EPD or EPA in compliance with the requirement of 40 CFR 128.140 (b) (1977), the industrial user will not be required to submit this information again. At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the county a report which contains the information listed in paragraphs a through e of this subsection. New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in paragraphs d and e of this subsection: 
a.  Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners; 
b.  Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
c.  Description of operations. The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operations carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes; 
d.  Flow measurement. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following: 
1.  Regulated process streams; and 
2.  Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR Part 403.6 (e) (See subsection (e) of this section); and 
3.  The county may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations. 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; 
2.  In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required by the standard or control authority) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations; 
3.  Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The control authority may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any industrial user that demonstrates that flow-proportional composite sampling is infeasible. In such cases, samples may he obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged; 
4.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph; 
5.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of section 403.6(e) [40 CFR Part 403.6 (e)] in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with section 403.6(e) [40 CFR Part 403.6 (e)] this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority; 
6.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the administrator determines that the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the administrator; 
7.  The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; 
8.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place, of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is a representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user (as defined in section 98-72) and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements; 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
1.  Where the industrial user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR Part 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR Part 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally difference factors variance (40 CFR Part 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by subsection (i)(2) below, the information required by paragraphs (i)(2)d and e below shall pertain to the modified limits. 
2.  If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR Part 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR Part 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally difference factors variance (40 CFR Part 403.13) after the user submits the report required by subsection (i)(2) below, any necessary amendments to the information requested by subsection (i)(2)d and e below shall be submitted by the user to the control authority within 60 days after the modified limit is approved. 
(3)  Compliance schedule for meeting categorical pretreatment standards. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by subsection (i)(2)g below: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection (i)(2)g below shall exceed nine months. 
c.  Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the control authority including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with these increments of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the control authority. 
d.  Deadline for compliance with categorical standards. Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate subpart of 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N. Direct discharges with NPDES permits modified or reissued to provide a variance pursuant to Section 301(I)(2) of the Clean Water Act shall be required to meet compliance dates set in any applicable categorical pretreatment standard. Existing sources which become industrial users subsequent to promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall be considered existing industrial users except where such sources meet the definition of a new source as defined in 40 CFR Part 403.3(k). New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall start-up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
(4)  All sampling and testing performed under this subsection for reporting requirements shall be conducted in accordance with section 98-164. 
(5)  If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the county within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the county within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. 
(6)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the county a report containing the information described in subsection (i)(2)d through f. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (m). 
(7)  Reports of changed conditions. Each nondomestic user must notify the county of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change. 
a.  The county may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under subsection (b) above. 
b.  The county may issue a wastewater discharge permit under subsection (a)(4) above or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under subsection (c)(1) above in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
c.  For the purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 25 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(j)  Confidential information. 
(1)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs, and from the county's inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the county, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. 
(2)  When requested by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall be made available for inspection by the public, upon receipt by the county of an open records request as provided by Georgia law with notification to the user by the county of the request and shall also be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(k)  Maintenance of records. 
(1)  Sampling and testing records. Any permitted user subject to the reporting requirements established in subsection (i) shall maintain records of all information resulting from any monitoring activities required by subsection (d). Such records shall include for all samples: 
a.  The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and names of the person or persons taking the samples; 
b.  The dates analyses were performed; 
c.  The name of the person(s) who performed the analysis; 
d.  The analytical techniques/methods used; and 
e.  The results of such analyses. 
(2)  Monitoring activities and records of results. Any permitted user subject to the reporting requirements established in this section shall be required to retain for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this chapter) and shall make such records available for inspection and copying by the city, state or EPA. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any unresolved litigation regarding the permitted user, or when requested by the county, state or EPA. 
(l)  Publication of names of permit violators. The county shall annually publish in the official organ of the county a list of the users who were significant violators during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) and the user's response to such enforcement actions during the same 12 months. 
(m)  Application and reports signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications, questionnaires, and nondomestic user reports must be signed by an authorized representative, as define in subsection 98-72, and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-167. - Industrial pretreatment facilities. 
(a)  Requirements. All users shall provide necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply with the limitations and provisions contained in this article and to achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the county shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the county for review and shall be acceptable to the county prior to commencement of construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user of the responsibility for modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the county under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the county prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
(b)  Compliance schedules. The timing of construction and operation of pretreatment facilities as required hereby shall be in accordance with the compliance schedules provided by the county as described in subsection 98-163(a)(9); however, the county shall also have the authority to issue compliance schedules independent of the permitting process and such compliance schedules may be enforced by the county as provided in the enforcement and penalties section of this article. 
(c)  Maintenance of pretreatment facilities. All wastewater pretreatment facilities shall be properly and adequately maintained by the user so as to achieve the intended purpose of the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-168. - Sand and oil/grease interceptors. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  All commercial waste generators involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall install and properly maintain oil/grease interceptors or traps to minimize the introduction of fats, oil and grease into the county's publically owned treatment works through proper operation and maintenance of grease interceptors. Additionally, any commercial waste generator who generates a wastewater which contains greater than the quantity of oil and grease regulated under section 98-161 shall install oil/grease interceptors or traps, provided that the excess oil and grease is floatable and can be effectively removed in an oil/grease interceptor or trap as determined by the director of the department. 
(2)  All commercial waste generators whose wastewater stream is associated with unusually large quantities of grit, sand or gravel shall be required to install a sand trap. All vehicle washing systems shall be required to install sand traps. 
(3)  For the purposes of this section, wastes of commercial origin are those generated by restaurants, institution kitchens, and other food service establishments, as well as car/truck wash facilities. All commercial waste generators involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide an approved fat, oil, grease (FOG) pretreatment system such as a grease trap, provided that the excess FOG is floatable and can be effectively removed. All commercial facilities with vehicle washing will be required to provide a pretreatment system such as an oil separator and/or sand trap to remove oil waste prior to discharging to the sanitary sewer. 
(4)  The requirements of this section shall not apply to private living quarters or dwelling units. 
(b)  Design criteria. 
(1)  For restaurants and other food service establishments. All oil/grease interceptors or traps used in conjunction with restaurants or other eating establishments shall have a capacity of 15 gallons per seat, except that no grease trap shall be smaller than 750 gallons nor larger than 3,000 gallons; provided, however, that restaurants or other eating establishments located in existing buildings shall be required to have an oil/grease interceptor with a capacity determined by the director of the department of water resources or his designee. For purposes of this article, the term "food service establishment" shall mean any restaurant, eatery, food caterer, cafeteria, or other institution processing and serving food such as motels, hotels, prisons or schools. 
(2)  For facilities other than eating establishments. All sand and oil/grease interceptors or traps used in conjunction with facilities other than eating establishments shall have a capacity that will provide not less than ten minutes nor more than 30 minutes' retention time at the peak eight-hour flow rate. Flow through velocities shall not exceed one foot per second at the peak eight-hour flow rate. 
(3)  Size, location and construction. All sand and oil/grease interceptors shall be sized, located and constructed in accordance with the provisions of the duly adopted county plumbing code where such parameters have not been otherwise set forth in this article. 
(4)  Upgrade. If a food service establishment in existence prior to codification of this section does not have a grease trap or, as documented by inspection, it is determined that the current great trap is insufficient for the volume of food service waste being treated, the director may require that the establishment upgrade to an adequately sized oil/grease interceptor or trap. 
(c)  Maintenance. 
(1)  Pumping. To minimize the introduction of fats, oil and grease into the POTW, all grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be maintained by the commercial waste generator to assure continually efficient operation at all times at the expense of the user. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater and bottom sludges and solids. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the traps from which the waste was removed or any other grease trap for the purpose of reducing the volume to be hauled is strictly prohibited. Cleaning and maintenance of all grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall include removal of materials from the tank walls, baffles, cross pipes, inlets and outlets, both tee's and cover. 
(2)  Pumping frequency. 
a.  Outdoor sand and oil/grease interceptors or traps shall be pumped out or cleaned out completely once every 90 days or more frequently if determined by the director to ensure the combined fats, oil and grease, and solids accumulation does not exceed 25 percent of the liquid depth of the grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps. The 25 percent rule requires that the depth of oil and grease (floating and settled) in a trap shall not be equal or greater than 25 percent of the total operating depth of the trap. The operating depth of the trap is determined by measuring the internal depth of the tank. If the tank is measured with more than two feet of floating top solids or more than two feet of settled solids, the tank is in violation. 
b.  Indoor sand and oil/grease interceptors or traps shall be cleaned at intervals not less than once every 90 days, or more often as necessary to prevent pass-through of grease and other food solids into the POTW. Removal of fats, oil and grease waste and sediments is required when operational capacity is reduced to seventy-five percent or less. This is calculated by the volume of the top (grease) layer added to the volume of the bottom (sediment) layer, the sum of the layers are divided by the total operational volume - [(Top inches + Bottom inches) / total operational inches]. 
(3)  Pumping variance. Variances may be granted if the commercial waste generator can prove at their expense to the director's satisfaction that the discharge from the user's sand and oil/grease interceptor or trap is meeting the county's discharge limit up to 180 consecutive days for outdoor grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps or 120 consecutive days for indoor grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps. 
(d)  Proper disposal of collected materials. The discharge of the materials collected from grease traps and sand traps into the county wastewater system is prohibited. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's employees must be performed by waste disposal firms currently licensed by the county. All waste removed from grease traps must be disposed of at a facility permitted by the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division to receive such waste. Under no circumstances shall the collected materials ever be returned to the wastewater or stormwater system. 
(e)  Additives. The use of any additive, such as enzymes, chemical or bacteria as a substitute for grease traps or grease trap maintenance is strictly prohibited. The use of additives as a supplement to grease trap or sewer maintenance may be authorized by the director after proper documentation and efficiency review. This authorization shall be obtained in writing from the director. 
(f)  Recordkeeping . 
(1)  Manifest. All commercial waste generators shall be responsible for maintaining manifests of waste removed. All materials collected from sand and oil/grease traps must be tracked by a manifest which confines pumping, hauling and disposal of waste. The manifest shall contain the following information: 
a.  Commercial Waste Generator information: 
1.  Name; 
2.  Address; 
3.  Volume pumped; 
4.  Date and time of pumping; 
5.  Signature of generator verifying generator information. 
b.  Transporter information: 
1.  Company name; 
2.  Address; 
3.  Driver name and signature verifying generator information. 
c.  Receiving facility information: 
1.  Facility name; 
2.  Address; 
3.  Date and time of receiving; 
4.  EPD permit number; 
5.  Signature verifying receipt of waste. 
(2)  Maintenance log. The commercial waste generator shall maintain a maintenance log indicating each pumping for the previous 12 months. This log shall include date, time, amount pumped, hauler and disposal site and shall be kept in a conspicuous location for inspection by the department of health or the department of water resources. 
(3)  Reporting. The commercial waste generator shall acquire a completed copy of the manifest from the disposal facility with the proper signatures and dates submit to the department within 14 calendar days of the pumping activity to: 
ROCKDALE WATER RESOURCES  2440 Tatum Road   CONYERS, GEORGIA 30013 
(4)  Penalties for Late Reports. A penalty, as set by the Board of Commissioners from time to time, may be assessed to any user for each day that a report required by this section is late beginning five business days after the date the report is due. Actions taken by the director to collect late reporting penalties shall not limit the director's authority to initiate other enforcement actions that may include penalties for late reporting violations. 
(g)  Inspection and entry. 
(1)  Authorized personnel of the county, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted at reasonable times to enter upon all properties without prior notification, for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing or record review, in accordance with this subsection. 
(2)  Inspection of a sand and oil/grease interceptor or trap shall be performed according to the "25 percent rule" as defined herein. 
(3)  If a sand and oil/grease interceptor or trap fails the initial inspection, the inspector may notify the commercial waste generator that the grease/oil interceptor or trap shall be cleaned out within seven calendar days. After seven calendar days, the sand and oil/grease interceptor or trap should be re-inspected. 
(4)  If at the first re-inspection, the sand and oil/grease trap is found to still be in non-compliance, a Notice of Violation may be issued and the commercial waste generator required to clean the grease/oil interceptor or trap immediately. The commercial waste generator may request an additional re-inspection again after three days. 
(5)  The commercial waste generator may be assessed a fee for additional inspections as set from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(h)  Enforcement and penalty. 
(1)  When the director determines that a violation of this section exists, the director may issue to the commercial waste generator a written notice of violation and require the commercial waste generator to clean and inspect the sand and oil/grease interceptor immediately. Within ten calendar days of the receipt of such notice, the commercial waste generator shall submit to the director an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions. Submission of such a plan in no way relieves the commercial waste generator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the Notice of Violation. 
(2)  If the commercial waste generator fails to initiate or complete corrective action within the time frame specified within the Notice of Violation, the director may pursue one or more of the following options: 
a.  Issuance of a citation or file an appropriate action with the court to compel compliance. 
b.  Place the commercial waste generator on a probationary status and require monthly reporting of sand and oil/grease interceptor cleaning and inspection. 
c.  Any combination of the above enforcement actions. 
(3)  A commercial waste generator who fails to comply with the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction of an ordinance violation, be subject to Section 1-11, General Penalty, of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  Exception. The provisions of this section shall not apply to or be enforced against any food service establishment which does not use frying and/or grilling machines and does not produce fats, oil, or grease in the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007; Ord. No. 2010-06, § 1, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 2016-10, § 2, 9-27-2016) 
Sec. 98-169. - Accidental discharges; slug control plans. 
(a)  The county may require any industrial user to develop, submit for approval and implement an accidental discharge/slug control plan. In addition, at least once every two years, the county shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs such a plan. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the department of water resources of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b) or subsection 98-161(b), with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(b)  Oral notice to county. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the department of water resources of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken. 
(c)  Written notice to county. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the county a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the county wastewater facilities, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this division or other applicable law. 
(d)  Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such an accidental discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-170. - High strength wastewater surcharge. 
(a)  Establishment. All users discharging high strength wastewater into the county wastewater system shall be assessed a monetary surcharge, in addition to the normally required wastewater use charges, in an amount to be calculated as shown in this section. A high strength wastewater is defined as wastewater which contains the following parameters in excess of the concentrations shown as follows: 
(1)  Five-day, 20 degrees Celsius biochemical oxygen demand of 225 milligrams per liter (mg/l); 
(2)  Total suspended solids of 225 mg/l; 
(3)  Total ammonia nitrogen (NH3+NH4) of 20 mg/l; 
(4)  Total inorganic phosphates of 10 mg/l; 
(5)  Floatable oil and grease of 100 mg/l. 
The parameters in this subsection shall be determined by the utilization of the sampling and testing procedures as provided in section 98-164. The amount of the surcharge, which is charged and assessed against all users discharging high strength wastewater into the county wastewater system, shall reflect the cost incurred by the county in handling the excess BOD, TSS, ammonia, total inorganic phosphates, and floatable oil and grease. 
This surcharge shall include a proportionate share of charges for maintenance and operation of the wastewater treatment facilities including depreciation and other incidental expenses. 
(b)  Formula. When the concentrations of the surcharged parameters exceed the values of the constituents as set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the excess concentrations shall be subject to a surcharge in the amount derived in accordance with the following formula: 
P × (D) × 8.34 × C=$/month 
Where: 
"P" is equal to the concentration in mg/l of the parameter being evaluated (BOD, TSS, ammonia, total inorganic phosphates, or floatable oil and grease) which is in excess of the amounts shown in subsection (a) of this section. 
"D" is equal to the average daily wastewater discharge as determined by the county in subsection (d) of this section, or at the discretion of the county by variable periodic compliance reports as required in section 98-166. 
"8.34" is a conversion factor. 
"C" is equal to the unit cost in dollars per pound ($/lb) for the treatment of the surcharged parameters. This value shall be established by the department manager based on actual wastewater treatment costs which shall be revised from time to time as necessary. 
(c)  Quantitative measurement of surchargable parameters. The measurement of the surcharge parameters (BOD, TSS, ammonia, total inorganic phosphates, or floatable oil and grease) shall be conducted as follows: 
(1)  The county shall sample and test the user as provided in section 98-164 once per year, except that the duration of the sampling to determine surcharge shall be for a period to be determined by the director of the department of water resources. 
(2)  The county need not provide any prior notice to the industry with regard to the sampling period. 
(3)  The county may sample the user as often as desired at the county's expense if, in the opinion of the county representative, samples have not been previously obtained. 
(4)  If in the opinion of the user the samples taken by the county are not representative of the user's typical wastewater, then the user may request a resampling. At the user's request, the county shall grant the user not more than two resamplings per year. All user-requested resampling shall be done at the user's expense. A reasonable cost shall be charged to the user by the county therefor. 
(d)  Measurement of flow used in computing wastewater surcharges. The volume of flow used in computing wastewater surcharges shall be based upon the average daily flow rate as determined by county personnel using a properly maintained and calibrated flow meter during the sampling period outlined in subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(e)  Billing procedure. Wastewater surcharges as provided for in this section shall be included on the user's regular water and wastewater bill or on a separate wastewater surcharge bill. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007; Ord. No. 2016-15, § 1, 10-11-2016) 
Sec. 98-171. - County's rights to monitor nondomestic users to confirm compliance. 
The county shall have the right and authority to enter upon any nondomestic user's premises for the purpose of observation, flow monitoring, wastewater sampling, or for any other reasonably necessary purpose to confirm the user's compliance with the provisions of this article. The county may, but is not required to, provide the user with prior notice of the entry. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-172. - Hazardous waste notification by nondomestic users. 
(a)  Any nondomestic user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the county the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance, which if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CRF Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under the subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 98-166(j)(7). The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections 98-166(i)(1), (2) and (3). 
(b)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) above during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms (33 pounds) of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). A discharge of more than 15 kilograms (33 pounds) of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.30(e), requires a one-time notification. 
Subsequent months during which the nondomestic user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the nondomestic user must notify the county the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the nondomestic user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-173—98-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL FACILITIES 

Sec. 98-191. - Private wastewater disposal facilities prohibited. 
No private wastewater disposal facilities which discharge to the surface shall be allowed in Rockdale County, except pre-existing properly operating facilities which have valid NPDES permits issued by the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division or the federal EPA. No other private wastewater disposal facilities of any kind shall be authorized in Rockdale County except septic tank systems operated in accordance with section 98-192. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-192. - Conditions for acceptable construction and use of septic tanks. 
(a)  Domestic wastewater only. The treatment of any wastewater other than domestic wastewater or other such wastewater which is readily treatable by anaerobic decomposition in septic tanks is prohibited. 
(b)  Septic tank prohibitions. No person shall construct a septic tank where wastewater availability exists and connection is required. 
(c)  County approval and department of health permit required. No person shall construct, repair, alter or enlarge a septic tank unless he receives prior approval from the director and shall hold a valid permit for such work issued by the county department of health. The director shall have the right to request and receive for his approval plans and specifications for any nonresidential septic tank systems or septic tank systems serving multifamily dwellings. 
(d)  Specifications for septic tank systems. The specifications for all septic tank systems constructed in the county shall conform to the rules and regulations of the DHR division of public health. 
(e)  Lot size. No septic tank system shall be authorized or installed where the area of the lot is less than that required by the department of health. 
(f)  Discharge to surface not allowed. No septic tank shall be allowed to discharge to the surface or to any natural outlet. 
(g)  Health menace not allowed. No septic tank that creates or will be likely to create a menace to public health shall be allowed. 
(h)  Septic tank serving multiple units not allowed. Only one residential unit or commercial building per septic tank system is allowed. 
(i)  Street address required. A street address must be obtained from the department of public services and engineering prior to the issuance of a septic tank system approval letter by the water system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-193. - Correction of unsanitary system. 
Any premises that has a septic tank, privy or any other private sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be made to function in a sanitary manner within 30 days from the receipt of a written notification and order from the director of the health department that such system is not functioning in a sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-194. - Time limit for connection of failing private system to the county wastewater system. 
If wastewater availability exists, and the connection requirements of section 98-8 are met, a property currently served by a private wastewater disposal system that has failed shall connect to the county wastewater system within 30 days after written notice from the director regarding the failed private system and steps required for connection. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-195. - Disposition of unused septic tanks. 
When removed from service, any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with a suitable material such as sand, gravel, dirt, etc. In the alternative, the out-of-service wastewater disposal facilities shall be removed from the ground. All connections to the county wastewater system which remove septic tanks from service shall be made to the plumbing system upstream of the septic tank. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-196. - Pit privies prohibited. 
No pit privies or other such similar subsurface systems shall be installed. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-197. - Additional requirements established by the county board of health. 
No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the rules and regulations of the county board of health. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-198. - Pollution of streams or soil. 
(a)  No person shall cause or allow to be caused, the deposition of pollution into or onto the streams, drainage ditches, or soil of the county. Such a deposition of pollution shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and also may be punished as provided in section 1-11. Each day that the offense continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The notice of violation requirements provided in the response plan shall not be required for cases involving the sudden and accidental releases of pollution. 
(b)  This section may be enforced by any remedy as set forth in division 8 of this article. 
(c)  It is not the intent of this section to preempt any federal or state water pollution control laws but instead to complement such laws so as to provide a local remedy for offenses which are not enforced under such federal or state laws. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-199—98-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF COUNTY EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 98-221. - Right to enter premises. 
Duly authorized employees and representatives of the county and authorized representatives of applicable federal and state regulatory agencies bearing proper credentials and identification shall be allowed to enter all properties at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurements, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharges to the county wastewater system in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-222. - Right to obtain information. 
Duly authorized employees and representatives of the county are authorized to obtain information concerning character, strength and quantity of nondomestic wastewater which may have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the county wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-223. - Permitted activities on utility easements. 
Duly authorized employees and representatives of the county bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted at reasonable times to enter all private properties through which the county holds a utility easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the water or wastewater facilities lying within such easement. All entry of subsequent work, if any, on such easement shall be done in full accord with the terms of the utility easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-224. - Safety rules. 
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in this division, the duly authorized employees or representatives of the county shall observe all reasonable safety rules. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-225—98-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 98-241. - Criminal sanction and fines. 
(a)  Generally. Any person who violates any of the terms or conditions of this chapter or who knowingly makes false statements, representations, certifications, in any application or questionnaire, record, plan or other document or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter shall be liable to the county and subject to the terms of section 1-11. 
(b)  Discharge limit violations. Any violation of the wastewater discharge prohibitions set forth in section 98-161 or violations of the conditions contained in a discharge permit issued by the county pursuant to section 98-166 shall be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-242. - Revocation of permit. 
The discharge permits issued in accordance with the provisions of section 98-166 may be suspended, revoked or denied in accordance with the procedures set forth therein for violation of any of the prohibitions set forth in section 98-161. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-243. - Termination of service: lien created by nonpayment of amounts due; interest on amounts due. 
(a)  In order to enforce the operation of the county wastewater ordinance codified in this article, the county shall have the power and authority to enter, at reasonable times, upon the property of any user who has violated any provision of this article following due notice of the violation as provided in the response plan to terminate the user's wastewater service in any manner deemed necessary and appropriate by the county; provided, however, that the county shall have the power to enter upon the property of any user who is causing immediate endangerment or health risk and terminate the user's wastewater service in any manner deemed necessary and appropriate by the county without notice. In the event of such termination under this section, the county shall retain all rights to collect unpaid bills or amounts owed by the terminated user according to law or other provision of this article. Such rates or charges, if not paid when due, shall constitute a lien upon the premises served. 
(b)  Past due amounts shall bear interest at the same rate as would unpaid ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-244. - Civil liabilities and penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions contained in this chapter or who violates the conditions contained in any county-issued discharge permit or who violates any consent order, prohibition, discharge limitation, standard of performance or pretreatment standard shall be liable to the county and subject to the terms of section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-245. - Injunctive relief. 
If any person violates the provisions of this chapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the county, the county may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief including injunctive relief, in the appropriate court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-246. - Consent orders. 
Consent orders may be utilized by the chairperson or his designee to enforce the provisions contained in this chapter 98. A consent order may be issued to any person who violates any provisions of said chapter. The consent order shall be an agreement between the county and the person or entity in violation and shall operate as follows: 
(1)  The county shall agree not to prosecute under the law relative to the particular violation or violations being considered if the violating person or entity complies with the terms and conditions of the consent order. 
(2)  A schedule including various terms and conditions, as necessary, for the violating person or entity to achieve compliance shall be provided. 
(3)  A monetary payment of an amount commensurate with the nature and magnitude of the violation may be stipulated in the consent order. Such monetary payment shall be made by the violating person to the county and shall have the legal effect of consideration provided in exchange for the county's covenant not to sue or prosecute on the violation or violations so stipulated in the consent order. 
(4)  Any party to any consent order shall agree that any such consent order may be filed with the superior court of the county, along with pleadings seeking to make such consent order an order of the superior court of the county, and enforceable as such court's order in any subsequent enforcement action which may be necessary. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a consent order prior to taking any other enforcement actions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-247. - Criminal sanctions and fines. 
Any person who violates any of the terms or conditions of this chapter or who knowingly makes false statements, representations, certifications, in any application or questionnaire, record, plan or other document or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this chapter 98 shall be liable to the county and subject to the terms of section 1-11 and/or State of Georgia remedies. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-248. - Other enforcement and penalty provisions. 
Other enforcement and penalty provisions contained in this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  Subsection 98-141(a) prohibits unauthorized water or wastewater connection, punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or 60 days imprisonment for each offense. 
(2)  Subsection 98-141(c) makes it unlawful to maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with water or wastewater facilities punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or 60 days imprisonment for each offense. 
(3)  Subsection 98-142(f) provides for the revocation of holding tank haulers permits for the failure to pay for the services rendered. 
(4)  Subsection 98-198 makes it unlawful to cause the deposition of pollution into or onto the streams, drainage ditches, or soil of the county punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00, and/or 60 days imprisonment, per day. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-249. - Enforcement actions accumulative. 
Except as otherwise provided, all of the enforcement provisions set forth in this chapter are cumulative to any other enforcement procedures or remedies which may be available to the county either by local or state law or by this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-250. - Notices of violation. 
Notices of violation may be utilized by the chairman or his designee to enforce the provisions contained in this chapter. A notice of violation may be issued to any person who violates any provisions of this chapter. The notice of violation may be in the form of one or more of the following: 
(1)  Phone call. A verbal telephone notice of violation to the authorized representative of a nondomestic user, or his designated contact person, for very minor violations. No follow-up is normally expected. 
(2)  Letter of violation. A written notice of violation to the authorized representative of a response within a specified length of time indicating the reason for the violation and what steps are being taken to prevent any future violations of the same nature. 
(3)  Site visit. An onsite visit to the nondomestic user to notify the authorized representative of a nondomestic user, or his designated contact person, of a violation, and to discuss and observe the problem. It may be used in place of, or in conjunction with a phone call or a letter of violation, and can require a written response within a specified length of time indicating the reason for the violation and what steps are being taken to prevent any future violations of the same nature. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a notice of violation prior to taking any other enforcement actions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-251. - Show cause orders. 
Show cause orders may be utilized by the chairman or his designee to enforce the provisions contained in this chapter. A show cause order may be issued to any person who violates any provisions of this chapter. The show cause order shall demand a violator show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a show cause order prior to taking any other enforcement actions. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Sec. 98-252. - Emergency suspensions. 
The county may immediately suspend any user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The county may also immediately suspend any user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the county may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the wastewater connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The county may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the county that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further proceedings are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the county prior to the date of any show cause or termination action under sections 98-250 or 98-243. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 2007-07, § 1, 3-27-2007) 
Secs. 98-253—98-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REVENUE COLLECTIONS AND BILLING; CUSTOMER SERVICE AND METER READING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-261. - Generally. 
(a)  Customer service, meter reading, and billing and collections for the Rockdale County Water System and Rockdale County Wastewater System shall be under the supervision and direction of the director of the water resources department. 
(b)  The director of the water resources department or his or her designee shall be vested with the authority to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-29, § 2, 12-20-2007; Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, 5-12-2009) 
Secs. 98-262—98-264. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 98-265. - Water and wastewater service deposit. 
(a)  In order to secure the prompt payment of accounts and charges for services and facilities and connection afforded, and as a condition precedent to the rendering of such service, each water and wastewater customer shall deposit a sum as fixed from time to time by the board of commissioners based on the size of the water meter installed on the property. 
(b)  Upon payment of all outstanding charges for services and a cut-off fee as fixed from time to time by the board of commissioners, the customer's deposit shall be refunded without interest. 
(Ord. No. 2007-29, § 2, 12-20-2007) 
Sec. 98-266. - Water and wastewater billing and rates—Generally. 
(a)  Rate schedules. The rate schedule for water and wastewater service furnished to customers shall be fixed from time-to-time by the board of commissioners, and changes in said rates may be made by the board of commissioners as necessary to support the financial needs of the county water and wastewater systems. A current copy of the rate schedule shall be maintained on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners where it shall be available for public inspection. 
(b)  Service charges; when payable; disconnection of service for failure to pay. 
(1)  The payment of all fees due for water and wastewater service shall be made monthly or at such other time as indicated by the county in accordance with a statement setting forth the amount due. Payment for services billed monthly shall be due and payable by the date specified on the bill. Failure to pay the bill on or before the due date shall result in the imposition of such delinquent penalties as fixed from time to time by the board of commissioners, and shall be in default and service may be disconnected by the county and a service may be disconnected by the due date. Failure to receive notice of the amount due shall in no way relieve the customer, or owner of the property served, from making payment as required in this subsection. 
(2)  Should any customer, including the owner of the property, receiving water or wastewater service fail to pay any sum due under this chapter, the water service shall be discontinued until such sums, with penalties as provided in this chapter, are paid in full. A penalty as set by the board of commissioners of the invoiced amount shall be assessed on all unpaid, past due invoices. A disconnection service charge, as set from time to time by the board of commissioners, shall be assessed for disconnections of water service due to delinquency. This delinquent service charge shall be applicable to each service call to discontinue service for delinquent accounts. The customer will be charged for the service call even if the service is not disconnected. The provisions of section 98-243 shall also apply. 
(c)  The following regulations shall apply to customers seeking adjustments for water and wastewater charges billed: 
(1)  Water bill adjustments for broken water lines and leaks. 
a.  In cases where it is clear that water usage as reflected by a monthly meter reading is due to an unusual circumstance, the board of commissioners or its authorized representative may authorize an adjustment of one-half the usage in excess of the average bill. 
b.  The adjustment can only be made for the two most recent billings regardless of the duration of the leak. 
c.  Leak adjustments will only be given for broken water lines and meter leaks on the customer's side of the meter. 
d.  Receipts, invoices or statements that support service needed to repair the leak in question shall be presented to customer service to be considered for an adjustment for such repairs. 
(2)  Wastewater adjustments for filling of swimming pools. 
a.  The board of commissioners or its authorized representative may authorize a wastewater usage credit for the filling of a swimming pool. 
b.  Customer must make contact with customer service before the filling of the swimming pool to establish a date for filling the swimming pool. 
c.  There shall be a difference of a minimum of 4,000 gallons from the filling for the month the swimming pool is filled and the average billing for the past 12 months. 
d.  All wastewater usage will be billed that is related to water consumption. 
e.  An adjustment for wastewater billed will be applied to the account for that water volume used to fill the swimming pool. 
f.  The adjustment is credited to the customer's account and will not be considered a refund. 
g.  The adjustment will only be applied once per year per customer. Billing for the water and wastewater utilized for filling of a swimming pool will occur on the following billing cycle. 
h.  The adjustment for wastewater sill be applied to the account on the proceeding billing cycle. 
(d)  Service calls. All service calls shall be charged to the customer requesting the service in accordance with a fee schedule established by the board of commissioners reflecting as closely as possible the actual cost to the county for rendering the service. The county's regular work hours are 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding established county holidays. Reconnections made after regular business hours and on weekends shall be made only upon customer's request and for the established after hours reconnect fees. No payments on account will be accepted in the field. 
(e)  Returned checks. A processing fee as established by the board of commissioners will be charged for returned checks. If water service has been discontinued as a result of the returned check, the service charges of this section applicable thereto will also apply. 
(f)  Failure to apply for service. A fee will be charged to water system users who have not properly applied for service in their own names. A separate fee shall be charged for each trip made by the county in an effort to have the customer properly and successfully apply for service. Payment must be made by the applicant for all water and wastewater services utilized subsequent to the former customer discontinuing service. 
(g)  Unauthorized connection or usage. The board of commissioners shall establish fees to be charged for unauthorized water or wastewater system connections and also establish separate fees for the unauthorized use of the county water or wastewater system services. Also see section 98-141. 
(h)  Optional waiver of charges by county. The chairperson or his designee shall be vested with the authority to determine any and all cases of hardship and waive CCR charges and other fees and penalties and that such action will be in the best interest of the county. 
(Ord. No. 2007-29, § 3, 12-20-1007) 
Sec. 98-267. - Damaging or tampering with water meter or water lines; discontinuing service. 
(a)  No person, other than authorized county personnel, shall remove, damage, break, disconnect or tamper with a water meter or a water measuring device. Upon the unauthorized removal, damaging, breaking, disconnecting or tampering with a water meter or a water measuring device, the customer or use in whose name the meter is registered shall be billed for estimated use of water while the meter was removed, damaged, broken, disconnected or tampered with, plus all additional fees and penalties. 
(b)  If any bill for water as provided in subsection (a), including the charge for removing, damaging, breaking or tampering with the meter, shall not be paid within 20 days after the due date, the county may discontinue water service because of the customer's failure to pay his water bill under this section. The customer's meter will not be reactivated until the outstanding bill is paid in full, and the customer pays a charge as fixed from time to time by the county for the restoration of service. 
(c)  No person, other than authorized county personnel, shall remove, damage, break, disconnect or tamper with water mains or lines. Upon the unauthorized removal, damaging, breaking, disconnecting or tampering with a water main or line, such person may be responsible for any necessary repairs as determined by the county, or, the repairs may be made by the county and such person shall be responsible to the county for the cost of such repairs. 
(d)  Any intentional or negligent act resulting in the unauthorized removal, damaging, breaking, disconnecting or tampering with a water meter or a water measuring device shall be considered unlawful and the county will prosecute under the applicable State of Georgia criminal statutes and local ordinances to the fullest extent possible. 
(Ord. No. 2007-29, § 4, 12-20-1007) 
Sec. 98-268. - Appeal of service disconnection; notice of contested charges; hardship cases; meter tests. 
(a)  Receipt by the customer or user of a water bill with extra charges under this article, other than for the normal use of water, shall constitute notice to the customer or user that he is in violation of this article and subject to have water service disconnected. 
(b)  A person desiring to contest or dispute the amount of any bill rendered under this article, including an amount charged for removing, damaging, breaking, disconnecting or tampering with a water meter or water measuring device, may pay such charges under protest on or before the due date and request a hearing, in writing, before the director of water resources or his or her designee. The hearing shall be held within 45 days of the written request. The time, date and place of the hearing shall be determined by the director of water resources or his or her designee and notice of same provided to the person requesting the hearing at least five calendar days prior to the hearing date. Following the hearing, should the director of water resources or his or her designee determine that any portion of the charges has been erroneously imposed, refund of the charges so erroneously paid shall be promptly made or such amount credited to the customer's account. The decision of the director of water resources or his or her designee shall be final. 
(c)  In cases of hardship, a person may apply to the director of water resources or his or her designee to permit installment payments to cover overdue payments. If granted, such installments must be kept according to the agreement in order to prevent service from being disconnected. All current charges must be paid in full when due. 
(d)  A customer believing his meter to be faulty may request that the county test the meter. Upon the request, along with a deposit as fixed from time to time by the county, which is to partially cover the costs of removing the meter, sending the meter to checking station and replacing the meter, this work will be accomplished and a check of the registering device made. Should the results of the test by within three percent of correct registration, a fee as fixed from time to time by the county shall be charged to the customer's account. Should the results of the check show the meter to be in error more that three percent or registering more water than actually is passing through the meter, the county shall repair or replace the meter and an adjustment shall be made to the account to cover the inaccurate billing. 
(Ord. No. 2007-29, § 5, 12-20-2007) 
Editor's note— At the instruction of the city, reference to the "director of finance" has been amended to read "director of water resources or his or her designee". 
Sec. 98-269. - Residential fireline master meters. 
(a)  Residential owners of single family residences who chose to have a single water supply line that provides both fireline service (i.e. sprinkler systems) and potable water service to the service entrant of their residential structure may qualify for a residential fireline master meter status as it relates to the billing of the base and volumetric fees. 
(b)  The owner further recognizes choosing the residential fireline master meter set up option (as opposed to having two separate water lines connected independently to a County water main; whereas, one water line would be for potable water and one water line will be for fire suppression before running to the service entrant of a residential structure) would render no fire protection to the owners property in the event water service is disconnected due to lack of payment, the owner's request, or any other circumstance that requires water service to be disconnected. 
(c)  Inspection and verification of a residential fireline master meter setup by RWR is required to qualify for residential fireline master meter status. 
(d)  Once granted residential fireline master meter status, the residential fireline master meter rate adjustment will be limited to 1 inch to 1 ½ inch meters. While the owner will be responsible for payment for the total cost of purchasing and installing a 1 inch to 1 ½ inch meter; the billing rate (base and volumetric) for a 1 inch to 1 ½ inch meter will be that of a residential ⅝ inch meter. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01, § 1, 2-27-2018) 
Subpart B - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
TITLE 1 - ADMINISTRATION 
Chapter 102 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Registration of building and repair services, § 26-131 et seq.; environment, ch. 42; hauling building materials at night, § 42-74; unfit buildings or structures; health hazards on private property, § 42-101 et seq.; health and sanitation, ch. 50; construction and demolition sites to be maintained, § 78-11; floods, ch. 106; house relocation; oversized loads, ch. 110; manufactured and industrialized homes, ch. 114; subdivisions, ch. 122; vegetation, ch. 126; zoning, ch. 130. 

Sec. 102-1. - Title. 
This Subpart B shall be known as "The Unified Development Ordinance ("UDO", or "Ordinance") of Rockdale County, Georgia." It consists of three Titles: Title 1, Administration; Title 2, Land Use and Zoning; and Title 3, Development and Permitting. Title 1 is intended to implement regulations generally applicable to Rockdale County and also to specifically address administrative regulations, including definitions, enforcement and penalties applicable to Titles 2 and 3. Title 2 is Rockdale County's Zoning Ordinance, and is intended to constitute a zoning ordinance within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1, et seq. Changes to the text of Title 2, as well as official zoning map amendments and other zoning actions addressed therein, accordingly shall require compliance with the public notice and hearing procedures provided therein and in said state statute. Title 3 is intended to regulate development and permitting activities in Rockdale County. Neither Title 1 nor Title 3 is intended to constitute a zoning ordinance or zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 102-2. - Purpose. 
The UDO is enacted by the board of commissioners in order to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents of Rockdale County, Georgia and to implement the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan. To these ends, the UDO is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
(a)  To guide and regulate the orderly growth, development, redevelopment, and preservation of Rockdale County in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan and with long-term objectives, principles, and standards deemed beneficial to the interest and welfare of the people. 
(b)  To protect the established character and the social and economic well being of both private and public property. 
(c)  To promote, in the public interest, the efficient utilization of land. 
(d)  To promote the preservation of open space. 
(e)  To provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood, and other dangers. 
(f)  To reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets. 
(g)  To facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community. 
(h)  To encourage an aesthetically attractive environment, both built and natural, and to provide for regulations that protect and enhance these aesthetic considerations. 
(i)  To provide a basis for establishing the future need for law enforcement and fire protection, transportation, water, sewage, flood protection, schools, parks, recreational facilities, and other public facilities and services. 
(j)  To protect against the destruction of, or encroachment upon, historic areas. 
(k)  To protect against overcrowding of land, undue density of population in relation to the community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, and loss of life or health from fire, flood or other danger. 
(l)  To encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base. 
(m)  To ensure the perpetual conservation, preservation and enjoyment of the unique natural and physical resources of the county, including forested areas, watersheds, streams, viewsheds, and archaeological sites and the protection of water quality as the county grows. 
(n)  To achieve compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(o)  To provide for and promote housing for all income groups and all citizens within the county. 
(p)  To establish high quality standards for buildings, land development, and subdivision regulations for the protection of the environment and the security of buyers and users of developed property in Rockdale County. 
(q)  To provide adequate and safe construction standards for streets, sidewalks, drainage, utilities and other public improvements. 
(r)  To provide a method of administration and procedure that ensures due process and equal protection for the citizens and property owners of Rockdale County. 
(s)  To establish a just balance between the rights of owners of property and the public interest of all the citizens of Rockdale County. 
(t)  To provide for protection of the constitutional rights and obligations of all citizens within the county. 
(u)  To provide penalties for a violation and remedies for enforcement hereof; and for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 102-3. - Authority. 
(a)  The UDO is enacted pursuant to the Constitution of the State of Georgia, article 9, section 2, paragraphs 1 and 3; by the county's authority to enact regulations and exercise powers granted by local laws including 1977 Ga. Laws p. 2817 Section 10, as amended; by the county's planning authority and general police powers; and by other powers and authority provided by federal, state, and local laws applicable hereto. Additional zoning authority for Title 2 is set forth in section 202-2. 
(b)  The UDO shall take effect and shall be in force upon its adoption by the board of commissioners of Rockdale County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 102-4. - Jurisdiction. 
The UDO shall apply to all unincorporated areas of Rockdale County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 102-5. - Application of ordinance. 
Except as hereinafter provided, as of the date of adoption of the UDO: 
(a)  Development activity. Any person proposing to rezone property, secure permits, undertake any land disturbance activity, construct, demolish, expand or modify a structure or a building for occupancy, develop or subdivide land within unincorporated areas of Rockdale County, Georgia, or undertake any other development permission or activity shall pay a fee and make application to the Rockdale County Department of Public Services and Engineering, and shall comply with all regulations set forth in the UDO. 
(b)  Use. No building, structure, premises or land shall be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, remodeled, extended, enlarged, constructed, or altered in a manner except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is or is to be located. 
(c)  Lots. No lot shall be reduced in size so that minimum lot area is not maintained. This section shall not apply to the extent that a portion of a lot is acquired for public use. See subsection 302-9(b)(7). 
(d)  Pending application for building permits and land disturbance permits. Nothing in the UDO shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building or structure or land disturbance for which development or building permits were lawfully applied for or approved, prior to the effective date of the UDO or amendment thereto, provided: 
(1)  Such permit has not by its own terms expired prior to such effective date. 
(2)  Actual building construction is commenced prior to the expiration of such permit. 
(3)  Actual building construction is carried on pursuant to said permit and limited to and in strict accordance with said permit. 
(4)  No renewals or extensions of said permit shall be authorized. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 102-6. - Relationship to existing ordinances. 
(a)  Whenever the provisions of the UDO impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, ordinance or resolution, these standards shall prevail, unless otherwise specified in the UDO. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, ordinance, or resolution impose more restrictive standards than are required herein, the requirements of such regulations shall prevail, unless otherwise specified in the UDO. 
(b)  In those instances where development standards for a parcel of land or a specific project have been lawfully established as a condition of approval for a rezoning, variance, permit, or other formal action by the board of commissioners, the board of adjustment, or the planning commission, the requirements of such conditions shall control. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall repeal the conditions of use, operation, or site development accompanying zoning approval(s) or conditional use(s), variances or permits issued under previous ordinances or resolutions. Modification or repeal of such past conditions of approval may be accomplished as authorized and provided by the UDO. All variances and exceptions heretofore granted by the director, board of adjustment, planning commission, or board of commissioners shall remain in full force and effect, and all terms, conditions and obligations heretofore imposed by the board of adjustment shall remain in effect. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 102-7. - Powers and duties of the department of public services and engineering. 
(a)  Duties. The department of public services and engineering, which includes the building inspector and other such inspectors, shall have the responsibility of interpreting, administering and enforcing the provisions of the UDO unless specifically provided otherwise. In particular, the department shall have the following powers and duties under the UDO: 
(1)  Authorization. The department is authorized to review and make final decisions regarding permits and other development requests authorized in the UDO. 
(2)  Duty. It shall be the duty of the department to administer and enforce the provisions of the UDO. 
(3)  Applications. The department shall accept and process applications and make recommendations or final decisions, as appropriate, for comprehensive plan amendments, official zoning map or text amendments, variances, special use permits, appeals, concept plans, preliminary and final plats, permits, licenses, and certificates of occupancy or any other such business including matters scheduled for public hearing by the board of commissioners, the planning commission or the board of adjustment, as required by the UDO and subsection (a)(7). 
(4)  Records. The department shall keep records of actions on comprehensive plan amendments, official zoning map or text amendments, variances, special use permits, appeals, and concept plans, preliminary and final plats, permits, licenses and certificates of occupancy along with notation of all special conditions involved. The department shall file and safely keep these records along with copies of all related applications, reviews, opinions, public hearings, sketches and plans submitted and other related documents that are to be made a part of the public record. 
(5)  Reporting. The department shall research facts and prepare reports for the board of commissioners, the planning commission and the board of adjustment related to their actions in the matters described in the UDO. Those reports shall be in writing on a form prescribed by the department and shall be made part of the public record. 
(6)  Maps. The department shall maintain, update and interpret the official zoning map, future land use map, and other maps required for the administration of the UDO, including all amendments thereto. 
(7)  Review. The department shall receive and review applications and plans for land disturbance permits, land development permits and building permits to ensure conformity with the requirements of the UDO and other relevant state and county regulations and approve, approve with conditions, or deny said applications within 30 days of receipt of complete applications, except where another time limit is specified for the type of action under review. 
(8)  Zoning verification. In response to a written request by the property owner or owner's authorized agent, the department may issue a statement identifying the current zoning of a parcel of land as provided in section 202-7 of the UDO. The fee for such a zoning verification shall be established by the director. 
(9)  Administrative variances. The department shall receive, review, grant, grant with conditions or deny administrative variances where authorized in the UDO. The fee for administrative variances shall be established by the director. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 102-8. - Adoption of certain codes. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 8-2-25 and other applicable authority, the latest edition of each of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, shall be applicable and enforced: 
(1)  International Building Code. 
(2)  International Fuel Gas Code. 
(3)  International Mechanical Code. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code. 
(5)  International Fire Code. 
(6)  International Energy Conservation Code. 
(7)  International Residential Code. 
(8)  International Property Maintenance Code. 
(9)  International Existing Building Code. 
(10)  National Electrical Code. 
(b)  In addition, chapter 1 and all appendices of the aforementioned codes referenced in subsection (a) above are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein fully. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  In each of the codes referenced above, when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named in the codes, the county officer who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the code shall be deemed to be the county officer responsible for enforcing the provisions of the code. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 3—5, 5-22-2007) 
Chapter 106 - DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS 

Sec. 106-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Rules of interpretation. 
(1)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural; and words in the plural include the singular; words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and are intended to be gender-neutral. 
(2)  The word "shall" is always mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. 
(3)  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual. 
(4)  The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed to be used or occupied." 
(5)  The word "erected" shall be deemed also to include "constructed," "reconstructed," "altered," "moved" or "placed." 
(6)  The word "land use" and "use of land" shall be deemed also to include "building use" and "use of building." 
(7)  Unless otherwise specified, all distances shall be measured along a straight line, horizontally. 
(8)  Unless indicated otherwise, reference to zoning districts refer to the most recent copy of the "Official Zoning Map of Rockdale County, Georgia." 
(b)  Rules of precedence. The following rules set forth the order of precedence that determines which definition applies in a specific instance within the provisions of the UDO: 
(1)  When definitions are provided within an individual chapter, article or section of the UDO, those definitions are to be applied within said chapter, article, or section. If the same term or phrase is also defined in this section, the definition in subsection (c) of this section shall not apply in that instance. 
(2)  When no definitions are provided within an individual chapter, article, or section of the UDO, words and phrases used in the UDO shall have the meaning established by the definitions provided in this subsection (c) of this section. 
(3)  For words and phrases listed in the Table of Uses in Article I of Chapter 218 with a NAICS code, the NAICS definition shall be the legal definition. Said NAICS definitions, as amended, are hereby incorporated by this reference to the extent utilized in the UDO. 
(4)  All remaining words used in the UDO are intended to have the commonly accepted definitions contained in a recent edition of the Merriam-Webster Dictionary. 
(c)  Definitions. As used in the UDO, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below, except where otherwise specifically set forth in subsection (b) above. 
Absorption field: A configuration of absorption trenches installed in a portion of land and used for the absorption and final treatment of wastewater. 
Abutting: Touching at one point or along a common side, boundary or property line. Two pieces of property that are separated by a street or right-of-way are adjacent, but not abutting. 
Accessory building: See Building, accessory. 
Accessory structure: See Structure, accessory. 
Accessory use: See Use, accessory. 
Acre: A unit of area equal to 43,560 square feet. 
Addition (to an existing building): See section 320-2(h). 
Adjacent property: See Property, adjacent. 
Adjacent to an interstate highway: Located within 250 feet of the nearest outer edge of the pavement of Interstate 20 within the county, regardless of the existence of intervening streets or lots. 
Administrative official: Any member of the department of public services and engineering when exercising the duties authorized in the UDO. 
Adult: Any competent individual 18 years of age or older. 
Adult day center: A facility serving aging adults that provides adult day care or adult day health services for compensation to three or more persons. 
Adult entertainment establishment: See Rockdale County Code of Ordinances, chapter 22, article V. 
Aging adults: Persons 60 years of age or older or mature adults below the age of 60 whose needs and interests are substantially similar to persons 60 years of age or older who have physical or mental limitations that restrict their abilities to perform the normal activities of daily living and impede independent living. 
Aggregate: Washed gravel or washed stone meeting the GDOT standards for hardness or other materials approved by the GDOT. 
Agriculture: Raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock or poultry; growing plants, sod, and trees for sale; the production of horticultural, diary, poultry, eggs and apiarian products. 
Aggrieved party: A person who can demonstrate that their property will be specially damaged by a decision of a county official or board involved in the enforcement of the UDO. 
Airport: A transportation terminal facility where aircraft take off and land, usually including hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations for passengers. 
Airstrip, private: An area designated for the landing of private, non-commercial aircraft with no terminal facilities and no scheduled takeoffs and landings. 
Alley: See Street classifications. 
Alteration: Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy; any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders, doors, windows, means of ingress or egress, or any enlargement to, or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building from one location to another. 
Alternative on-site sewage management system: Any approved on-site sewage management system which differs in design or operation from the conventional or chamber septic tank. 
Alternative tower structure: Manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light and power poles, water storage tanks, outdoor advertising signs and similar alternative design mounting structures that effectively camouflage the presence of antennas or towers and are compatible with and resemble the scale of the surrounding natural setting and/or structures. 
Antenna: Any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Antenna, amateur radio: A freestanding or building-mounted device, intended for airway communication purposes by a person holding a valid amateur radio (HAM) or Citizens Band (CB) license issued by the Federal Communications Commission. 
Antenna, satellite: A specific device, the surface of which is used to transmit and/or receive radio frequency signals, microwave signals, or other signals transmitted to or from other antennas. 
Apartment: A multi-family dwelling held through a lease or rental agreement. 
Apartment, efficiency: An apartment consisting of two or fewer rooms, not including a separate bedroom. 
Appeal: A request for a review to hear and decide where it was alleged there was an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination, or refusal made by any officer of Rockdale County in the enforcement of the UDO. 
Application: A document and associated documentation filed by any person seeking approval to undertake any activity regulated by Rockdale County. 
Aquifer: Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Area of shallow flooding: See subsection 320-2. 
Area of special flood hazard: See subsection 320-2. 
Arterial: See Street classifications. 
Authorized use: A use authorized in a zoning district pursuant to Title 2. 
Automobile: A motorized vehicle with two axles and not more than six wheels, designed for carrying ten passengers or less and used for the transportation of persons. 
Automobile impound lot: A facility that provides temporary outdoor storage for automobiles that are to be claimed by title holders or their agents. No vehicle shall be stored at said facility for more than 30 days and must remain mechanically operable and licensed at all times. 
Automobile repair services, major: General repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work, framework, welding, and major painting services. 
Automobile repair services, minor: The replacement of any part or repair of any part of an automobile or light truck that does not require removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission or differential; incidental body and fender work, minor painting and upholstering service. 
Awning: A shelter projecting over a window or door that is attached to the exterior wall of the building over a window or door that extends from the exterior wall of a building and is supported by or attached to a frame. 
Base flood: See subsection 320-2. 
Basement: That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade and has at least 6½ feet vertical interior clearance from floor or grade to ceiling or underside of structure. 
Beacon: A stationary or revolving light which flashes or projects single color or multi-colored illumination, in any manner which does or is intended to attract or divert attention, providing this term shall not include any lighting device required by regulations prescribed by the Federal Aviation Administration or similar government agencies. 
Bed and breakfast: An owner-occupied, single-family dwelling where between one and ten rooms not containing kitchen facilities are rented to overnight guests on a daily basis for periods not to exceed two weeks. 
Berm: An earthen mound designed to screen undesirable views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes. 
Best management practices (BMPs): See section 306-2. 
Bike lane: A paved lane on a street or roadway that is reserved by pavement marking and /or signs for the exclusive use by bicycles. 
Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
Board: Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County. 
Board of adjustment: The Rockdale County Board of Adjustment, formerly known as the Rockdale County Board of Zoning Appeals. 
Board of commissioners: The Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. 
Boarding house: A building, other than a hotel or bed and breakfast, where, for compensation, meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for one or more persons who are not part of the operator's family. 
Boulevard: See Street classifications. 
Buffer, transitional: That portion of a lot set aside for open space and visual screening purposes, pursuant to applicable provision of this chapter, so separate different use districts, or to separate uses on one property from uses on another property of the same use district or a different use district. See chapter 328, article I. 
Buffer, state waters: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat, as referenced in O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. See section 306-2. 
Buildable area: The area of a lot remaining after the minimum front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the zoning district has been met. 
Building: Any structure with a roof and enclosed on all sides. 
Building, accessory: A building detached from the principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or use. 
Building, elevated: See subsection 320(j). 
Building permit: See Permit, building. 
Building principal: A building in which is conducted the main or dominant use of the lot on which such building is situated. 
Building wall: An exterior load-bearing or non-load-bearing vertical structure that encompasses the area between the final grade elevation and eaves of the building, and used to enclose the space within the building. 
Caliper: The diameter measurement of a tree in inches measured six inches above ground. When the tree caliper is greater than six inches, the diameter measurement shall be made at breast height (4½ feet) and shall be called diameter at breast height (DBH). 
Cambium: Tissue within the woody portion of trees and shrubs which gives rise to the woody water and nutrient conducting system, and the energy substrate transport system in trees. Cambium growth activity results in a tree's radial development, i.e., increase in diameter. 
Cambial dieback: The irreparable radial or vertical interruption of a tree's cambium, usually caused by mechanical damage, such as "skinning bark"; or from excessive heat. 
Campground: See Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds. 
Canopy: A roof structure constructed of rigid materials, including but not limited to, metal, wood, concrete, plastic, or glass, which is attached to and supported by a building, or which is free-standing and supported by columns, poles or braces extended to the ground. Unlike an awning, a canopy is generally supported by vertical elements rising from the ground at two or more corners. 
Canopy, tree: The perimeter formed by the outer edge of the branches and leaves of a tree. 
Car wash, conveyor means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
Car wash, in-bay automatic means a commercial car wash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the car. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
Car wash, self-service means a commercial car wash where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
Caretaker dwelling or employee residence: An accessory single-family dwelling unit placed on an occupied tract for use by an employee where the tract is owned by the employer as a part of the same operation or business. At least on of the occupants of the caretaker dwelling or employee residence must be employed on the premises or their presence must be necessary and essential for the orderly operation and security of the premises. 
Cellar: That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade and has a height less than 6½ feet. 
Cemetery: Any plot of ground, churchyard, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure used for the burial of deceased persons. 
Cemetery, pet: Property used for the interring of dead domestic animals. 
Cemetery, private: Any plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure used for the burial of deceased persons of one collateral line of descent. 
Center line of street: See Street, centerline of. 
Chairman: Chairman of the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. 
Child: Any person under 18 years of age. 
Child care learning center: Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group wherein are received for pay for group care, for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody, 19 or more children under 18 years of age and which is required to be licensed by Bright from the Start, Georgia Department of Early Care and Learning. 
Clear cutting: The clearing or removal of trees from a site in a manner contrary to the best management practices of the Georgia Forestry Commission, except as consistent with activity authorized by a development permit or building permit. 
Clearing: The removal of trees and brush from the land but not including removing roots and stumps or the ordinary mowing of grass. 
Clerk: The clerk serving the board of commissioners of Rockdale County, Georgia. 
Clinic: A medical or dental establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment. 
Club, private: A non-commercial establishment organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests, or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings, and a constitution or bylaws. 
Collateral: Belonging to the same ancestral stock but not in a direct line of descent. 
Collector: See Street classifications. 
Colleges, universities and professional schools: Establishments primarily engaged in furnishing academic courses and granting degrees at baccalaureate or graduate levels. 
Co-location: The placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower or alternative tower structure. 
Columbarium: A structure or building substantially exposed above ground intended to be used for the interment of the cremated remains of deceased persons. 
Combination, lot: The process of legally joining two lots of record to form a single conforming lot in accordance with the provisions of section 302-27, with or without re-subdivision of such lots. 
Commercial message: Any sign, wording, logo, or other visual representation that directly or indirectly names, advertises, or directs attention to a business operated for profit, or to a product, commodity or service for sale or lease, or to any other commercial interest or activity. 
Commercial use: An occupation, place of employment, or enterprise that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee, or licensee. 
Community water system (CWS): A public drinking water system permitted by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division per Chapter 391-3-5 that serves at least 15 service connections used by year-round residents or regularly serves at least 25 year-round residents. 
Composting facility, municipal solid waste: An establishment converting municipal solid waste to humus through a controlled process of degrading organic matter by microorganisms. 
Composting facility, yard trimmings: An establishment converting yard trimmings to humus through a controlled process of degrading organic matter by microorganisms. This definition does not include composting conducted on a residential lot for home gardening purposes. 
Comprehensive plan: Any part or element of the overall plan for development adopted by the board of commissioners as provided by O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 and DCA Regulations Chapter 110-3-2, Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning, including the future land use map and all other maps, exhibits, and appendices. 
Conditional approval: The imposition of conditions in the grant of an application for approval of a rezoning, special use permit, variance, concept plan, preliminary plat, or permit that are in addition to or different from the regulations set forth in this land development ordinance and which are related to the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding property. 
Condominium: A building, or group of buildings, in which dwelling units, offices, or floor areas are owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
Coniferous: Belonging to the group of cone-bearing evergreen trees or shrubs. 
Conservation easement: A recorded agreement between a land owner and government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Construction activity: Activities including, but not limited to, activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits, such as clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance, erecting new structures and buildings, as well as redevelopment, remodeling or modification of an existing building or structure. 
Construction/demolition waste: Waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to asbestos containing waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material, and other non-putrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Construction, existing: Any structure for which "the start of construction" commenced before the effective date of these regulations. 
Construction, new: Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the UDO; other structures that are built on previously undeveloped land and are not additions or alterations. 
Construction, start of: The point of time commemorating the breaking of ground for the construction of a development or structure. 
Cottage food consumer: A person who is a member of the public, takes possession of food, is not functioning in the capacity of an operator of a food sales establishment or food processing plant, and does not offer the food for resale. 
Cottage food operator: A person who produces cottage food products only in the home kitchen of that person's primary domestic residence and only for sale directly to the consumer. 
Cottage food products: Non-potentially hazardous baked goods, jams, jellies, preserves, and other non-potentially hazardous foods produced in the home kitchen of a domestic residence. 
County: Rockdale County, Georgia. 
County arborist/urban forester: The agent of Rockdale County, having enforcement responsibilities under the UDO, and charged with the responsibility, as the designee of the director of the department of public services and engineering, of approving all tree protection plans for land development or building construction in unincorporated Rockdale County required pursuant to the UDO. 
Cremation: As described in O.C.G.A. § 10-14-3 G, cremation includes any mechanical or thermal process whereby a deceased human being is reduced to ashes. Cremation also includes any other mechanical or thermal process whereby human remains are pulverized, burned, re-cremated, or otherwise further reduced in size or quantity. 
Crematory: A location containing properly installed, certified apparatus intended for use in the act of cremation. 
Cul-de-sac: A local street or road with one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. See subsection 332-1(b). 
Curb cut: The opening along the curb line or edge of pavement of a public street at which point a driveway begins for vehicular ingress and egress from a parcel. 
Cut: See section 306-2. 
Dam: 
1.  Any artificial barrier, including appurtenant works, which impounds or diverts water and which the improper operation or failure of such would result in probable loss of human life as determined pursuant to the Georgia Safe Dam Act, and which: 
a.  Is 25 feet or more in height from the natural bed of the stream or water course measured at the downstream toe or the lowest elevation of the outside limit of the barrier (whichever is lower) to the maximum water storage elevation; or 
b.  Has an impounding capacity at maximum water storage elevation of 100 acre-feet or more. 
2.  Any artificial barrier, including appurtenant works, constructed in conjunction with the reclamation of surface mined land, and meeting the requirements of subsection 1 above, and when improper operation or failure would result in probable loss of human life. 
Day care center, adult: An establishment operated by any person with or without compensation for providing for the care, supervision, and oversight only during daytime hours of seven or more adults who are elderly, physically ill or infirm, physically handicapped or mentally handicapped. 
Day care facility, adult: Any place operated by any person with or without compensation for providing for the care, supervision, and oversight only during day-time hours of six or fewer adults who are elderly, physically ill or inform, physically handicapped, or mentally handicapped. 
Day-care center, child: An establishment operated by a person, society, agency, corporation or institution, or any group, wherein are received with or without pay, seven or more children under 18 years of age for group care for less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody. 
Day-care facility, child: Any place operated by any person with or without compensation providing for the care, supervision, and protection of six or fewer children who are under 18 years of age for group care for less than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody. For the purpose of computing the number of children within the child day-care facility, all children who are related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship to the person or persons operating the facility shall be included. 
Deciduous tree: A tree that sheds its leaves annually. 
Density: The total number of square feet of a building, or number of lots or dwelling units per acre of land unless specifically provided otherwise in the UDO. 
Density, gross: The number of square feet of a building, or number of lots or dwelling units on a tract of land divided by the total acres of a parcel or tract of land prior to development or subdivision, including all streets or rights-of-way, open space, floodplain, and other un-subdivided or unused portions of the tract of land. 
Density, net: The number of square feet, lots or dwelling units on a tract of land, less area for streets, rights-of-way, open space, floodplain, and other un-subdivided or unused portions of the tract of land. 
Department: The Department of Public Services and Engineering of Rockdale County. 
Department of environmental health: The Rockdale County Department of Environmental Health. 
Detention: The temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility: A permanent basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Developer: A person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or and storage equipment or materials. 
Development permit: An official authorization issued by the director allowing clearing, grubbing, grading or other alteration of the site that entails land disturbance related to construction activities in compliance with the UDO. 
DHR: The Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Diameter at breast height (DBH): A standard measure of the diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at a height of 4½ feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4½ feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
Direct discharge: See Discharge, direct. 
Director: The director of Rockdale County Department of Public Services and Engineering or his or her designee. 
District, zoning: A tract of land or contiguous parcels of Rockdale County, Georgia within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
Drainage area: That area contributing runoff to a single point; measured in a horizontal plane that is enclosed by a ridge. 
Drainage basin: An area defined by topography within which any water that falls is tributary to the specified watercourse as shown on an official map identifying the drainage basins existing within Rockdale County promulgated and maintained by the department of water resources. 
Drainage easement: See Easement, drainage. 
Drainage structure: See section 306-2. 
Dripline: A vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy or shrub branch to the ground. 
Driveway: A vehicular access, or curb cut that is in private ownership, except for that portion lying within the public right-of-way, and provides access primarily to one property. 
Drug rehabilitation center: Structures and land used for treatment of drug abuse where neither meals nor lodging is provided. 
Dry cleaning and laundry services: A business that provides for the cleaning of laundry and dry cleaning, excluding self service, and contains on the premises, equipment necessary for the processing of laundry and dry cleaning. 
Dumpster: A portable container used for temporary storage of garbage, trash, or other refuse or receptacle material that has a capacity of one cubic yard or more (see section 226-3). 
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof designed, arranged or used principally for residential occupancy (not including buildings designed for transient use such as hotels and motels), and which complies with the provisions of the UDO and the International Building Code. 
Dwelling, accessory: A secondary dwelling established in conjunction with, and clearly subordinate to, a primary dwelling unit on the same lot, whether a part of the same structure as the primary dwelling unit or in a detached structure. 
Dwelling, multi-family: A building designed, constructed, altered or used for more than two adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a separate entrance and a party wall and/or party floor or ceiling connecting it with at least one other dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, principal: The building that is used as the primary residence on a lot. 
Dwelling, single-family: A dwelling structure that is designed for the use of one family. 
Dwelling, single-family attached: A building containing two or more one-family attached dwelling units joined at one or more points by one or more party walls or other common facilities (not including the walls of an enclosed courtyard or similar area) and with property lines separating each dwelling unit. This includes townhouses. 
Dwelling, single-family detached: A free standing building designed for or containing one dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex): A single building designed for and containing two dwelling units located on one lot or one parcel of land. 
Dwelling unit: One or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single housekeeping unit. Does not include rooms in a hotel, motel, boarding house, bed and breakfast, or extended stay hotel. 
Dwelling, single-family zero lot line: A single-family dwelling unit erected as a detached dwelling unit with no required side and/or front setback on one side so as to allow the dwelling unit to be built on the property line but not attached to another dwelling. See section 218-13. 
Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Easement, access: An easement created for the purpose of providing vehicular or pedestrian access to or across a property. 
Easement, drainage: Land required for the installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches and/or required for the preservation or maintenance of a natural stream or watercourse or other drainage facility. 
Easement, utility: A grant by a property owner for the use of real property for the specified purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities; including, but not limited to sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, cable lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines. 
Electric, petroleum or gas substation: Facilities devoted to the distribution of electricity, gas or petroleum. 
Electric vehicle: Vehicle powered in full or in part by electricity and requiring to be charged periodically, with a maximum speed of at least 65 miles per hour, and in compliance with Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Section 571. 
Electric vehicle battery exchange station: A facility where an electric vehicle can exchange its depleted battery for a fully charged battery. 
Electric vehicle charging station: A stand-alone apparatus dedicated to the charging of electric vehicle batteries, by providing a connection to a power source. 
Electric vehicle charging unit: A wall-mounted apparatus with an electrical outlet dedicated to the charging of electric vehicle batteries. 
EPA: The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
EPD: The Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
EPD director: The director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Equestrian training and sales facility: Establishments providing equestrian training and the sale of horses, mules, donkeys, and other equines and related tack or feed. 
Erosion: See section 306-2. 
Erosion, sedimentation control plan: See section 306-2. 
Exceptional tree or exceptional stand of trees: Any tree or grouping of trees which has been determined to be of high value by the county arborist/urban forester because of its species, size, age, or other accepted professional criteria as specified in the Administrative Standards adopted in conjunction with chapter 328, article II. 
Existing construction: Any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the UDO. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision: See Manufactured home park, existing. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Extended detention: The detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection: Measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Facade: The exterior of a building extending the entire width of the building elevation. 
Facility or telecommunications facility: Shall mean a tower, antenna, alternative tower structure, related apparatus or any combination thereof. 
Factory-built housing: Any structure, designed for residential use, that is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly on a building site. Factory-built homes include mobile homes, manufactured homes, and modular homes. 
Family: A group of individuals related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship, or not more than six persons not so related, living together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and stability. 
Family day care home: A private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, at least three but not more than six children under 13 years of age who are not related to such persons and whose parent(s) or guardians are not residents in the same private residence as the provider; provided, however, that the total number of unrelated children cared for in such home, for pay and not for pay, may not exceed six children under 13 years or age at one time. 
Farming, commercial: Any primary use of a tract or parcel of land for the purpose of raising for sale any types of agriculture products, nursery stock, including, but not limited to, soil crops, fish, fowl, silviculture or livestock. 
Feeder roots: A complex system of small annual roots growing outward and predominantly upward from the system of "transport roots". 
Fence: A constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen, or separate areas. 
Fill: See section 306-2. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flea market: An occasional or periodic market held in an open area or structure where groups of individual sellers offer goods for sale to the public. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM): See subsection 320-2. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM): See subsection 320-2. 
Flood insurance study: See subsection 320-2. 
Flooding: See subsection 320-2. 
Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on: a) the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan or b) the regulatory floodplain as defined by the National Flood Insurance Program (FEMA). The more restrictive (wider) of either a) or b) shall be used. 
Floodway: See subsection 320-2. 
Floor: The lower horizontal finished surface of each story in a building that is intended to support the contents of the building and its occupants. 
Floor area, gross: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the total number of finished floors of a fully enclosed building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings; excluding cellar space, carports and garages, and any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than 6½ feet. 
Floor area, heated: The gross floor area of a dwelling or other building that is heated and intended for daily human activity, including hallways, stairs, and interior storage areas and closets. 
Floor area ratio: The gross floor area of all buildings or structures on a lot divided by the total lot area. 
Floor, lowest: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of the UDO. 
Floor, party: A floor in a multi-story building that is designed to provide required fire separation between two adjoining dwelling units that are constructed one above the other. 
Flush toilet: A sanitary flushable fixture in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Forestry: Establishments primarily engaged in the operation of timber tracts, tree farms, forest nurseries, the gathering of forest products, or in performing forest services. 
Freeway: A multiple-lane roadway carrying local, regional, and interstate traffic of relatively high volumes that permits access only at designated interchanges. 
Frontage, building: The width in linear feet of each exterior wall of a building that faces a street or public way. 
Frontage, road: The distance on which a parcel of land adjoins a public street or street right-of-way, including proposed streets within a subdivision of land approved by Rockdale County. 
Fruit and vegetable market: An establishment engaged primarily in the retail sales of fresh fruits and vegetables. The term shall include permanent fruit and vegetable stands, fruit markets, permanent fruit stands, produce markets, permanent produce stands and vegetable markets (NAICS Code 445230). 
Functionally dependent use or facility: See subsection 320-2. 
Future land use map: A map, formery known as the 2020 Comprehensive Land Use Plan Map, prepared as part of the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan prepared pursuant to O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 and Chapter 110-3-2, Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning that divides land within the unincorporated area of Rockdale County into a series of land use categories listed in section 202-6 and serves as guidance for rezoning decisions made pursuant to Title 2. 
Garage, attached: A garage that shares a common roof with a dwelling unit or that adjoins a dwelling unit with a common wall along a distance of at least ten feet. 
Garage, two-car: A permanent enclosed structure having a paved floor area designed with adequate floor area, access and egress for two standard automobiles. 
Garbage: See Solid waste. 
Gasoline station with convenience store: A gasoline station that includes a retail store that sells a limited line of groceries and household items. 
General NPDES permit for construction activities: State issued National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, regulating construction activities pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". 
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual: See Stormwater management manual. 
Governing authority: The Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County, Georgia. 
Grade: A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or between the building and a point six feet from the building, whichever is closer. 
Grade, percentage of: The rise or fall of a slope in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal distance. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut and filled condition. 
Greenhouse: A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of plants for subsequent sale or personal enjoyment. 
Greenspace: Permanently protected areas of a site that are preserved in a natural state meeting the standards of the Georgia Greenspace Program. 
Greenway, stream: An area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition for both recreation and conservation that may contain limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. 
Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR): The rating applied by a vehicle manufacturer, and represents the maximum total weight of vehicle, cargo, people, fuel, and other fluids together. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Groundwater recharge area: Any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Group day care home: Any place operated by a person(s), partnership, association or corporation wherein are received for pay for group care not less than seven nor more than 18 children under 18 years of age for less than 24 hours without transfer of legal custody and which is required to be licensed or commissioned by Bright from the Start, Georgia Department of Early Care and Learning. 
Grubbing: Removing roots and stumps from land that has been cleared, but not grading. 
Guest house: An attached or detached accessory building that provides living quarters for guests, may or may not contain a kitchen or cooking facility. 
Halfway house: A licensed home for inmates on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. 
Hardship: A condition of significant practical difficulty in using a lot because of physical problems relating solely to the size, shape or topography of the lot in question which are not economic difficulties and which are not self-imposed. 
Hazardous material: Any substance that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment. 
Hazardous waste: Any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations, promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. Section 261.3. 
Height: The vertical distance of a structure other than a building measured from the average elevation of the finished grade surrounding the structure to the highest point of the structure. When referring to a telecommunications antenna it shall mean the vertical distance from the base of the antenna to the highest point of the tower or any appurtenance attached to it. 
Height, building: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof if a flat roof; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. Does not include steeples, cupolas, decorative towers, antennas and mechanical equipment attached to a building. 
Height, telecommunications facility. The vertical distance from grade to the highest point of the tower and its appurtenances, grade being the average level of the pre-existing or finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior of the tower, whichever is lower. When referring to a telecommunications antenna it shall mean the vertical distance from the base of the antenna to its highest point. 
Highest adjacent grade: See section 320-2. 
Historic resources: Landmarks, districts, sites, structures, or buildings which have historic, cultural, or archaeological significance by virtue of being eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic places, listed as such by the state Historic Preservation Office, or identified as such in the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan. 
Home occupation: An occupation customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes, and operated in accordance with applicable provisions of Title 2, sections 218-1 and 218-13. 
Hospital: An establishment providing physical or mental health services, in-patient or overnight accommodations, and mental or surgical care of the sick or injured. Includes health clinics and sanatoriums. 
Hotel: A building in which short-term (less than 21 days) lodging or board and lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally made through the interior of the building. 
Hotel, extended stay: Any building containing six or more guest rooms rented or leased for sleeping purposes, for a period not to exceed 60 days, that contain kitchen facilities for food preparation including, but not limited to, refrigerators, stoves, and ovens. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG): A natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and product much more runoff. 
Impervious: A material that water cannot pass through or be absorbed by. 
Impervious cover or surface: Areas which significantly prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater into the soil. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, concrete and asphalt surfaces, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awning, and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. Impervious surface also includes unpaved graded aggregate base (GAB) or crusher run. 
Impoundment: The water or liquid substance that is or will be stored by a dam - commonly referred to as the reservoir. 
Industrial activity: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
Industrial park: A tract of land subdivided and developed according to a comprehensive development plan in a manner which provides a landscaped setting for two or more industrial establishments. 
Industrial stormwater permit: A national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries that regulates the pollution control strategies. 
Industrialized building: Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. 
Industralized home: A residential structure that is, either wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed or assembled in one or more factory built sections or panels in manufacturing facilities for assembly and installation on a building site. An industrialized home is manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to or destruction thereof and which, when completed, meets or exceeds the requirements of, and all development standards for, conventionally constructed site built housing. Any industrialized home must be designed to be permanently connected to a site-built foundation. No industrialized home shall be constructed with a chassis, as defined in 24 CFR 3280.902(a). It is the intent of this definition to include structures or components which are included within O.C.G.A. § 8-2-111(3) and 7 CFR 3550.10 or which are approved pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs and which bear an insignia of approval issued by the commissioner thereof. 
Infiltration: The process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Intermodal terminal facility: An industrial establishment in which freight is transferred in containerized form from truck to railroad cars for transportation. 
Issuing authority: Rockdale County. 
Junk: Any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or disposition. 
Junked vehicle: Any wrecked or non-operable dismantled or abandoned automobile, truck, boat, motorcycle, or similar device. 
Junkyard: See Open yard storage business. 
Kennel, hobby: An accessory use for the keeping of up to seven dogs or cats or other small animals or any combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on for the purpose of showing, training, or breeding. Such use specifically excludes any operation for which a fee or other compensation is charged and also excluded any commercial use. 
Kennel, pet boarding: Any use where up to 21 dogs or cats or other small animals or any combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) are maintained for boarding, grooming, sitting, training, breeding, or similar purpose for a fee or other compensation is carried on. 
Kindergarten: A school for pre-elementary school children ages five and six. 
Kiosk: A freestanding structure upon which temporary information and/or posters, notices, and announcements are posted or displayed electronically. 
Kitchen facilities: A room used to prepare food containing, at a minimum, a sink and a stove or oven. 
Landscape strip: Land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
Land development: Any land disturbing activity, including but not limited to clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious surface. Land development excludes agricultural uses. 
Land development activity or activities: Those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project: A single or phased discrete land development undertaking. 
Land disturbance: Any land or vegetation changes, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious surface, but not including agriculture. 
Land disturbance activity or activities: Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. See subsection 306-2. 
Land disturbance permit: See Permit, land disturbance. 
Land disturbance project: A single or phased discrete land disturbance undertaking. 
Landfill: See solid waste handling facility. The term "landfill" shall include construction and demolition debris landfill, hazardous waste landfill, industrial waste landfill, inert waste landfill, monofill, sanitary landfill and private landfill. The term "landfill" shall not include approved on-site disposal of inert waste at a building, land disturbing, or development site. 
Landfill, construction and demolition waste: A landfill in which construction/demolition waste is disposed. Construction/demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material and other non-putrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Landfill, inert waste: A disposal facility regulated by department of natural resources accepting only wastes that will not cause production of leachate (a liquid that has passed through or emerged from solid waste and contains soluble, suspended, or miscible materials removed from such wastes) of environmental concern. Only the following waste may be deposited in the inert landfill: earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition specifically excludes any transfer stations, recycling stations, household materials or the storage of these items to be taken to another location. 
Landfill, private: A privately owned and operated landfill for the purpose of profit. This may be each or all of the above types of landfills. 
Landfill, sanitary (municipal): Disposal sites, approved by the board of commissioners, and owned by a municipality or by a political subdivision of the state, where putrescible solid wastes are disposed of in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume, and applying earth cover thereon. 
Landing area: The area of an airport or private airstrip used for landing, taking-off or taxiing of aircraft. 
Laundromat: A business that provides self-service, coin-operated washing, drying and/or ironing machines for clothing and similar laundry. 
Library: A public facility for the use, but not sale, of literary, musical, artistic or reference material. 
Liquified petroleum gases: As defined in O.C.G.A. § 10-1-262, any material that is composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons, or mixtures of the same: propane, propylene, butane (normal butane or isobutane), and butylenes. 
Livestock: Any animal raised for food, raw materials or pleasure, and customarily kept on a farm including, but not limited to, beef and dairy cattle, sheep, swine, poultry, horses, mules, donkeys, goats, turkeys, bison, llama, emus and pot-bellied pigs. 
Litter: Sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, discarded materials of every kind and description or paper products of every kind and description including, but not limited to, advertising materials, newspapers, promotional papers, letters, bills, publications or other writings. 
Loading space: A space within the principal building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, and other carriers. 
Lot: A portion, plot, or parcel of land separated from other portions, plots, or parcels by a graphic description as on a subdivision plat of record or survey map and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
Lot area: The total area within the boundaries of a lot. 
Lot, conforming: A lot that meets all requirements of the UDO and is not a nonconforming lot. 
Lot coverage: The percentage of the total area of a lot that is occupied by buildings. 
Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. See section 214-3. 
Lot, double frontage: A lot other than a corner lot abutting two streets. 
Lot, flag (or panhandle lot): A prohibited lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements and where access to the lot from a public road is achieved by a narrow strip of land. 
Lot, interior: A lot with a single street frontage. 
Lot of record: A lot, the plat for which has been lawfully recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Rockdale County, or a lot, the deed of which has been lawfully recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Rockdale County. 
Lot remnant: Any portion or portions of a lot not suitable for building upon because of size or topography and remaining after the transfer of other portions of said lot to adjoining lots or rights-of-way. 
Lot width: The width of a lot at the required front setback line measured parallel to the street right-of-way or in the case of a curvilinear street, parallel to the chord of the arc between the intersection of the side lot lines and the street right-of-way line. 
Lowest floor: See Floor, lowest. 
Major intersection: Intersection of an arterial with another arterial or major collector in accordance with the latest Federal Functional Classification System for Rockdale County. 
Major thoroughfare: A public street, road, or highway that is classified as a collector street, minor arterial, or principal arterial in the latest Federal Functional Classification System for Rockdale County. 
Major woody roots: First order tree roots, originating at the "root collar" and growing horizontally in the soil to a distance of between three and 15 feet from the tree's trunk. 
Manual for on-site sewage management systems: The technical handbook currently adopted and periodically updated by EPD. The manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems and its provisions are herein adopted unless inconsistent with other provisions of law or regulation and is hereafter referred to as the "Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems". 
Manual or manual for erosion and sediment control in Georgia: Manual published by the GASWCC as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the GASWCC up until the date of the NOI. 
Manufactured home, class A: A manufactured home fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home and Standards Act (42 USC 5401—5445) and meeting each of the following development standards: 
(1)  Minimum width of the installed home shall be in excess of 20 feet over at least 70 percent of its length. 
(2)  The pitch of the home's roof has a factory-installed fixed, nominal or true minimum vertical rise of four feet for each 12 feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in conventional residential construction. 
(3)  The roof of the home has a minimum six-inch factory installed roof overhang on each of the dwelling's perimeter walls. 
(4)  Exterior wall materials shall consist of brick, masonry, or stone, or siding consisting of wood, hardboard, aluminum or vinyl, covered or painted, but in no case exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint. Corrugated materials are not permitted for exterior walls. 
(5)  Exterior roof materials shall consist of asphalt or composition shingle, wood shake, wood shingle, standing seam metal, clay or ceramic tile, but not including corrugated metal, plastic or fiberglass. 
Manufactured home, class B: A manufactured home fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home and Safety Standards Act (42 USC 5401—5445) but which does not satisfy the criteria necessary to qualify the unit as a class A manufactured home. 
Manufactured home, class C: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet of more in length or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; and manufactured prior to June 15 1976. A "mobile home" as defined O.C.G.A. § 8-2-131 is a class C manufactured home within the meaning of this Code. 
Manufactured home lot: A parcel of land, legally created, pursuant to the Code of Rockdale County in effect at the time and meeting the requirements of Title 3 or the subdivision requirements in effect at the time that the lot was approved and located in a manufactured home park which is intended and used for the placement of a single manufactured home and for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
Manufactured home park, existing: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or before the effective date of these regulations, or before March 6, 1975. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision, new: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March 6, 1975. 
Massage apparatus: See section 22-71. 
Massage establishment: See section 22-71. 
Massage; massages; Massage therapy: See section 22-71. 
Massage therapist: See section 22-71. 
Materials recovery facility (MRF): A solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
Mean sea level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. This term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act: A state law, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et. seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Mineral extraction: See Mining. 
Mining: The extraction of minerals, including solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such as natural gases. The term mining includes quarrying; ground-water diversion; soil removal; milling, such as crushing, screening, washing, and flotation; and other preparation customarily done at the mine site as part of a mining activity. 
Mini-warehouse: A building or group of buildings that contain(s) individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers used for storage, including accessory office, but not including retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing, outside storage, or any other commercial use. 
Mobile food vendor is a motorized, wheeled vehicle designed and utilized for the preparation and sale of food and non-alcoholic beverage items to the general public, and whose operations are self-contained within the confines of the vehicle. Such vehicles shall operate in accordance with state law and the rules and regulations for food service of the Rockdale County Environmental Health Department. 
Mobile home: See Manufactured home, class C. 
Modular home: A factory-manufactured single-family dwelling that is constructed in one or more sections and complies with the definition of "industrialized home." 
Motel: A building or a group of buildings containing sleeping accommodations for short-term (less than 21 days) rental primarily to the motoring public and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally on the outside of the building. 
Motor vehicle sales: An open area, other than a right-of-way or public parking area, used for display, sale, or rental of new or used motor vehicles in operable condition. See section 218-13. 
Moved-in house: A single-family dwelling (not including a manufactured home or modular home) that is transported over land in Rockdale County in one or more sections and intended for erection on permanent footings on a conforming lot in Rockdale County for use as a permitted dwelling unit, subject to the regulations of UDO chapter 110 and section 302-52. 
Museum: A building having public significance by reason of its architecture or former use or occupancy or a building serving as a repository for a collection of objects of interest, intended to be used by the public for viewing and which may include as an accessory use the sale of goods to the public. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): Vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain (as corrected in 1929). 
National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) storm water discharge permit: A permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342 (b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Natural vegatative buffer or buffer area: A river corridor containing the flora native to that area. The natural floras for specific areas are described in Georgia Geologic Survey Bulletin 114, "The Natural Environment of Georgia." Habitats for endangered and threatened species may require human management of the river corridor in order to maintain those species. 
New development: A land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
New manufactured home park: See manufactured home park, new. 
Nonconforming characteristic(s) of building or structure: A building or structure, legally existing on the effective date of the UDO, but which fails to comply with one or more of the regulations adopted under the terms of the UDO which are applicable to said building or structure, including, but not limited to, setbacks, lot frontage, lot area, building height, off street parking or loading, buffers, landscaping or any other applicable development regulation. 
Nonconforming, legal: A lot of record, structure or use that does not comply with the current requirements of the UDO, but was lawfully established and authorized in accordance with former regulations of Rockdale County prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the requirements in the UDO making the lot of record, structure, or use noncompliant. 
Nonconforming lot: A lot of record that meets the definition of "Nonconforming, legal" or a lot of record lawfully created and recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Rockdale County prior to January 15, 1984. 
Nonconforming use of land, or nonconforming use of land and building(s), or 
Nonconforming use of land and structure(s): A use of land and building(s) or a use of land and structure(s), in combination, legally existing on the effective date of the UDO, but that is not an authorized use of land and building(s) or land and structure(s), in combination, under the terms of this UDO in the district in which such use is located. 
Nonconforming use requiring special use permit: A use of land, or land and building(s) or structure(s) in combination, legally existing on the effective date of the UDO, but which is not an authorized use as of right under the terms of Title 2 in the district in which such use is located but rather is authorized only upon approval of a special use permit by the board of commissioners. 
Non-point source pollution: A form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Non-point source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstormwater discharge: Any discharge to the county's separate storm sewer system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988: A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within a floodplain. 
NPDES (National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System): A provision of the Clean Water Act pursuant to 33 U.S.C. Section 1342(b) that prohibits discharge of pollutants into waters of the United States. 
Nursery: Establishments primarily engaged in retailing nursery and garden products, such as trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, bulbs, and sod, which are predominantly grown elsewhere. These establishments may sell a limited amount of a product they grow themselves. 
Nursing home: An institution or a distinct part of an institution that is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision for 24 or more consecutive hours to two or more patients who are not related to the institution's management or its members by marriage, blood, or adoption. 
Occupied structure: See Structure, occupied. 
Office, professional: A land use that includes one or more buildings that are primarily used for services rendered by occupations with specialized knowledge or expertise such as architects, engineers, lawyers, doctors, bankers, realtors, financial and insurance services, and similar services, as opposed to buildings used for manufacturing, storage or sale of goods. 
Office-warehouse: A structure which may include space for an office for administration or sales and related space for temporary storage or assembly or repair of goods, equipment or products. 
On-site sewage management system: A sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system serving one or more buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences, or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. Such term shall include, without limitation, conventional and chamber septic tank systems, and experimental and alternative on-site management systems that may be approved by the Rockdale County Environmental Health Department and Rockdale Department of Water Resources. 
Open space: Areas that are primarily undeveloped and reserved to provide separation, resource protection, scenic enjoyment, recreation, or amenity to abutting developed property and that are not included in minimum lot areas required in Title 2. 
Open yard storage business: Any commercial or non-commercial activity except a materials recovery facility or recycling center, which involves the sale, storage, wrecking, dismantling, processing or sorting of waste, discarded or salvaged paper, rags, machinery, equipment or other junk, including automobiles, trucks and similar motor vehicles; where those materials are commonly stored in an open area outside any building as defined in this section; provided, however, that businesses engaged predominantly in the repair or sale of new or used motor vehicles and other machines shall not be included in the term "open yard storage business" if those vehicles and machines are in operating condition and ready for sale or, if non-operational, those vehicles or machines are stored in a building as defined in this section. 
Outdoor recreation facilities: Facilities including greenways, trails, bikeways, paths, tennis courts, ball fields, playfields, courts, golf courses, swimming pools, clubhouses, lockers, bicycle facilities, equestrian facilities, beaches, docks, seating areas, amphitheaters, stages, band shells, community buildings, fountains, plazas, patios, decks, lawns, picnic shelters and picnic areas, landscaping and land containing outdoor recreation structures and facilities. 
Outdoor recreation, commercial: Any establishment whose main purpose is to provide the general public with facilities for active, outdoor recreational activities and entertainment where tickets are sold or fees are collected for participation in the activity. Outdoor commercial recreation facilities include, but are not limited to: outdoor fairs and amusement parks, water slides and parks, golf driving ranges and miniature golf courses, baseball batting cages, paintball facilities, tracks for motor sports, and other similar activities. 
Outdoor storage: The keeping, in an unenclosed area, of any goods, material, merchandise, or vehicles in the same place for more than twenty-four hours whether for storage, display, processing or sale. See section 218-13. 
Overbank flood protection: Measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-banks flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Overlay district: A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zones and that may vary the requirements, uses, and standards of the underlying zone. 
Owner: The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, or other person, firm or corporation, in control of the site. 
Owners of record: The owner(s) of property as specified on the deed to the lot of record. 
Parcel: Any tract of land that has a deed and is shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Parks and playgrounds: Public or community land, open spaces, or recreation areas including such areas represented on a plat of a subdivision as dedicated, reserved or to be reserved, for recreational purposes. 
Parking lot: Any area designed for temporary (less than 48 hours) storage of motor vehicles of the motoring public in normal operating condition. 
Parking, off-street: A temporary (less than 48 hours) storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle and that is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way. 
Parking, on-street: Areas along curbs of a street that are authorized for temporary (less than 48 hours) storage of automobiles belonging to owners, tenants, customers, or visitors of adjacent or nearby properties. 
Parking structure: A covered or sheltered structure of two or more stories designed, constructed and used for the parking of automobiles. 
Paved: An area which is covered by asphalt, concrete, brick, or pavers meeting the specifications of the department of public service and engineering. Pervious paving materials are subject to approval by the director. 
Pawnshop and/or pawnbroker: Any business or person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this paragraph. The term is intended to include title pawn shops. 
Pedestrian way: Crosswalk or other areas designed and marked exclusively for pedestrian traffic. 
Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message, suspended from a rope, wire or string and designed to move in the wind. 
Percentage of grade: See Grade, percentage of. 
Perennial stream: A stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated by a blue line on the USGS Quad map. 
Perennial river: A river or section of a river that flows continuously throughout the year. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity, land development activity, building construction, or other activity regulated by Rockdale County that requires an official authorization as provided in the UDO. 
Permit, building: A permit issued by the director, or his designee to the owner that is required for undertaking any construction, alteration, addition or repair of a structure under the provisions of Title 3. 
Permit, land disturbance: the permit issued by the director to the owner that is required for undertaking any land-disturbing or land development activity under the provisions of the UDO. 
Permitted use: See Authorized use. 
Permittee: Any entity that has submitted a notice of intent. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, company, agency, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, organization, society, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Personal care home: Building(s) in which is provided housing, meals, and 24-hour continuous watchful oversight for one or more ambulatory adults and which is licensed as a personal care home by the Office of Regulatory Services of the State of Georgia Department of Human Resources, including: 
(1)  Personal care home, congregate: A personal care home which offers care to 16 or more persons. 
(2)  Personal care home, family: A personal care home which offers care to not more than six persons. 
(3)  Personal care home, group: A personal care home which offers care to at least seven but not more than 15 persons. 
Personal services: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or apparel. Personal services include, but are not limited to, laundry, including cleaning and pressing service, beauty shops, barbershops, manicure, shoe repair, tanning salons and health clubs, clothing rental, tailor shops, and domestic services, but specifically excluding adult entertainment. 
Pet, household: A domestic animal, not including fish or livestock, which is cared for by members of a household for companionship. 
Place of assembly: A premises where a group of persons congregates for a common reason, over short periods of time and typically at regular intervals for civic, cultural, fraternal, political, religious or social purposes. In the context of this code, places of assembly are further described as places where the occupancy of the premises follow a predictable pattern independent of customary retail business hours. Places of assembly share similar attributes in operations, parking requirements, traffic impact, building and fire safety requirements and infrastructure needs. 
For the purposes of this code, places of assembly shall include banquet hall, events center, performing arts theater, concert hall, convention center, auditorium, place of worship, and civic and social organization. 
Place of worship: A facility providing for the regular assembly of persons who share a common, religious faith as a primary use, and controlled by a legally established religious body to sustain public worship and accessory uses. Includes synagogue, church, temple, mosque, or other similar place of worship and organized religious or spiritual activities. 
Plan, concept: Written and graphic documents submitted to the director for review that document the intent of a developer in a conceptual form, indicating the types, general arrangement and density of uses, extent and pattern of subdivision, and the relationship of the intended uses to surrounding tracts. 
Plan, ESPC: An erosion, sedimentation, and pollution control plan prepared pursuant to chapter 306. 
Planned center: One or more commercial land uses or establishments developed under unified control, to be planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a whole, having one or more structures with appurtenant common areas. 
Planning commission: The Conyers-Rockdale County Planning Commission. 
Plat: A map, plan or other graphic layout of a land lot, lot, tract, parcel or subdivision indicating the location and boundaries of one or more properties along with improvements subject to the UDO. 
Plat, final: A finished drawing or map of a subdivision or development site plan, meeting all of the requirements of the UDO and approved by Rockdale County and fully certified for recording pursuant to Title 3. See chapter 302. 
Plat, preliminary: A tentative plan of a proposed subdivision or development meeting the specified requirements of this chapter and showing the layout in sufficient detail to allow an evaluation of the proposed project. See chapter 302. 
Playschool: A school for pre-kindergarten children ranging in age from three to four years. 
Pollution susceptibility: When used in relation to groundwater recharge areas, the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections, and other human activities in the recharge area. 
Pollution susceptibility maps: Maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the department of natural resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the State into areas having high, medium, and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Potentially hazardous foods: Foods requiring temperature control for safety because they are capable of supporting the rapid growth of pathogenic or toxigenic microorganisms, or the growth and toxin production of Clostridium botulinum. 
Pre-application conference: An initial, informal and non-binding stage of development review at which the developer may make known concept plan proposals and the director may hold discussions of those proposals with the developer regarding the development regulations and other issues related to the development. 
Pre-kindergarten (Pre-K): An educational program for Georgia's four year olds to prepare children for kindergarten. 
Premises: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Primary permittee: The owner or the operator or both of a tract of land for a construction project. 
Principal use: The principal purpose for which a lot or the principal building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained. 
Private road: See Road, private. 
Private street: See Street, private. 
Privy: A structure (and necessary appurtenances) used for the sanitary disposal or storage of human wastes without the aid of water carriage; the term does not include chemical, composting, portable or incinerator toilets. 
Professional: When used in connection with "use" and "occupancy" of a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in rendering personal, executive, sales, or administrative services or activities, including accountants, architects, professional engineers and land surveyors, doctors, lawyers, insurance offices, real estate offices, religious organizations, stock brokers and administrative agencies considered professional in character. The term, however, does not include repairs or sales of tangible personal property stored or located within the structure nor any use that would create any loud noise or noxious odors within Rockdale County. 
Project: The entire proposed development, regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Property, adjacent: Property that is either abutting or on the opposite side of a common street, right-of-way, or easement that separates it from the subject property. In order for the parcels on opposite sides of an easement or right-of-way to be adjacent, it must be possible for a projected property line of one parcel to cross the street and intersect the property line of the adjacent parcel. Properties separated by a railroad track or freeway are not abutting or adjacent. 
Property interest: The ownership of property, including any percentage of ownership less than total ownership. 
Protected river: Any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of 400 cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. However, those segments of rivers covered by the Metropolitan River Protection Act or the Coastal Marshland Protection Act are specifically excluded from the definition of a protected river. In coastal areas, the seaward limit of any protected river shall be the inland limit of the jurisdiction of the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act. 
Protected zone: All lands that fall outside of the buildable area of a parcel, all areas of the parcel required to remain in open space according to the provisions of Title 2 of the UDO or the administrative standards established herein, and all areas required as landscaping strips according to provisions of Title 2 of the UDO or Administrative Standards established herein. 
Protection area or riparian protection area: With respect to a stream, river, lake, or impoundment, the combined areas of all required riparian buffers and setbacks applicable to such riparian. 
Protective covenants: Recorded restrictions imposed by private parties running with the title to the land and specifying the manner in which land may be used, developed, or improved with the intent of protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. Protective covenants are not enforced by Rockdale County Government. 
Provider: The occupant of the residence and the registrant of the family day care home who is also the person that primarily provides care in the family day care home. 
Public entity: A federal, state, county or municipal government, or any agency, authority or pubic utility of such government that is legally established to provide pubic services to the citizens of Rockdale County. 
Public facilities: A use conducted by, or a facility or structure owned or managed by a unit of government, and intended to provide for needs of the public. 
Public hearing: An official session of any elected or appointed board advertised according to law. 
Public improvement: Any street, park, water line, sanitary drainage system or similar improvement installed to serve abutting or nearby private or public property constructed by either a private entity or a public agency and ultimately owned and maintained by a public entity. 
Public sewer: A common sewer controlled by a government agency or public utility, in this case Rockdale County. 
Public street: Right-of-way dedicated to or owned by a public government agency for the purpose of providing principal access to abutting property. 
Public uses: Buildings, structures and uses of land by a unit of government, including but not restricted to government administration, water treatment facilities, streets, libraries, public schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation centers and fire stations. 
Public utility: Any publicly, privately, or cooperatively owned line, facility or system for producing, collecting, transmitting or distributing communications, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil products, water, steam, waste, stormwater not connected with highway drainage, and other similar services and commodities, including publicly owned fire and police and traffic signals and lighting systems, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. 
Public water system: A system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections, or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily, at least 60 days out of the year. 
Quadrangle map: The most recently published USGS 7.5 minute topographic map prepared at a scale of 1:24,000. 
Quarry: A mine where rock, ore, stone, sand, and similar materials are excavated for sale or for off-site use. Quarry includes rock crushing, asphalt plants, the production of dimension stone, and similar activities. 
Real property: Any tract or parcel of land and, if developed, any buildings or structures located on the land. 
Recovered materials processing facility: See Recycling center. 
Recreation, center: A building or portion of a building designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, exercise, leisure time activities or other recreational activities, operated for profit or not-for-profit and which can be open only to bona fide members and guests of the organization or open to the public for a fee. 
Recreational vehicle: A vehicle that is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis. 
(2)  450 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection. 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently tow-able by a truck or car. 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds: Any area that is occupied or intended for occupancy by transients using recreational vehicles, mobile trailers or tents as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes and is open to the public. 
Recycled water system means a water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
Recycling center: Any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting, sorting, processing, and shipping materials to be recycled including, but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper and aluminum whenever such use is principal to the site. 
Rehabilitation center: A facility operated for the purpose of assisting in the rehabilitation of disabled persons which provides one or more of the following types of services: 
(1)  Testing, fitting, or training in the use of prosthetic devices. 
(2)  Prevocational or conditioning therapy. 
(3)  Physical, corrective, or occupational therapy. 
(4)  Adjustment training or evaluation or control of special disabilities; or a facility in which a coordinated approach is made to the physical, mental, and vocational evaluation of disabled persons and an integrated program of physical restoration and prevocational training is provided under competent professional supervision and direction. 
Related or related children: Children that are related to the provider, the registrant of a family day care home, within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity by either blood or marriage (i.e. sons, daughters, grandchildren, nieces, nephews, first cousins), or under legal guardianship, custody or state regulated foster care of the provider. 
Required yard: See Yard, required. 
Research and development: A business that engages in research, or research and development, of innovative ideas in technology-intensive fields. Development and construction of prototypes may be associated with this use. 
Reserve strip: A strip or parcel of land along, around or between properties, the sole purpose of which is to restrict access. 
Reservoir: A governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Reservoir boundary: The edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Residential district: Any of the following zoning districts: A-R, W-P, CRS, CSD, CSO, R-1, R-2, MUR, and RM, as well as prior zoning districts M-H, R-1A, R-1B and R-3. 
Restaurant: An establishment in which the primary purpose is preparing, serving, and consuming food and beverages. 
Restaurant, fast-food: An establishment that offers quick food service, which is accomplished through a limited menu of items, and in which orders are not generally taken at the customer's table, and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers. 
Retaining wall: See Wall, retaining. 
Retention facility, stormwater: A pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage of stormwater runoff. 
Rezoning action: Legislative action by the board of commissioners adopting an amendment to the Title 2 of the zoning ordinance that has the effect of rezoning real property from one zoning classification to another. 
Right-of-way: A strip of land dedicated to, designated, reserved, or purchased by Rockdale County for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access or utility line installation. 
Right-of-way line: The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
Riparian: Belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
River bank: The rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
River corridor: All land, inclusive of islands, not regulated under the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-440 through 12-5-457), or the Coastal Marshland Protection Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-280 through 12-5-293), in areas of a protected river and being within 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks. The 100-foot buffer shall be measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the riverbank, usually marked by a break in slope. Although not within the measured 100-foot wide buffer, the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the river shall be treated by local governments in the same manner as the river corridor and shall be included within the River Corridor Protection Plan. Because stream channels move due to natural processes such as meandering, riverbank erosion, and jumping of channels, the river corridor may shift with time. For the purposes of these standards, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the beginning of each review period for local comprehensive plans. Any shift in the location of the protected river after the start of the review period will require a revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of the next review by the department of community affairs. 
Road, private: Any privately owned and maintained access way serving two or more parcels of land that is intended to provide access for motorized vehicles, including safety and emergency equipment and that is not dedicated to the county or maintained by the county and that meets the provisions of section 332-7. 
Road, public: Any right-of-way set aside for public travel as defined in O.C.G.A. § 32-1-3(24). 
Rockdale water resources: The administrative department within the county government that is responsible for the planning, design, construction and maintenance of the Rockdale County water and wastewater systems. 
Root respiration: An active process occurring throughout the feeder root system of trees, and involving the consumption of oxygen and sugars with the release of energy and carbon dioxide. Root respiration facilitates the uptake and transport of minerals and nutrients essential for tree survival. 
Root collar: The point of attachment of major woody roots to the tree trunk, usually at or near the ground line and associated with a marked swelling of the tree trunk. 
Rope roots: An extensive network of woody second order roots arising from major woody roots, occurring within the surface 12 to 18 inches of local soils, and with an average size ranging from .25 to one-inch diameter. The primary function of rope roots is the transport of water and nutrients, and the storage of food reserves. 
Runoff: See Nonpoint source pollution. 
Sand pit: A surface mine or excavation used for the removal of sand, gravel, or fill dirt for sale or for use off-site. 
Sanitary sewer or sewer: A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, storm waters and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
Sawmill: A facility where logs or partially processed boards are sawn, split, shaved, stripped, chipped, or otherwise processed to produce wood products, not including the processing of timber for use on the same lot by the owner or resident of that lot. 
School: A public or private facility that provides a curriculum of elementary or secondary academic instruction. 
School, private: Any building or group of buildings the use of which meets state requirements for elementary, secondary, or higher education and which does not secure the major part of its funding from any governmental agency. 
School, private residential: A private school or similar institution that may include residential facilities and accessory kitchen, dining, and recreational facilities for program participants. 
Screening: A method of shielding, obscuring or buffering one use or building from another use or building by fencing, walls, densely planted vegetation, natural vegetation, including a transitional buffer or other means; a visual and acoustical barrier which is of such nature and density that provides year-round maximum capacity from the ground to a height of at least six feet. 
Secondary permittee: An individual builder, utility contractor that conducts a construction activity within a common development. 
Sediment: See section 306-2. 
Sedimentation: See section 306-2. 
Septic tank: An approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Setback: With respect to a stream, river, lake, or impoundment, the area extending beyond any riparian buffer applicable to the stream, river, lake, or impoundment in which certain structures, including buildings, septic tanks and septic tank drainfields, are prohibited. 
Setback: The shortest distance between the right-of-way of a street or an adjacent property line or lot line and the nearest wall of the building or structure on a lot as prescribed in section 206. Principal buildings may not be placed within a required setback. 
Sewage: See Wastewater. 
Sewage treatment system: A system that provides primary treatment and disposal, including absorption field components, devices and appurtenances intended to be used for disposal of sewage by soil absorption, but does not include a conventional or chamber septic tank system. 
Sewer: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or stormwater. 
Sewer tap fee: A fee assessed to new users of the county wastewater system to provide the funds necessary for operation and maintenance of the system and to renew, extend and/or improve the system where said renewals, extensions and/or improvements are necessitated by the reduced available wastewater system capacity caused by the new users' demands. 
Shelter, homeless: See Transitional housing facility. 
Shopping center: A group of commercial establishments, planned, and developed as a unit, with common off-street parking provided on the property. 
Sign: An object, device, display, structure, or part thereof which is used to advertise, identify, display, or direct attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. Further defined in chapter 230 of this Code of Ordinances. 
Significant recharge areas: Those areas mapped by the Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, the presence of karst, and potentiometric surface. Significant recharge areas are as follows in the various geologic provinces of Georgia: 
(1)  In the Valley and Ridge and in the Cumberland Plateau, significant recharge areas outcrop areas of carbonate rock where low slope (less than eight percent slope) conditions prevail. Such areas commonly are characterized by karst topography (caves and sinkholes). 
(2)  In the Piedmont and in the Blue Ridge, rocks have little primary porosity, with most groundwater being stored in the overlying soils. The significant recharge areas are those with thicker soils. Field mapping indicates that thick soils in the Piedmont and Blue Ridge are characterized by a density of two or more geologic contacts per four squares miles (source: 1976 1:500,000 Geologic Map of Georgia) and slopes lower than eight percent. 
(3)  In the Coastal Plain, the significant recharge areas are the surface outcroppings of the large and extensively used drinking water aquifers (e.g., the Floridian, the Clayton, etc.) and soils having high permeability according to the 1976 1:750,000 Soils Association Map of Georgia. 
Site: Any plot, parcel or area of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land. 
Site built home: A dwelling unit constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with the International Building Code (IBC). 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: See section 306-2. 
Soil compaction: A change in soil physical properties which includes an increase in soil weight per unit volume, and a decrease in soil pore space. Soil compaction is caused by repeated vibrations, frequent traffic and weight. 
Solid waste: Any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
Solid waste handling: The storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. 
Solid waste handling facility: Any facility the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste as approved by department of natural resources. 
Solid waste transfer station/materials recovery facilities: Any facility that the primary purpose is the collection, temporary storage, or transportation, or any combination thereof, of municipal solid waste (defined as solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, day use recreation areas, and commercial establishments, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations, or industrial processes or operations, per the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.) and that may provide for the extraction of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
Special event: Any organized activity having as its purpose recreation, entertainment or education, such as a festival, carnival, celebration, foot or vehicle race, parade, procession, block party, or similar assembly which takes place on private property, or on Rockdale County public property including public streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, or parks, and which will affect the ordinary use of such public property through impacts such as street closings, unlawful parking, impeding emergency access, unsanitary conditions, blocking ingress and egress to private property, and similar impacts, except as exempted under subsection 218-2(1). 
Special use: A use listed in section 218-1 as being permitted if it meets stated conditions and is approved by the board of commissioners of Rockdale County. 
Sprinkler system: For fire protection purposes, an integrated system of underground and overhead piping designed in accordance with fire protection engineering standards. 
Stand alone construction project: Construction activities that are not part of a common development where the primary permittee chooses not to use secondary permittees. 
Start of construction: See Construction, start of. 
State: State of Georgia. 
State waters: See section 306-2. 
Storage tank, bulk: An above ground container used for the storage of large volumes of liquids, solids or gases, which may or may not include such flammable materials as petroleum. 
Storm drain: A drain or sewer for conveying surface water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
Storm sewer system: Any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
(1)  Publicly owned or maintained. 
(2)  Not combined with sanitary sewer. 
(3)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
Storm shelter: A structure or portion of a structure intended to provide protection to human life during periods of danger from storms or other emergencies. 
Stormwater or stormwater runoff: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stormwater management: The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility: Any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management manual: The Georgia Stormwater Management Manual is presumed to be the latest edition as defined on the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual website at www.georgiastormwater.com. Updates, errata and revisions will be provided on the website. 
Stormwater management facility, off-site: Any facility outside the project boundary that is or will be used for transporting and managing of storm water runoff, including, but not limited to, culverts, detention ponds, storm drains, flumes, and headwater pools. Easements for the purpose of transporting and managing of storm water runoff shall be obtained for any off-site facility with prior approval obtained from the director. 
Stormwater management, on-site: The design and construction of a facility or facilities necessary to control stormwater runoff within and for a single development. 
Stormwater management facility, on-site: Any facility within the project boundary used for the purpose of transporting or managing storm water runoff, including, but not limited to, culverts, detention ponds, storm drains, flumes, and headwater pools. 
Stormwater management plan: A document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of chapter 310. 
Stormwater management, regional: The design and construction of a facility necessary to control storm water runoff; whether within or outside of a development, and serving one or more developments. 
Stormwater management system: The entire set of structural and non-structural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater runoff, or runoff, or stormwater: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Story: That portion of a building having a height greater than six feet between the surface of the floor occupied and the ceiling above it, not including cellars, basements, mechanical rooms and parking floors that do not extend more than three feet above finished grade or mechanical rooms, tanks or structures not designed for occupancy that are placed on the roof of a building and occupying less than ten percent of the area of the floor below. 
Stream: Any waterway, beginning at either: the location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow; or a point in the stream channel with a drainage area to that point of 25 acres or more. 
Stream bank: The sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel: The portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Street: A way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley or other way. 
Street, centerline of: A line that is halfway between the right-of-way lines of a street, 
Street classifications: Streets are classified according to the latest Federal Functional Classification System for Rockdale County. See section 332-1. 
Street, dead end: A street that must be exited at the same point as is entered but not a cul-de-sac. 
Street, half: A street or road adjacent to a subdivision tract boundary where only half the required right-of-way and road improvements are provided within the proposed subdivision and the responsibility for the other half is undecided or is left to the adjacent property owner. 
Street jog: The incidence where two streets or two portions of a single street are separated by a relatively short distance, usually at their intersection with another street. 
Street, private: Any privately owned and maintained access way serving two or more lots or parcels that is intended to provide access for motorized vehicles, including safety and emergency equipment, that is not dedicated to the county or maintained by the county and that meets the provisions of section 332-7. 
Street, private residential: Any privately owned and maintained access way serving two or more single family residential lots that is intended to provide access for pedestrians and motorized vehicles, including service, safety and emergency equipment, that is not dedicated to the county or maintained by the county and that includes streets, curb and gutter, and sidewalks that meet the provisions of UDO Chapter 332. All private residential streets shall be gated. 
Street, public: See Road, public. 
Street, stub: An extension of the right-of-way of a street in a subdivision extending to the property boundary of the tract being developed and intended to provide continuity of the street pattern between subdivisions or between the individual phases of the same subdivision. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices: See section 306-2. 
Structure: Any fixed object that is constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground, including, but not limited to, towers, fences, posts, walls and walled or roofed buildings, but not including tents, flags, balloons, or vehicles. 
Structure, accessory: A structure detached from the principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or use. Where a structure is attached to the main building in a substantial manner, as by a wall, such structure shall be considered part of the main building. 
Structure, flood-prone: A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Structure, occupied: A building with one or more rooms intended for use by humans for dwelling, commerce, industry, or public services, and including buildings intended for the installation, storage, or use of equipment, merchandise, or machinery related to such use, subject to regulations and permitting procedures of the UDO. 
Subdivider: Any person, firm, corporation or duly authorized agent or other legal entity who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined in this chapter. 
Subdivision: The division of one or more lots of record lawfully in existence at the time of enactment of the UDO into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and includes all division of land whether or not they involve a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision, and where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. 
Subdivision plat: A drawing prepared by a land surveyor currently registered in the State of Georgia indicating a proposed division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, gift or division in kind, or building or other development. 
Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Market value may be determined from tax appraisal or other estimate provided by a certified professional appraiser. 
Substantial improvement: See subsection 320-2. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions: See subsection 320-2. 
Supportive commercial use: Use that is located on the same lot or parcel with a principal permitted use in a zoning district and that is established for the sole convenience of nearby residents, employees, patients, patrons or visitors within walking distance. Supportive uses include, but are not limited to, cafeterias, gift shops, clothes stores, bookstores, newsstands, and snack bars or other uses identified as supportive uses in section 218-1 of the UDO. 
Surface water: Waters of the state located on the ground surface such as lakes, reservoirs, rivers, streams and creeks. 
Suspended solids or total suspended solids or TSS: Total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as non-filterable residue. 
Swimming pool: A facility designed and intended for water contact activities that serves the public, a club or other membership-based organization. 
Swimming pool, home: A facility designed and intended for water contact activities that serves a single-family dwelling. 
Telecommunications tower: Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular communications towers, and other similar structures. 
Temporary building: A structure without any foundation or footings that is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. See section 218-13. 
Temporary use: Land uses established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use within a designated time period. 
Temporary use, accessory: A use meeting the definition of an accessory use, building or structure that is established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use within a designated time period. See chapter 218. 
Temporary use, commercial retail: Commercial uses established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use within a designated time period. See section 218-13. 
Timber harvesting: The felling, loading, and transporting of timber products for gain. The term "tree harvesting" includes forestry, silviculture, selective tree harvesting, and thinning of trees as prescribed by best management practices of the Georgia Forestry Commission. See section 328-37. 
Tower or telecommunications tower: Any structure that is designed or constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structure, but not including amateur radio antennas. 
Townhouse: A single-family dwelling unit that is erected in a row as part of a single building consisting of three or more dwellings on adjoining lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved fire resistant party wall or walls extending from the basement or cellar floor to the roof along the dividing lot line. 
Trail, bike: See Trail, multiuse. 
Trail, multi-use: A corridor designed for one or more alternative forms of transportation including pedestrians, joggers, skaters, and slow-moving vehicles such as strollers, bicycles and golf carts. 
Transitional housing facility: A building or buildings in which is provided long-term but not permanent living accommodations for one or more persons who have no permanent residence and are in need of long-term housing assistance, and in which may also be provided meals and social services including counseling and substance abuse recovery assistance. 
Transport containers: Standardized reusable vessels that were: (1) originally designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities; and/or (2) originally designed for or capable of being mounted or moved by rail, truck, or ship by means of being mounted on a chassis or similar transport device. 
Transport roots: System or framework of tree roots comprised of major woody roots and rope roots. 
Tree: Any self-supporting, woody perennial plant usually having a single trunk diameter of 1½ inches or more which normally attains a mature height of a minimum of ten feet. 
Tree canopy: See Canopy, tree. 
Tree, co-dominant: A tree whose crown extends above the tops of surronding trees and receives direct sunlight from above and from the side. 
Tree density factor: A unit of measure used to prescribe and calculate required tree coverage on a site. Unit measurements are based upon tree size. 
Tree, dominant: A tree whose crown extends into the tops of surrounding trees and receives direct sunlight from above but limited sunlight from the side. 
Tree preservation and replacement plan: A drawing which depicts the boundaries and dimensions of a given lot or lots for which a land disturbance permit or building permit is sought and which includes all of the information required in section 302-63 and section 328, article II. 
Tree removal: The unauthorized intentional or negligent killing of trees on a parcel of land. Such acts shall include but not be limited to cutting of trees, to damage inflicted upon the root system of a tree or trees by the application of toxic substances, by the operation of equipment and vehicles, by storage of materials, by the change of natural grade due to unapproved excavation or filling, or by the unauthorized alteration of natural physical conditions, including drainage patterns. 
Tree replacement: The replacement of trees and landscape plant materials into the minimum required landscape areas, as determined by the Development Regulations of Rockdale County. 
Trout streams: See section 306-2. 
Truck, heavy: Trucks, including truck tractors, and similar vehicles with two or more rear axles. 
Truck, light: Trucks and similar vehicles with single rear axles. 
Truck stop: A prohibited use that includes any building, premises, or land in which or upon which a business, service, or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, storage, or repair of heavy trucks and similar commercial vehicles is conducted or rendered, including the dispensing of motor fuel or other petroleum products primarily for such heavy trucks and similar commercial vehicles and the sale of accessories or equipment for heavy trucks and similar commercial vehicles, as well as overnight accommodations, showers, overnight customer parking, or restaurant facilities for the use of crews of heavy trucks and similar commercial vehicles. 
Use: The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
Use, accessory: A use of land or a building, or portion thereof, customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
User, wastewater: Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the county wastewater system. 
Utility: Public or private water, stormwater, or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems, railroads, similar services and all equipment and structures necessary to provide such services for utilities licensed or authorized to serve Rockdale County. 
Variance: A grant of relief of the terms of Title 2 pursuant to section 238-9 that will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property (and not the applicant), a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Variance, administrative: A grant of relief of the terms of Title 2 that is subject to review and action by the department pursuant to section 238-14. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: See section 306-2. 
Vehicle: A mechanical device with wheels or treads for transporting people and/or loads. Vehicles include automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, cranes, earth moving equipment, trailers, and other similar conveyances. 
Vehicle, commercial: Vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of 10,001 pounds or more used as a part of a business (including a non-profit organization), including, but not limited to, any vehicle which falls into one or more of the following categories: (1) truck tractor; (2) semi-trailer, which shall include flat beds, stake beds, roll-off containers, tanker bodies, dump bodies and full or partial box-type enclosures; (3) vehicles of a type that are commonly used for the delivery of ice cream, milk, bread, fruit or similar vending supply commercial or delivery trucks. This category shall include vehicles of a similar nature which are also of a type commonly used by electrical, plumbing, heating and cooling, and other construction oriented contractors; (4) tow trucks; (5) commercial hauling trucks; (6) vehicle repair service trucks; (7) vehicles with blades attached for plowing or grading; (8) construction vehicle, such as a bulldozer, backhoe and similar vehicles; (9) a vehicle which has permanently mounted outside brackets or holders for ladders, tools, pipes, or other similar equipment; (10) passenger carrying vehicles with more than 15 passengers including the driver; (11) combinations of vehicles (such as a truck pulling a trailer or other equipment), and (12) vehicles that carry hazardous materials. 
Veterinary services: Establishments where animals or pets are given medical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use. 
Wall, foundation: A wall constructed on footings or piers and designed to bear the load of a building or major structure. 
Wall, retaining: A structure constructed and erected between lands of different elevations to protect structures and/or to prevent erosion, and not used as a foundation. 
Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present. 
Wastewater, domestic: Wastewater discharged into the wastewater system from domestic sources such as toilets, washing machines, dishwashers, sinks, showers and bathtubs from normal household usage. 
Wastewater facilities: The structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and non-domestic wastewater and to dispose of the effluent. 
Wastewater system or county wastewater system: The total wastewater disposal facilities owned and operated by the county, also the administrative framework which operates the facilities. 
Watercourse: See section 306-2. 
Water supply reservoir: A governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed: The area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
Water system or county water system: The total water treatment and distribution facilities owned and operated by the county, also the administrative framework which operates the facilities. 
Watershed: The land area that drains into a particular stream, river, lake, or impoundment. 
Well: An excavation or opening into the ground by which groundwater is sought or obtained. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and, similar areas. 
Wetlands, jurisdictional: Wetlands subject to permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Window, drive-through: An opening in the wall of a building or structure designed and intended to be used to provide for sales to and/or service to patrons who remain in their vehicles. 
Yard: An open space between the property line and the wall of the principal building, on the same lot, such space being open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except for authorized landscaping, driveways, parking, sidewalks, signs, lighting standards, encroachments and accessory buildings that are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front: A yard extending the full width of the lot or parcel and situated between the right-of-way line of the abutting street and the front yard line of the principal building or structure. 
Yard, rear: A yard extending the full width of the lot or parcel and extending from the rear line of the lot to the rear yard line of the principal building or structure. 
Yard, required: A yard situated between a lot line or property line and the setback line established by the zoning district for the principal building or structure. 
Yard, side: A yard extending the full depth of a lot or parcel and situated between the side yard line and side property line of the lot or parcel and the side of the building facing such property line. 
Zoning district: One or more sections of the county as set forth in Title 2 and delineated and designated on the zoning maps, within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
Zoning maps: A series of numbered maps of the county, depicting the locations of zoning classifications set forth in Title 2 and other expository material, each of which is entitled "Zoning Map, Rockdale County, Georgia," and referenced to an index map. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 1, 2, 31, 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 0-2007-23, § 1, 10-9-2007; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 1, 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 0-2008-10, § 1, 7-22-2008; Ord. No. 2008-11, §§ 1, 2, 9-23-2008; Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 1, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 2009-13, § 1, 9-25-2009; Ord. No. 2009-15, § 1, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 0-2010-05, §§ 1, 6, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 0-2010-09, § 1, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 3, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 0-2012-19, § I, 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 0-2013-03, § I, 4-23-2013; Ord. No. 0-2013-13, § 1, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 0-2014-13, § 1, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 0-2015-02, § I, 2-10-2015; Ord. No. 0-2015-07, §§ VI, VII, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 0-2016-12, § V, 9-27-2016; Ord. No. 0-2017-17, § II, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 0-2017-18, § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 0-2017-22, § I, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 106-2. - Abbreviations. 
As used in this title, the following abbreviations represent the terms set forth below. 

 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Chapter 110 - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 110-1. - Violations of the UDO. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or use of any land in the county, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of the provisions of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 110-2. - Inspections and right of entry. 
Upon presentation of county identification to the developer, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, county employees authorized by the director, or authorized by the director of the department of community compliance and legal affairs may enter during all reasonable hours, or outside reasonable hours in the event of an emergency threatening life or property, any property for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with the provisions of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 110-3. - Inspection warrants. 
The director, or the director of the department of community compliance and legal affairs, or his/her designee, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this section. the warrant shall authorize said individuals, or their authorized representatives, to conduct a search or inspection of property, either with or without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, as follows: 
(a)  Inspection warrants may be issued by the superior court or other court having jurisdictional authority, when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance related to specific requirements of the UDO which legally justifies such an inspection of that property. 
(2)  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this section. 
(b)  The inspection warrant shall be issued validly only if it meets all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. 
(2)  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. 
(3)  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances related to requirements of the UDO which the inspection is intended to check or reveal. 
(4)  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the UDO provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 110-4. - Correction notices. 
(a)  Whenever the director or the director of the department of community compliance and legal affairs determines that any violation of the UDO is taking place, or that a condition of rezoning, special use permit, variance, or other permit or administrative approvals are not complied with, said director may present to the owner, owner's agent, or the owner, occupier or party responsible for such use or activity, a notice of violation and order the use or activity to cease immediately. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  Include a brief description of the property sufficient to identify where the violation has occurred. 
(3)  List the provisions of the UDO or other ordinance of Rockdale County that has been violated. 
(4)  State the deadline for correction. 
(c)  If the violation has not been corrected within a reasonable length of time, which shall not exceed five days, the owner of the property on which such violation has occurred or the agent, occupier or other party responsible for the violation shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 110-7, provided that either the director or the director of the department of community compliance and legal affairs may, at his/her discretion, extend the time for compliance with any such notice. 
(d)  The director and the director of the department of community compliance and legal affairs also shall have the authority to issue a warning notice prior to issuance of a notice of violation for any violation set forth in subsection (a). A warning notice shall be discretionary when circumstances warrant such action in the opinion of said director and shall under no circumstances be required prior to issuance of a notice of violation or other enforcement action. If issued, a warning notice shall include all of the requirements set forth in subsection (b). If a warning notice has not resulted in corrective action within the time specified in the notice, or within any time limit as extended by said director, said director may proceed with a notice of violation or other authorized enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 110-5. - Stop work orders and revocations. 
Whenever any building, structure, or premises is being developed, demolished, expanded, renovated, constructed, used, or occupied contrary to the provisions of the UDO, or the public interest is otherwise threatened in a manner requiring immediate action, the director may order the work stopped and said stop work order shall be posted on the property and delivered or mailed to the owner or person performing said unlawful work. The director also may revoke any permit or certificate of occupancy for any land, building or structure that is being constructed, used or occupied in violation of any provision of the UDO in order to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the county. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 110-6. - Other enforcement and penalties. 
Enforcement and penalty provisions set forth elsewhere in any chapter of the UDO or any code adopted by reference shall be applicable as therein provided and such enforcement and penalties may be applied in addition to those enforcement and penalty provisions available in this chapter 110. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 110-7. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  In case any building or structure is, or is proposed to be erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure, or land is or is proposed to be used in violation of any provision of the UDO, the county may, after due notice to the owner of the violation, issue a citation requiring the violator to appear in the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County. 
(b)  The owner of any buildings or premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this title exists, and any architect, builder, contractor or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits or assists in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(c)  Penalties for such violations shall be in accordance with Rockdale County Code of Ordinances, section 1-11 entitled "General penalty". 
(d)  Each day any violation of any provision of the UDO shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 110-8. - Other remedies and penalties. 
(a)  In addition to all other actions and penalties authorized in this section and elsewhere in the UDO, the county may also: 
(1)  Institute injunctive abatement or other appropriate judicial action or administrative proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of the UDO. 
(2)  Where a violation exists with respect to a structure or land, require that public utility service be withheld therefrom until such time as the structure or premises is no longer in violation of the UDO. 
(3)  Revoke the business license of any entity found guilt of violating the UDO for a period of time not to exceed five years, except to the extent prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
TITLE 2 - LAND USE AND ZONING 
Chapter 202 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 202-1. - Purpose. 
This Title 2 is intended to implement the purposes set forth in section 102-2, and further is enacted for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the county; lessening congestion in the streets, securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land; avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, sewerage, water, schools, parks and other public requirements; conserving the value of buildings; and encouraging the most appropriate use of land and buildings throughout the county, all in accordance with Rockdale County's Comprehensive Plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 202-2. - Authority. 
This Title 2 is enacted pursuant to Rockdale County's authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, article 9, section 2, paragraph 4 and by article 9, section 2, paragraphs 1 and 3; pursuant to chapters 66 and 70 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; by the Georgia Planning Act of 1989; by Rockdale County's authority to enact regulations and exercise powers granted by local laws and by the county's general police powers; and by other powers and authority provided by federal, state, and local laws applicable hereto. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 202-3. - Incorporation of official zoning map. 
The "Official Zoning District Maps for Rockdale County," hereinafter called official zoning maps, with all appendices, notations, references and other information shown thereon, shall be the official maps and are incorporated by this reference and hereby made a part of Title 2 of the UDO. Said maps shall be made a public record and shall be kept permanently in the Department of Public Services and Engineering of Rockdale County, where the maps or accurate reproductions thereof, will be accessible to the general public. Certified copies of said map shall be prepared by the Rockdale County Clerk. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 202-4. - Division of the county into districts. 
For the purposes of this UDO, the county is divided into the following districts: 

 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 27, 5-22-2007) 
Sec. 202-5. - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map of Rockdale County, the following rules shall apply: 
(a)  Unless otherwise indicated the district boundaries are intended to approximately follow property lines, land lot lines, centerlines of streets, highways, alleys or railroads, shorelines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or civil boundaries, and they shall be construed to follow such lines. 
(b)  Where district boundaries are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways, or railroads, right-of-way of the same, or the centerlines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or said lines extended, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance there from as indicated on the official zoning maps. If no distance is given, such dimensions shall be determined by the director using the scale shown on the official zoning maps. 
(c)  In case the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the board of commissioners shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary pursuant to a regularly advertised public hearing. 
(d)  When a parcel is split by a zoning district boundary, each such portion of the parcel shall be used only for the uses authorized within the zoning district that each such portion is classified. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 202-6. - Relationship to comprehensive plan. 
(a)  Land use role of the Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan is hereby established as the official policy of the County concerning designated land uses and development types, under which the unincorporated areas of the County are divided into land use categories and character areas. 
(1)  As Rockdale County has adopted the Comprehensive Plan to include a Future Land Use Map, and a Character Area Map. The two maps shall work in tandem with one another to provide guidance in the request for zoning amendments. The Character Area map is mandated to identify the broad character of the landscape, including where limited growth is desirable, and areas where more intense development is preferred. 
(b)  Relationship between land use categories and zoning districts. The land use categories established in the adopted Comprehensive Plan and shown on the Future Land Use Map are to be implemented by approving zoning map amendments to zoning districts listed within the following categories table. 
(1)  The comprehensive plan does not change the existing zoning districts in the county, does not effectuate an amendment to the official zoning map, and does not itself permit or prohibit any existing land uses. Instead, the comprehensive plan establishes broad planning policy for current and future land uses and provides, among other things, designated categories within which only certain zoning districts may be authorized. The Future Land Use Map is a designation of the highest use available, it is utilized for staff and commissioners to consider the most compatible use for the proposed area. 
(2)  The zoning districts that are permitted within each land use category shall be restricted to those shown in table of zoning districts permitted in each land use category of the comprehensive plan in this section. 
Table of Zoning Districts Permitted in Each Land Use Category of the Comprehensive Plan 

 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 28, 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 2019-09, § 1, 3-26-2019) 
Sec. 202-7. - Zoning verification. 
Upon request, the director shall have authority to issue written zoning verifications stating the existing zoning of a particular parcel of property. Requests to the director shall be in writing, accurately identify the property, and be accompanied by a fee established by the director. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 202-8. - Zoning classification of de-annexed properties. 
(a)  Property de-annexed from the municipalities in Rockdale County shall automatically be deemed to be zoned to the least intense zoning district in Rockdale County that permits the current use and intensity of the subject property at the time of de-annexation. 
(b)  Such de-annexation shall be reflected on the future land use map of the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan and a consistent land use category shall be assigned to de-annexed property by the department based on the following standards: 
(1)  The future land use map category shall be consistent with the current use. 
(2)  The future land use category shall be consistent with the zoning district assigned in subsection (a). 
(3)  The future land use category shall take into consideration the land use classification of adjacent properties as shown on the adopted future land use map of the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  Immediately upon de-annexation property owners of de-annexed property may present an application for amendment to the comprehensive plan and amendment of the official zoning map, based on the standards and procedures of the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan and this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 202-9. - Enforcement and penalties. 
The provisions of Title 2 of the UDO shall be administered and enforced by the director, except as to those limited code enforcement duties assigned to the director of the department of community compliance and legal affairs. Said Directors shall have authority to revoke, suspend, or void any development permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy and shall have authority to immediately suspend all work on a site or portion thereof that is in violation of Title 2 pursuant to UDO chapter 110. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Chapter 206 - BASE ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 206-1. - W-P watershed protection district. 
(a)  Legislative findings; purpose and intent. 
(1)  The board of commissioners finds that Big Haynes Creek was identified as a feasible water source for Rockdale County in a regional water supply plan adopted by the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC) in 1976. The ARC plan was preceded by a number of other studies that supported an impoundment on Big Haynes Creek. Consistent with these plans and studies, and the county's comprehensive plan, the county first enacted the W-P zoning district regulations and determined that the W-P zoning regulations were needed in the drainage basin contributing to the Upper Big Haynes Creek in 1981 to protect the watershed. These watershed protection zoning regulations require an average lot size of three acres (minimum two acres), among other restrictions, to protect the environmental and aesthetic qualities of this district and to protect the watershed from future environmental degradation. 
The board of commissioners further find that in 1987, the Georgia Environmental Protection Division studied the reservoir and the Conyers-Rockdale Big Haynes Creek Impoundment Authority was created by the Georgia General Assembly and charged with constructing a surface water impoundment for a water supply for Rockdale County. In 1988, the Atlanta Regional Commission adopted a regional water supply plan that identified the Big Haynes project. The ARC has repeatedly warned that the region will not be able to meet its water supply demands unless local and regional water supplies are developed. In addition, one of the critical issues identified by the Governor's Growth Strategies Commission was the importance of expanding Georgia's water supply base. The Big Haynes Authority consulted with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, the U.S. Wildlife Federation, the Georgia Conservancy, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Federation and numerous other agencies. The authority held numerous public hearings on the project before the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers issued the Federal Clean Water Act Section 404 permit in October 1992. To protect this future water supply, the Rockdale Board of Commissioners rezoned the remaining portion of the reservoir's watershed in 1993, applying the following regulations to said properties consistent with this extensive planning for this project. The county finds that these W-P regulations, in addition to implementing these studies, will also assist in implementing a two-year study, facilitated by ARC, of the 82-square mile watershed which resulted in a five-county agreement to control pollution in stormwater that runs off impervious surfaces, such as roads, parking lots and rooftops, within the watershed. 
The board of commissioners further finds that the W-P zoning regulations are necessary to protect water quality for the county's water treatment plant, capable of treating 22.1 million gallons of water per day (MGD), completed in 2002, enabling Rockdale to utilize Randy Poynter Lake for potable water consistent with these W-P regulations. 
(2)  The board of commissioners further finds that the county benefits from additional public parks and recreational facilities and programs. Consistent with this finding the board of commissioners finds that the Randy Poynter Lake (formerly Big Haynes reservoir) property may be used for limited recreation purposes in addition to water supply purposes consistent with the following regulations and those found in chapter 62, article II and the county's comprehensive plan, as amended. 
(3)  The board of commissioners finds that it is in the best interests of the citizens of the county to establish and protect a reservoir for drinking water and limited recreational purposes in this part of the county. The board of commissioners finds the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan adopted July 9, 1991, made certain findings and recommendations regarding water quality, wetlands establishment and preservation, provision of water supply, establishment and preservation and protection of a watershed district, and expansion of public and private recreation uses in the Big Haynes basin. Said comprehensive plan has since been amended and updated. The board of commissioners incorporates the analyses and findings set out in the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan, as amended, regarding those matters and finds that action to accomplish the goals and objectives as set out in the comprehensive plan are implemented in the following W-P regulations. The board of commissioners finds that the Rockdale Comprehensive Plan requires protection of the Big Haynes Watershed in order to provide optimum conditions for the impoundment of the reservoir and the public water intake site. The board of commissioners further finds that the Rockdale Comprehensive Plan, as amended, determines that the impoundment of the reservoir and the establishment of the watershed protection zoning district are necessary actions to protect the integrity of the reservoir and intake site, particularly those zoning regulations establishing an average lot size of three acres (minimum lot size of two acres), prohibiting commercial and other non-residential uses, and establishing buffers. The board of commissioners finds that the following regulations governing the W-P district are consistent with the comprehensive plan and will serve to substantially implement the plan. 
(4)  The board of commissioners further finds that the watershed protection district as recommended in the comprehensive plan, as amended, will allow for protection of wetlands and the preservation of the integrity of water supplies to the greatest extent possible. The state Department of Natural Resources "Environmental Planning Criteria for Water Supply Watersheds" defines Big Haynes Creek as a "small" water supply watershed. The state Department of Natural Resources' criteria require, among other things, streamside and lakeside vegetated buffers, impervious surface setbacks, and septic tank and drain field setbacks, and that impervious surface be limited throughout the entire watershed to a maximum of 25 percent of the area. As a result of the Atlanta Regional Commission cooperative watershed study, and other studies, the necessary limitation for impervious surface throughout the entire W-P district is at least ten percent of the total area. 
(5)  The following regulations are intended to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the county and to implement the policies and objectives and findings of the comprehensive plan, as amended, through the enactment of regulations governing the use of the affected land pursuant to the county's zoning, planning and general police powers. The purpose of the watershed protection zoning district is to protect the public health by setting standards for land use which will maintain, and where possible improve the purity of water in the streams in the county that flow into the public water intake and reservoir. The W-P district is intended to provide for low density residential development, public and private open space, park land, and related uses that are compatible with the primary purpose of protecting the purity of the water and that are substantially related to the primary intended land use of low-density residential development and limited recreational uses. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section; except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Randy Poynter Lake (previously Big Haynes Creek Reservoir): The water impoundment project consisting of the impounded waters from Big Haynes Creek located in Rockdale County, Georgia. 
Easement rights: An easement right which shall inure to the benefit of the county in the form of either: (i) a conservation easement in relation to the reservoir buffer area; (ii) a conservation easement in relation to water quality protection; or (iii) an ingress/egress easement. 
Flood pool area: The area lying between the 735 mean sea level (MSL) line and the 739.8 MSL line as established by the 100-year flood event. 
Normal pool: The area of the reservoir impoundment contained within the 735-foot MSL contour line from which the reservoir buffer area, impervious surface setback, and the septic system setbacks are to be measured. 
Recreation grounds and facilities: Land and structures owned or leased by a governmental entity and used or intended to be used for the purpose of public leisure activities such as picnic areas, sports facilities, fishing piers, boating ramps, related equipment storage and similar activities. 
Reservoir buffer area: The area extending a horizontal distance of 150 feet outward from the normal pool elevation (735 feet MSL) and maintained as a natural or enhanced vegetated area around the reservoir. 
Reservoir manager: The designated agency or employee of the board including the authorized representatives of the reservoir manager. 
Stream buffer area: The area extending a horizontal distance of 100 feet from the top of both banks of a perennial stream and maintained as a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances. 
W-P country store: A community store building lawfully in existence prior to the adoption of the watershed protection zoning district, used solely or principally for the purpose of sales to the public of general merchandise, including but not limited to packaged food and beverages, small houseware articles, papers and magazines, and similar "general store" items. 
(c)  District boundaries. There is hereby established a zoning district known as the watershed protection district (W-P). This W-P district shall consist of all land within the district boundary line specified as W-P including all subzones, on the county's official zoning map identified in section 202-3. The regulations set forth in this section shall apply to all land within this W-P district. 
(d)  Watershed subzones delineated. The watershed protection (W-P) district has distinct land areas that require separate regulations. Accordingly, there are hereby created within the W-P district the following five subzones: 
(1)  Watershed/non-reservoir area (W-NR). 
(2)  Watershed/reservoir water area (W-RW). 
(3)  Watershed/reservoir recreation area (W-RR). 
(4)  Watershed/reservoir buffer area (W-RB). 
(5)  Watershed/reservoir prohibited area (W-RP). 
These five subzones shall be delineated as specified on the official zoning map and made a part of this section. Uses permitted within each subzone shall be as specified in the table of permitted uses. All other regulations set forth in this section shall apply to all subzones unless otherwise stated. The following further describes each subzone area: 
(1)  W-NR: Watershed/non-reservoir area. The watershed/non-reservoir area subzone comprises the watershed area within the boundaries of the county as defined in the comprehensive plan. This area comprises all land outside the reservoir water area, the reservoir buffer area, the reservoir recreation area and the reservoir prohibited areas. 
(2)  W-RW: Watershed/reservoir water area. The watershed/reservoir water area subzone comprises the entire area of the water impoundment owned in fee simple by the county. 
(3)  W-RR: Watershed/reservoir recreation area. The watershed/reservoir recreation area subzone comprises the areas suitable for recreational uses. This subzone comprises governmentally owned land both within and outside the normal pool of the reservoir. The portion of the recreation area subzone lying outside the normal pool area comprises approximately 25 percent of the reservoir shoreline and is subject to the Big Haynes Reservoir Management Ordinance as found in article II of chapter 62. 
(4)  W-RB: Watershed/reservoir buffer area. The watershed/reservoir buffer area subzone is comprised of the land area lying within 150 feet, horizontally, outside of the reservoir impoundment water surface at normal pool. 
(5)  W-RP: Watershed/reservoir prohibited area. The watershed/reservoir prohibited area subzone is comprised of those areas associated with the reservoir that are established for the protection of project operations and ecosystems and to provide for the physical safety of the recreational visitor. This subzone comprises approximately one percent of the reservoir shoreline. 
(e)  Permitted uses. The table of permitted uses sets forth the uses permitted in each subzone of the watershed protection zoning district. Any use not expressly permitted in such table is prohibited. Uses or accessory uses which generate or utilize hazardous or toxic waste are prohibited. 
(f)  Nonconforming uses. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (g), all nonconforming situations shall be regulated pursuant to chapter 234 of the UDO. 
(g)  Nonconforming retail uses. 
(1)  Findings. The board of commissioners finds that four nonconforming community store uses were in existence in the W-P district prior to the enactment of the watershed protection zoning district. The board of commissioners finds that the necessity for stringent environmental and water quality regulations in the district must be carefully balanced with the individual hardships associated with restrictions on these nonconforming uses as well as the public interest served by continuing to provide existing general store/retail services to residents and visitors in the district. Accordingly, the board of commissioners finds that with regard to these existing nonconforming W-P country store uses, limited expansion may be authorized, but only in strict accordance with the standards and criteria set forth in subsection (g)(2). It is the specific intent of this subsection (g) to prohibit any new non-residential use or structure not specifically authorized herein, including but not limited to restaurants, convenience stores, gasoline sales, and other retail establishments. 
(2)  Criteria. Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 234 of the UDO, the legal nonconforming W-P country stores located within the W-P district may be altered and/or expanded in strict accordance with these standards and criteria: 
a.  All building applications for the renovation, redevelopment, expansion or improvement of any nonconforming W-P country store use within the W-P district shall be accompanied by detailed architectural plans and renderings. Such construction plans shall reflect an architectural style that is consistent with the residential and rural development pattern in the W-P district. All such plans shall be reviewed by the director for consistency with these requirements. The front elevation exterior facade, visible from the public right-of-way, shall be constructed of wood. 
b.  No building shall be constructed, expanded or modified so as to exceed 2,500 square feet of gross floor area as measured to the outside face of walls, and are limited to one story, not to exceed 20 feet in height. 
c.  All renovation, redevelopment, expansions or improvement shall be limited to a single building on the same site platted prior to the enactment of the W-P district. Such W-P country store location may be replatted to a maximum allowable lot area of 1.5 acres. 
d.  No building shall be developed or utilized for any use other than the sales provided by country stores to the public, such as general merchandise, gasoline, groceries (including but not limited to packaged foods and beverages, individual takeout food and beverages), small houseware articles and furnishings, papers and magazines and similar "general store" items. 
e.  All development standards applicable to commercial uses specified in various sections of this section and chapter 302 pertaining to the subdivision regulations of the county as well as all applicable requirements of this Code shall apply to such alterations and/or expansions with the following exceptions: 
1.  A ten-foot wide landscape strip shall be established against all road frontages. 
2.  Any renovation, redevelopment or expansion of the existing facility shall conform to all applicable county codes, except for the following standards: 
A.  Building setbacks: 
i.  Side yard: 25 feet. 
ii.  Rear yard: 40 feet. 
B.  The site shall maintain a 25-foot, naturally vegetated buffer area against the rear and side yard property lines in conjunction with a 100 percent opaque fence to be established the entire length of the affected property line. 
C.  Variances and appeals. Variances to this section shall be governed by section 238-9. Appeals to this section shall be governed by section 238-8. 
(h)  Density, lot size, and setback requirements. Property in the W-P district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards of zoning districts, table 1 development standards for residential zoning districts, and the following provisions. 

 
(1)  A site plan, approved by the county environmental health service and the department of public services and engineering, shall be required prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(2)  All divisions of land in the W-P district shall meet the minimum lot size specified in this section. Lots of record lawfully in existence prior to October 11, 1994 and that do not meet the minimum lot size specified in the W-P district shall be deemed legal nonconforming lots and may be developed in accordance with all other requirements specified in this section. 
(i)  Stream buffers. 
(1)  All perennial streams within the W-P district shall be regulated by each of the following criteria: 
a.  A natural or enhanced vegetated area with limited land disturbances shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet from both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks; 
b.  No impervious surface shall be constructed or placed within a distance of 150 feet from both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks; and 
c.  No septic tanks or septic tank drainfields shall be constructed or placed within a distance of 150 feet from both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
(j)  On-site wastewater management systems. County regulations require a permit for siting and installation of septic tanks and absorption fields from the county environmental health department. Such laws, ordinances and regulations shall be applicable to the W-P district. 
(k)  The uses set forth in the table below shall be permitted only as listed within each zoning district and only in the manner so listed. Any use not listed in said table is prohibited in all districts. No use shall be permitted and no structure associated with such use shall be erected, structurally altered, or enlarged unless the use is permitted as one of the following: 
(1)  P: A permitted use. 
(2)  C: A use requiring a special use permit subject to approval following the application procedures and requirements in section 238 of the UDO. 
(3)  S: A supportive commercial use that is on the same lot or parcel with a permitted use in a zoning district and established for the sole convenience of nearby residents, employees, patients, patrons, or visitors within walking distance. 
(4)  A: An accessory use subject to the requirements specified and generally applicable to accessory uses. 
(l)  Any use not listed with the letter P, C, S, or A in a particular zoning district shall be prohibited in that zoning district, unless it is a nonconforming use lawfully established prior to the effective date of the regulation that rendered it legally nonconforming. All listed uses shall comply with the supplemental use standards set forth below and in sections 218-12 and 218-13. See also section [chapter] 234. 
Table of Permitted Uses  ("P" denotes a permitted use) 

 
(m)  Art shows and other special events shall be subject to the terms and conditions of subsection 218-13(ttt), Temporary Use, Commercial Retail. 
(n)  Road standards. Local and collector streets in the W-P district may be constructed without curbs and gutters or sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2008-11, § 3, 9-23-2008; Ord. No. 0-2013-10, § I, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 0-2014-13, § 4, 12-9-2014) 
Sec. 206-2. - A-R agricultural-residential district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The A-R district is intended to provide for areas of the county where single-family residential development can co-exist compatibly with agricultural and agriculture related uses. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures permitted in the A-R district are as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the A-R district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the A-R district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(e)  Property development standards. Property in the A-R district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 1 development standards for residential zoning districts. Additionally, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: 
a.  Residences with private stables: 3.0 acres. 
b.  Agriculture and forestry uses: 5.0 acres. 
(2)  Road standards. Local and collector streets in the A-R district may be constructed without curbs and gutters or sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 206-3. - R-1 single-family residential district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The R-1 district is intended to provide for single-family residences at medium densities. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures permitted in the R-1 district are as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the R-1 district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the R-1 district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(e)  Property development standards. Property in the R-1 district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 1 development standards for residential zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 206-4. - R-2 two-family (duplex) residential district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The R-2 district is intended to provide for two-family residences (duplexes) on moderate size lots served by county water and county wastewater treatment systems. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures permitted in the R-2 district are as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the R-2 district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the R-2 district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(e)  Property development standards. Property in the R-2 District may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, Dimensional Standards for Zoning Districts, Table 1 Development Standards for Residential Zoning Districts. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 2, 7-24-2007) 
Sec. 206-5. - CRS collaborative residential subdivision. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  Intent. The CRS zoning classification is intended to implement the policies of the board of commissioners adopted in the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan. In particular, the CRS zoning classification is intended to allow and encourage the form of single-family detached residential development intended for the conservation residential category of the comprehensive plan future land use map. The CRS zoning classification should be utilized in areas where sensitive natural resources are to be preserved. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of the CRS zoning classification is: 
a.  To create a distinct physical single-family detached residential neighborhood while preserving conservation space and valuable view sheds in perpetuity that include sensitive natural resources such as streams, creeks, lakes, groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes, woodlands, exceptional trees, and wildlife habitat. 
b.  To ensure that interconnected wildlife corridors, green space, multi-modal trails and other dedicated conservation space are protected and accessible in perpetuity for various public and private uses. 
c.  To encourage the protection of passive outdoor recreation, water quality and non-motorized mobility. 
d.  To permit grouping of permitted principal and accessory structures on less environmentally sensitive areas that will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including impervious surfaces and utility easements necessary for residential development. 
e.  To minimize stormwater runoff, erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of mature trees and vegetation in residential development. 
f.  To encourage design flexibility for innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, green space, community design and public amenities. 
g.  To create a sense of place that is attractive, walkable and environmentally responsible, by promoting landscaped walking trails, bike paths, and public gathering places, within and outside the subdivision. 
h.  To connect the neighborhood with communities, businesses and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles and encourage community interaction. 
i.  To encourage reduction of traffic speeds in subdivisions and to reduce the reliance on main corridors through the use of connectivity in street design. 
(b)  General regulations. 
(1)  Applicability of comprehensive plan. The CRS zoning classification is available only within the conservation subdivision land use category as designated on the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map. 
(2)  Timber harvesting. The CRS zoning classification shall not be used on property that has been timber harvested within 36 months. 
(3)  Single development plan. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownerships. If held in multiple ownerships, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common responsibility of conservation space as provided in subsections (h) and (i) of this section. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Principal uses and structures permitted in the CRS district as listed in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(d)  Property development standards. Property in the CRS district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 1 development standards for residential zoning districts and the following provisions. 
(1)  Minimum conservation space: 30 percent of gross parcel area prior to subdivision, and as provided subsections (e) through (j). 
(2)  Minimum development size: Ten contiguous acres, exclusive of conservation space. 
(3)  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. Area contained within a lot shall be exclusive of the 100-year floodplain, wetlands, stream buffers, required buffers, and slopes exceeding 25 percent. 
(4)  Minimum street frontage and lot width at building setback line: 70 feet, continuous from frontage to building line. Street frontage may be reduced to 30 feet for lots with frontage upon a cul-de-sac and 50 feet for lots on the outside of street curves, so long as the lot width at the building setback line is at least 70 feet. 
(5)  Front yard setback: 20 feet minimum; alternating staggered five-foot (minimum) setbacks are required. 
(6)  Rear yard setback: 25 feet minimum. 
(7)  Side yard setback: 7.5 feet minimum. Air conditioning pads, units and other similar structures shall not encroach into the side yard setback. 
(8)  Exterior building materials for principal structure: All sides shall consist of brick, stone, cementitious siding or real (lath and portland) stucco from ground to eaves, with brick, stone, cedar shake, real stucco, painted wood siding or cementitious siding to be used as accents. Metal siding, vinyl siding, metal canopies and exposed standard concrete block are prohibited. Soffits may be constructed of vinyl. 
(9)  Sodded yards: All grassed areas on dwelling lots shall be sodded. 
(10)  Minimum heated floor area of dwelling unit: 1,800 square feet. 
(11)  Minimum main roof slope: 6/12. 
(12)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(13)  Utilities: Must be placed underground. 
(14)  Design features. Buildings shall utilize a minimum of three of the following design features to provide visual relief along the front of the residences: 
a.  Dormers; 
b.  Gables; 
c.  Pillars; 
d.  Posts; 
e.  Covered front porches; 
f.  Recessed entries; 
g.  Cupola; 
h.  Bay windows (minimum 24-inch projection). 
(15)  Accessory structure. Must be located in the rear yard, shall contain a total floor area no greater than 30 percent of the heated area of the principal structure, and the exterior finish material shall be of the same or visually match the exterior finish of the principal structure. Accessory structures shall not exceed the height of the principal structure and shall meet the minimum side and rear setback requirements of this chapter. 
(16)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  All single-family dwelling units shall include an enclosed garage for a minimum of two cars. Said garage may be attached to or detached from the principal structure, and shall be oriented to the side or rear yard, or if front facing, shall be staggered between even with the front facade and at least five feet behind the front facade of the dwelling and consist of two decorative single-wide garage doors (each not to exceed 12 feet in width) that provide for integrated architectural integrity with the house in order to visually diminish the impact of the garage doors. Double-wide garage doors that provide for integrated architectural integrity with the house may be used for front-facing garages if the garage is set back at least ten feet behind the front facade of the residence. 
b.  A minimum of one additional parking space per every six lots shall be established adjacent to recreation areas, clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis court, community room, and exercise or health club, with a minimum of ten spaces required. Parking areas serving playing fields, playgrounds and courts shall provide safe ingress and egress, and shall not be lighted. 
(17)  Development density. Maximum density shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan, which establishes a maximum density not to exceed 3.1 units per acre in the conservation residential land use category. The maximum number of lots in the CRS zoning classification shall be based on the adjusted tract area of the site. Adjusted tract area is the total acreage of the parcel, not including the primary conservation area, but including other land used for lots, streets, recreation and other conservation space. Area contained within a lot shall be exclusive of 100-year floodplains, wetlands, stream buffers, required buffers, and slopes exceeding 25 percent. 
(18)  Tree preservation bonus density. Each existing healthy tree located within a required conservation space area may receive a bonus credit of 0.5 tree density units, if, in the opinion of the county arborist/urban forester, the tree is retained along with an intact area of undisturbed soil containing natural habitat and groundcover that includes all of the area below the crown of the tree. Each existing exceptional tree that is preserved, as defined in chapter 106, may receive three bonus credits of tree density units, as long as, in the opinion of the county arborist/urban forester, the exceptional tree is retained along with an intact area of undisturbed soil containing natural habitat and groundcover that includes all of the area below the crown of the tree. 
(19)  Compatibility with existing development. Each CRS zoned development that abuts property that is zoned for agricultural or single-family residential use shall provide one of the following forms of transition to adjacent zones: 
a.  20-foot natural or enhanced vegetated opaque buffer adjacent to residentially zoned property, to include a three-foot tall berm with plantings to a minimum total height of six feet, recorded separately from the lots. 
b.  50-foot natural or enhanced vegetated opaque buffer adjacent to residentially zoned property recorded separately from the lots. 
c.  150-foot deep transition area developed with lots that are not less than the average size of lots that abut the CRS zoned parcel or within 150 feet of its outer boundary, measured as straight-line distance. 
d.  Where possible, connectivity of inter-parcel conservation space or wildlife corridors is encouraged. 
(20)  Streets, sidewalks, and street trees. 
a.  Streets. The street network shall form a connected pattern (grid system), with a minimum of culs-de-sac approved by the director only in cases of topographical hardship. Street shapes should be varied with loop streets, curving crescents, eyebrows, ovals, and courts providing visual interest and traffic calming effects. Approved cul-de-sac streets may be no longer than 600 feet in length and shall reflect a design around a central median or square. Street patterns shall be designed to respect and follow existing terrain as much as possible, to minimize earthmoving and disruption of the existing topography. Streets shall be designed to: 
1.  Parallel and preserve existing tree lines, hedgerows, existing historic structures, and water elements. 
2.  Minimize alteration of natural, cultural or historic features. 
3.  Minimize the acreage devoted to streets. 
4.  Calm traffic speeds. 
5.  Promote pedestrian movement. 
6.  Secure the view to prominent natural vistas. 
7.  Be aligned so that the "terminal vista" is of civic buildings or conservation space land, either manmade (such as greens, commons, squares, or parks) or natural. 
8.  Minimize crossing of primary conservation areas. 
9.  All streets, with the exception of loop streets, shall terminate at other streets within the conservation subdivision, and at least two streets shall provide connections to existing or proposed through-streets or collectors outside the CRS zoned property, where practicable. 
10.  Streetlights are to be provided along one side of every street, a minimum of 16 feet high and a maximum of 20 feet high if overhanging into the street, and placed no more than 160 feet apart. 
b.  Sidewalks. Public sidewalks shall: 
1.  Be a minimum of five feet wide and shall be constructed on one side of streets. 
2.  Create a linked network of walkways connecting with parks and other conservation space land areas. 
3.  Be separated from street curbs by a "tree lawn" not less than five feet wide, planted with shade trees in accordance with the Rockdale County plant palette. 
4.  Be provided along the front lot lines of all CRS zoned lots to ensure pedestrian access to each lot. Lots fronting directly onto common greens or parks shall be provided with sidewalks along their front lot lines abutting the greens or parks. 
c.  Street trees. 
1.  Street trees shall be planted along each side of all streets, public or private, existing or proposed. Existing healthy and mature street trees may be counted toward the street tree-planting requirement. 
2.  Street trees shall have a minimum of three inches dbh. 
3.  Street trees shall be spaced at intervals no greater than 50 feet along both sides of each residential street; spacing may be adjusted to account for driveways, fire hydrants and other obstructions and to provide adequate visual clearance for intersections and driveways. 
4.  Species of street trees shall be approved by the director. However, no more than 25 percent of the total number of the trees installed may be of any one genus. 
(e)  Conservation space. Conservation space is defined as the portion of the CRS zoned property that has been set aside for permanent protection and shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  A minimum of 30 percent of the gross acreage prior to subdivision shall be designated as conservation space, subject to subsection (f) of this section. 
(2)  Activities within the conservation space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(3)  The CRS zoning classification does not require the public dedication of any conservation space lands to any government body or agency, nor does it require that public access be granted. All conservation lands shall remain in private hands held in common ownership by the owners of the lots in the subdivision unless those areas are deeded to and accepted by Rockdale County or to a land bank conservation tax exempt trust that has been approved by the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. 
(4)  At least 50 percent of the conservation space shall be in a contiguous tract. The conservation space should adjoin any neighboring areas of conservation space, or other protected areas and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected conservation space. 
(5)  No more than ten percent of required conservation space shall be impervious. 
(f)  Categories of conservation space. In order to qualify for CRS zoning, conservation space shall be held under unitary ownership or control, meet the following requirements, and fall within the following three categories: 
(1)  Primary conservation areas. Primary conservation areas form the core of the conservation space to be protected and are required to be included in the conservation space. All of the acreage of a primary conservation area may be counted as conservation space. Active recreation areas are prohibited in primary conservation areas. These areas shall be left in a natural and undisturbed state, except for the fewest possible perpendicular crossings of essential access roads and utility lines. Primary conservation areas, as defined by this section, include the following: 
a.  Private cemeteries and burial grounds. 
b.  100-year floodplains. 
c.  Habitats for endangered or threatened species as defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
d.  Wetlands identified by the national wetlands inventory maps prepared by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the county soil survey prepared by the U.S. Deptartment of Agriculture (USDA), Natural Resources Conservation Service, or a certified wetlands delineation using data from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
e.  Alluvian soils identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and 100-year floodplain, as identified on Federal Insurance Rate Maps. 
f.  Lakes, rivers, streams, existing ponds, creeks, including but not limited to blue line tributaries and state waters. 
g.  Riparian zones equal to any required stream buffers and improvement setbacks. 
h.  Existing slopes greater than 25 percent on average with a site area greater than 5,000 square feet identified as part of a site analysis conducted by a registered engineer, land surveyor or landscape architect and calculated using topographic maps from the Rockdale County GIS system or from a topographic survey prepared by a licensed land surveyor. 
i.  Rock outcroppings. 
(2)  Secondary conservation areas. Secondary conservation areas consist of undeveloped but buildable land and protected lands and may be counted as conservation space. Secondary conservation areas, as defined by this section, should be protected to the maximum extent feasible, and should include the following: 
a.  Mature hardwood forests of at least one acre of contiguous area. 
b.  Historic and /or archaeological sites. 
c.  Passive recreation areas, public and private, to include parks as identified by the parks and recreation master plan, open fields, and playgrounds. Impervious surfaces within passive recreation areas shall not be credited toward conservation space. 
d.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
e.  Aquifer recharge areas identified in the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan. 
f.  Scenic view sheds, particularly those that can be seen from public roads. 
g.  Wetland and stream bank mitigation projects. 
h.  Greens, commons, squares, and parks. In order to provide for terminal vistas and loop roads in lieu of cul-de-sacs, and for the enjoyment of the residents, Rockdale County recommends that ten percent of the minimum required conservation space land consist of multiple greens, commons, squares, or parks, but these smaller areas of conservation space shall not exceed 20 percent of the total required conservation space. 
i.  Street rights-of-way may traverse, but shall not count toward the minimum required area of conservation space. 
(3)  Outdoor recreation area. Impervious surfaces in recreation areas shall not be counted as conservation space. Lakes and ponds are allowed in outdoor recreation areas, but their surface area shall not be counted as conservation space. This category includes: greenways, trails, bikeways, paths, tennis courts, ball fields, playfields, courts, golf courses, swimming pools, clubhouses, lockers, bicycle facilities, beaches, docks, seating areas, amphitheaters, stages, band shells, community buildings, fountains, plazas, patios, decks, lawns, picnic shelters and picnic areas, landscaping and other land containing outdoor recreation structures and facilities. 
(4)  Exclusions. Excluded from counting toward the minimum amount of conservation space are the following (also see the definition of primary conservation space): 
a.  Proposed permanent lakes that may be used for wet detention. 
b.  Recreation area improvements. Impervious surfaces in recreational areas shall not be credited. 
c.  Easements. 
d.  Up to 50 percent of land area within utility easements, such as but not limited to power, gas pipeline easements, sewer line easements, may be counted towards conservation space requirements. 
e.  Residential yards. 
f.  Land that has been or is to be conveyed to a public agency via an agreement for such uses as schools, parks, or other public facilities. 
(g)  Accessibility of conservation space. Conservation space shall be designed and located for the convenient access and enjoyment of all users of the CRS zoned property. Conservation space shall be within 1,000 feet of all occupied buildings in the development. If the conservation space is for public use, connection shall be made to the conservation space by improved pathways or sidewalks. 
(h)  Ownership of conservation space. The applicant must identify the owner who is responsible for maintaining the conservation space, the required buffers and facilities located thereon as the owners of the various lots and undeveloped phases located in the subdivision. The above-mentioned property shall be considered commons area for the subdivision and the ownership and value of such commons area shall reside with the owners of the individual lots and undeveloped phases located in the subdivision. The ownership shall be fee simple with undivided interest. All deeds recorded for this subdivision shall indicate such ownership in the commons area. This ordinance will not require the public dedication of any conservation space to any governmental body or agency, nor will it require that public access be granted. All conservation land may remain in private hands, or if accepted, be dedicated to Rockdale County or a land bank conservation tax-exempt trust that has been approved by the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. The owners may form a property owners association for the purpose of managing and maintaining the grounds and any facilities. The property owners association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members in order to pay for such maintenance. 
(i)  Conservation space and common facilities management plan. The applicant shall submit a conservation space management plan (management plan) at the time the construction plans are submitted. The management plan shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of any land disturbance permit for any development under the CRS zoning classification. The management plan shall include information that: 
(1)  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the conservation space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements. 
(2)  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the conservation space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided. 
(3)  Provides for sufficient funds to be escrowed for the maintenance and operation costs of common facilities for one year. 
(4)  Provides that any changes to the management plan be approved the board of commissioners. 
(5)  Provides for enforcement of the management plan. 
(6)  Maintenance required. In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the conservation space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, Rockdale County may assume responsibility for its maintenance, and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, property owners association, or to the individual property owners that make up the property owners association, and may include administrative costs, including attorneys' fees, and penalties. Such costs shall be recouped through the use of special assessments upon the property owners of the various lots and undeveloped phases. 
(7)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. The conservation space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed and noted on the final plat. The instrument for permanent protection shall incorporate restrictions on the use of the conservation space contained in this section, as well as any further restrictions as approved by the board of commissioners. The legal instrument shall be in place and binding on the conservation space no later than the date of issuance of a land disturbance permit. However, greens, commons, squares or pocket parks may be deeded concurrent with the unit or phase of the final subdivision plat of which it is a part. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
1.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence, and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for transfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions. 
2.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this UDO. 
3.  If the entity accepting the easement is not Rockdale County, then a third right of enforcement favoring Rockdale County shall be included in the easement. 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60(c). 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. 
(8)  Tax assessment of conservation space. Once a legal instrument or permanent protection has been placed upon the conservation space, the required buffers and facilities, the Rockdale County Board of Assessors shall reassess these areas as commons area and the value of such commons area shall vest in the remaining subdivision lots and undeveloped phases. Rockdale County, through the use of special assessments upon the property owners of the various lots and undeveloped phases, shall recoup any work or maintenance performed by Rockdale County upon the commons area. 
(9)  Other design considerations. The configuration of conservation space shall comply with the following additional standards: 
a.  Except for formal greens, commons, squares, parks, playing fields, and trail corridors, conservation space land shall not include parcels smaller than three acres, have a length-to-width ratio of less than 3:1, or be less than 50 feet in width. 
b.  Conservation space land shall connect to adjoining parks, preserves, or other protected lands. 
c.  Except in those cases where part of the designated conservation space is located on private land, conservation space land shall provide for pedestrian pathways for use by the residents of the subdivision. The developer shall provide for public access on such trails if they are linked to other publicly accessible pathway systems within Rockdale County (for example, a PATH Foundation trail connection). Provisions shall be made for access to the conservation space, as required for land maintenance and emergency purposes. 
d.  Outdoor recreation areas designated for active recreational uses shall not negatively impact adjacent residential areas or roadways. 
e.  Conservation space land shall be undivided by public or private streets, except where necessary for proper traffic circulation. 
(j)  Establishment of conservation residential subdivision status. Land development using the CRS zoning classification shall be subject to the following procedures: 
(1)  Pre-zoning application conference. Prior to submitting an application for rezoning to the CRS district, the applicant shall schedule a conference to discuss the standards and procedures that apply to the CRS. The applicant, the applicant's engineer or site plan preparer, the owner of the property (if different than the applicant), and appropriate county staff shall attend the conference. A representative from the land trust that will hold the conservation easement on the dedicated conservation space to be included in the development, if known, shall also be invited to attend the pre-zoning application conference. 
a.  Purpose of conference. The purpose of the pre-zoning application conference is to discuss the applicant's objectives, review the applicant's documentation and analysis of existing environmental conditions and discuss concepts for subdivision layout and location of conservation space. Applicant shall prepare, and provide to the department two weeks in advance of this meeting, three copies of both a site concept plan and an existing conservation features plan. 
(2)  Site concept plan. Prior to application for rezoning, the developer shall prepare a site concept plan, to present at the prezoning application conference that shall include: 
a.  Statement of intent. A narrative describing the proposed development and explaining how it meets the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan and of this section. 
b.  Site concept plan. A plan drawn to a designated scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, certified by a professional engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor licensed by the State of Georgia, presented on a sheet having a maximum size of 30 inches by 42 inches, and one 8½-inch x 11-inch reduction of the plan. If presented on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join and shall be numbered consecutively with a notation such as sheet 2 of 3. The concept plan shall represent the conceptual design of the property to be developed, as well as for all adjacent property that is within the developer's ownership or control. The concept plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Boundaries of the entire property, with bearings and distances of the perimeter property lines. 
2.  Total area of the property in acres. 
3.  Current and proposed zoning. 
4.  Scale and north arrow, with north, to the extent feasible, oriented to the top of the plat and on all supporting graphics. 
5.  Banks of streams, lakes and other waterbodies, and buffers. 
6.  Delineation of any floodplain designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), United States Geological Survey (USGS), or Rockdale County; the delineation of any jurisdictional wetlands as defined by Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
7.  Approximate location and extent of any significant historic or archaeological feature, grave, object or structure marking a place of burial, if known, and a statement indicating how the proposed development will preserve the feature and provide access to it during and after construction. 
8.  A delineation of all existing structures and whether they will be retained or demolished. 
9.  Development density and lot sizes. 
10.  Designation of minimum lot areas, setbacks and yards. 
11.  Parking areas, points of access to public rights-of-way and vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns within the subject property. 
12.  Areas to be held in joint ownership, common ownership or control and the proposed method of control and management of these areas. 
13.  Indication that the property is served by public water and sewer, with conceptual layout of utilities and location of all existing or proposed utility easements having a width of ten feet or more. 
14.  Conceptual plans for drainage with approximate location and estimated size of all proposed storm water management facilities and a statement as to the type of facility proposed. 
15.  Location and width of required buffers at external site boundaries. 
16.  Location and approximate area (in acres) of conservation space and recreation facilities. 
17.  Location, where applicable, of proposed trails, recreation areas, parks, schools, libraries, churches and other public or community uses, facilities or structures on the site. 
18.  Public right(s)-of-way, any required or proposed improvements to the public right(s)-of-way and delineation of the existing centerline of all streets abutting the property, including dimensions from the existing centerline to the edge of the pavement and to the right-of-way. 
19.  Width of right-of-way and pavement sections of all internal streets. 
20.  Seal and signature of professional person preparing the plan. 
c.  Existing conservation features plan. The developer shall prepare an existing conservation features plan that meets the following minimum requirements: 
(3)  Existing conservation features plan. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, the applicant shall prepare an existing conservation features plan, sealed by a registered engineer or landscape architect by the State of Georgia. This plan will delineate areas that have been identified as worthy of permanent protection in conservation space because of their environmental values. It will set forth the particulars of the site, including boundary, topographic data (minimum two-foot contour intervals), existing structures and utility easements. The plan should provide the starting point for the design of the CRS development, with built areas being designed as separate from the areas delineated as worthy of permanent protection. The existing conservation features plan shall include the following: 
a.  Perennial and intermittent streams, drainage swales, FEMA designated 100-year flood hazard zones and wetlands, and other hydrologic features, along with the sources of this information. 
b.  Identification of tree lines, native woodlands, open fields or meadows, exceptional trees, peaks or rock outcroppings, ridgelines, watershed boundaries, and prime agricultural land. 
c.  Delineation of tree resource areas by type such as hardwoods, pines or mixed; and old and new growth. 
d.  Delineation of steep slope areas (over 25 percent). Slopes greater than 40 percent shall be preserved, per subsection (f) of this section. 
e.  Identification of historical, archeological or other significant features. 
f.  Identification of scenic vistas. 
g.  Identification of conservation space, green space, multi-modal trails or common areas adjacent to the project, and potential connections to the existing green space and trails. 
h.  Certification that timber-harvesting activity has not occurred on the property in the previous 36 months prior to the submittal of a site concept plan. 
i.  Topographic contours of no less than two-foot intervals, unless a closer interval is required for clarification. 
j.  General soil series, types, and phases as mapped by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service in the published soil survey for Rockdale County, and accompanying data published for each soil in relation to its suitability for construction. 
k.  Groundwater recharge areas. 
l.  Existing roads and structures. 
m.  Archeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
n.  Historic properties. 
o.  View sheds showing location and extent of views into the property from public roads. 
p.  Easements and other encumbrances of the property. 
q.  Date existing conservation features plan was prepared. 
(4)  Variances. No administrative variances shall be granted in the CRS zoning district. Appeals shall be submitted pursuant to section 238-8. 
(5)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of this Title 2 of the UDO, applicable subdivision regulations, and other development requirements of Rockdale County. In any case where the standards and requirements of this district conflict with other provisions of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, subdivision regulations, the requirements of this district shall govern. 
(k)  Senior housing element. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The regulations set forth in this senior housing element of the CRS zoning district are designed to provide for the development of detached dwelling units limited to those persons age 55 and older, and to promote the concept of aging in place which provides a variety of living choices aimed at allowing residents to remain in their communities as they age. 
(2)  Definitions related to senior housing element. 
a.  Aging in place: The opportunity to live in a specific community for as long as possible, facilitated by the presence of housing which meets the changing needs of an aging adult, provides transportation alternatives, opportunities for exercise and physical activity and a community life which engages older residents with the community as a whole. 
b.  Universal design standards: Building guidelines developed to insure that a house can remain accessible to a homeowner should they ever face a short or long term disability. 
(3)  General regulations. 
a.  Standard criteria for senior housing. All projects developed under this subsection shall: 
1.  Be located within two linear miles north or south of Interstate 20. 
2.  Be within three driving miles of commercial retail uses, including but not limited to, grocery store, pharmacy, and/or medical service facility. 
3.  Maintain the scale and intensity of the surrounding uses. 
b.  Principal permitted use. Senior housing element shall permit single-family detached residential units with a density of no more than 3.1 dwelling units per acre. 
c.  Minimum lot size. No lot shall be less than 8,000 square feet. Areas contained in a lot shall be exclusive of the 100-year floodplain, wetlands, stream buffers, other required buffers and slopes exceeding ten percent. 
d.  Minimum street frontage and lot width at building setback line. Fifty feet, continuous from frontage to building line. Street frontage may be reduced to 30 feet for lots with frontage upon a cul-de-sac. For lots on the outside of street curves the minimum frontage remains at 50 feet. 
e.  Front yard setback. Minimum ten feet with at maximum of 20 feet. 
f.  Rear yard setback. With an alley, five feet. Without an alley, 20 feet. 
g.  Side yard setback. Seven and one-half feet minimum. Air conditioning pads and units and other similar structures shall not encroach into the side yard setback. 
h.  Housing standards. All dwellings shall have a minimum of 1,200 heated square footage and a maximum of 1,800 heated square footage. In addition, all residential units within the senior housing element of the CRS zoning district shall incorporate the following universal design standards: 
1.  Entrances. 
• Accessible parking convenient to dwelling, covered from the elements. 
• Accessible path of travel to dwelling from parking or drop off area (slope of 1:20 or less eliminates the necessity for handrails, except when needed by a specific individual). 
• At least one entrance without steps and flush or low profile threshold. 
• Minimum five-feet by five-feet maneuvering space at stepless entrance. 
• 36-inch minimum exterior door with lever hardware. 
• Movement sensor light at entrance. 
• A sidelight or peephole at 42 and 60 inches above the floor. 
• Ambient and focused lighting at keyhole. 
• High visibility address numbers. 
2.  General interior. 
• Hall width 42 inches minimum (interior accessible route is 36 inches). 
• Interior door width 32-inch minimum (requires 34 or 36-inch wide door), equipped with lever hardware. 
• Flush transitions between floor surfaces (maximum of ½-inch rise). 
• Five pounds maximum force to open doors. 
• Eighteen-inch minimum space at latch side of door. 
• Five-feet by five-feet maneuvering space in each room (after furniture is placed). 
• Increased number of electrical outlets for additional lighting and alarm indicators, especially in bedrooms. 
• Electrical outlets at 18-inch minimum height. 
• Light switches 44 inches maximum above floor. 
• View windows at 36-inch maximum sill height and large enough to use as an escape route in the event of an emergency. 
• Crank operated (casement) or light weight sliding windows. 
• Closet rods adjustable from 30 inches to 66 inches above the floor. 
• Loop or other easy-to-use handle pulls on drawers and cabinets. 
• High contrast, glare free floor surfaces and trim. 
• Low pile carpet or smooth anti-slip flooring. 
• High-speed internet access data connection port and cabling. 
3.  Bathrooms. 
• 60-inch diameter turning circle. 
• 30-inch by 48-inch area of approach (forward or parallel, depending on fixture type) in front of all fixtures. 
• Toilet more usable by many if positioned in a five-feet by five-feet space with centerline 18 inches from sidewall. 
• 32-inch minimum lavatory counter height with lever faucet controls. 
• Adaptable cabinets to reveal kneespace under lavatory. Exposed piping in kneespace should be padded or concealed. 
• When tub or shower are installed, select models designed to accept portable bench or bathing seat. 
• Curbless or roll-in shower plus standard tub. 
• Offset single-lever controls in tub and shower to minimize stooping, bending and reaching. 
• Adjustable height hand-held shower head in addition to standard fixed shower head. 
• Anti-scald devices on all plumbing fixtures. 
• Enlarged reinforced blocking (minimum ¾-inch plywood) areas around toilet and bathing fixture to provide secure mounting locations for grab bars and shower seats. 
• Mirror to backsplash at lavatory. 
• Contrasting color edge border at countertops. 
4.  Kitchens. 
• 60-inch diameter turning space. 
• 30-inch by 48-inch area of approach (forward or parallel, depending on fixture type) in front of all appliances. 
• Cooktop or range with front or side-mounted controls and staggered burners to eliminate dangerous reaching. 
• Front-mounted controls on washer and dryer. 
• Adaptable cabinets to reveal kneespace at sink and under work surface near cooking appliances. 
• Variable height sink adjustable between 32 and 40 inches 
• Exposed piping and any sharp or hot elements in any kneespace should be padded or concealed. 
• Single-lever faucet controls. 
• Full height pantry cabinets for high and low storage. 
• Adjustable height shelves in wall cabinets. 
• Refrigerator/freezer with frozen food storage in bottom or side-by-side refrigerator/freezer. 
• Variable height counter surfaces or adjustable through a range of 28 to 40 inches. 
• Base cabinets with pullout shelves or drawers. 
• Contrasting color edge border at countertops. 
• Microwave over at countertop height with uninterrupted counter surface or pull out shelf to support the safe transfer of hot and/or heavy cookware. 
• Glare free task lighting under the cabinets. 
i.  Property owner's association. In addition to the requirements set forth in the CRS zoning district subsections 206-5(h) and 206-5(i), the property owners association shall publish and adhere to policies and procedures that require that the community will provide housing for persons at least 55 years old and older, including maintaining surveys or affidavits verifying compliance with 55 and older occupancy requirements as permitted by 42 U.S.C. Section 3607, (b)(2)(c) of the Federal Fair Housing Act, as amended. Said association shall also include declarations (covenants) and bylaws including rules and regulations, which shall, at a minimum, regulate and control the following: 
1.  Restriction on homes being occupied, with at least 80 percent of the occupied units occupied by at least one resident who is age 55 or older. For developments in which 100 percent of the units are occupied by seniors, at least one resident in each unit shall be age 62 or older. 
2.  Restrictions on single-family residential use only and leasing/renting of units. No more than ten percent of the total units may be leased/rented by individual owners at any one time. 
3.  Maintain and regulate exterior items such as fences, lawn ornaments and restrictions on removal of landscaped areas and buffers. 
4.  Exterior fence maintenance shall include a requirement that any graffiti shall be repaired and/or repainted within 72 hours. 
5.  Prohibit playground equipment, swing sets, trampolines or like fixtures. 
6.  Maintenance of detention ponds, common areas and entrance features. 
7.  Insurance and maintenance of all common areas owned by the association not located in the county right-of-way. 
Said association declarations shall be reviewed for approval by the department and the county attorney prior to recording with the Rockdale County Clerk of Courts. The first building permit shall not be issued until verification of said documents has been recorded. 
(4)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of this CRS zoning district, Title 2 of the UDO, applicable subdivision regulations, and other development requirements of Rockdale County. In any case where the standards and requirements of this district conflict with other provisions of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, subdivision regulations, the requirements of this district shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 24, 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 3, 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 0-2008-18, § 1, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 4, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 206-6. - CSD conservation subdivision development district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  Intent. The CSD is intended to implement the policies of the board of commissioners adopted in the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan and the recommendations of the Salem Road Corridor Study. In particular, the CSD is intended to allow and encourage the form of development intended for the special mixed-use activity center category of the future land use map. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of the CSD is: 
a.  To preserve in perpetuity sensitive natural resources such as streams, creeks, lakes, groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
b.  To ensure that interconnected greenspace, trails and open space are accessible to the residents of the county for the protection of passive outdoor recreation, water quality and mobility. 
c.  To permit grouping of permitted principal and accessory structures on less environmentally sensitive areas that will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements necessary for residential development. 
d.  To minimize stormwater runoff, erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
e.  To encourage design flexibility for innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, greenspace, community design and public amenities. 
f.  To create a sense of place that is attractive, walkable and environmentally responsible. 
(3)  Application. This zoning district may only be applied to property located in the SRCO. 
(4)  Uses. The principal uses and structures, accessory uses and structures, and special uses and structures listed in section 206-6, subsections (b), (c), and (d) are permitted within the CSD district. Any use or structure not specifically listed is prohibited. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the CSD district as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the CSD district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO and the following provisions: 
(1)  The floor area of accessory structures shall not exceed 30 percent of the floor area of the principal uses on the same lot to which they are accessory. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the CSD district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(e)  Property development standards. Property in the CSD district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 1 development standards for residential zoning districts and the following provisions: 
(1)  Minimum open space: 30 percent of gross parcel area prior to subdivision. 
(2)  Minimum development size: Five acres or at least ten lots, exclusive of open space. 
(3)  Heated floor area of dwelling unit: Minimum 1,800 square feet. 
(4)  Maximum ground floor area of a building: 5,000 square feet. 
(5)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  All single-family dwelling units shall include a garage for a minimum of two cars. Said garage may be attached to or detached from the principal structure. 
b.  Minimum of 25 additional parking spaces adjacent to recreation areas, clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis court, community room, exercise or health club and dressing rooms. 
(6)  Tree preservation bonus density. Each existing healthy tree located within a required open space area may receive a bonus credit of 0.25 tree density units; if, in the opinion of the county arborist/urban forester, the tree is retained along with an intact area of undisturbed soil containing natural habitat and groundcover that includes all of the area below the crown of the tree. 
(7)  Compatibility with existing development. Each CSD development that abuts property that is zoned for agricultural or single-family residential use shall provide one of the following forms of transition to adjacent zones: 
a.  50-foot opaque buffer adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
b.  200-foot deep transition area developed with lots that are not less than the average size of lots that abut the CSD zoned parcel or within 200 feet of its outer boundary, measured as straight line distance. 
(8)  On-site septic systems. With the approval of the director, the applicant may seek approval of the Rockdale County Division of Environmental Health for on-site septic systems for individual lots within a CSD that include: 
a.  Placing drain fields for on-site septic systems within secondary conservation areas in required open space; 
b.  Placing drain fields for on-site septic systems on individual lots with an easement limiting its use to open space required under this section. 
(9)  Development density. 
a.  Density of a CSD shall be computed based on the number of dwelling units per acre of the parcel, not including the primary conservation area, but including other land used for lots, streets, recreation and other open space. 
b.  Density, lot size and lot design are subject to approval of the wastewater treatment system by the Rockdale County Board of Health, Environmental Health Section. 
c.  Maximum density: 2.4 dwelling units per acre, except as authorized to be increased in subsection d., below and in subsection 210-2(j). 
d.  Bonus density for additional open space (not including primary conservation areas), is as follows: 

 
e.  The bonus density allowed in this subsection shall be in addition to that allowed in the subsection 210-2(j). 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 30, 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 5, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 206-7. - MUR mixed-use residential district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  Intent. The MUR district is intended to implement the policies of the board of commissioners adopted in the Rockdale County 2020 Comprehensive Plan and the recommendations of the Salem Road Corridor Study. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of the MUR district is: 
a.  To provide for the needs of a diverse population with well-designed and human-scale, attached single-family and multifamily structures that are compatible with other residential neighborhoods. 
b.  To provide a transition between single-family residential neighborhoods and commercial, civic or office uses. 
c.  To encourage design flexibility for innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, greenspace, community design and public amenities. 
(3)  Application. This zoning district may be applied only to property located in the SRCO. 
(4)  Uses. The principal uses and structures, accessory uses and structures, supportive commercial uses, and special uses and structures listed in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e) of this section are permitted within the MUR district. Any use or structure not specifically listed is prohibited. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the MUR district as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the MUR district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Supportive commercial uses. Supportive commercial uses shall be permitted in the MUR district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO on the ground floor of buildings in the MUR district, provided they occupy no more than 20 percent of the total floor area of occupied buildings within an MUR development project. 
(e)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the MUR district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(f)  Property development standards. Property in the MUR district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 1 development standards for residential zoning districts and the following provisions: 
(1)  Minimum heated floor area: 
a.  Two-family dwellings and townhouses: 
1.  1 bedroom: 900 square feet. 
2.  2-bedroom: 1,200 square feet. 
3.  3-bedroom: 1,400 square feet. 
b.  Personal care homes: 1,320 square feet, plus 80 square feet for each bed. 
(2)  Maximum ground floor area: 7,500 square feet per building. 
(3)  Maximum building length or width: 150 feet. 
(4)  Spacing between buildings: Minimum 20 feet. 
(5)  Maximum building height: 45 feet or 50 feet if supportive commercial use is on ground floor. 
(6)  Minimum lot size: 
a.  Two acres prior to development. 
b.  2,500 square feet for individual fee-simple townhouse lots. 
(7)  Minimum frontage: 200 feet on public street for development. 
(8)  Off-street parking and loading areas. 
a.  Surface parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential uses and public streets by an evergreen hedge or solid masonry wall not less than three feet in height that shall be continuous, except for driveways and sidewalks connecting said parking areas to public streets. 
b.  Loading areas shall be screened from adjacent residential uses and public streets by an opaque buffer, solid fence or masonry wall not less than six feet in height that shall be continuous, except for driveways and sidewalks connecting said loading areas to public streets. 
(9)  Compatibility with existing development within zones and transition to adjacent zones. 
a.  Buildings over 35 feet high shall not be closer than 75 feet to property lines of single-family residential property. 
b.  Parking lots, loading docks, dumpsters and outdoor recreation with outdoor lighting shall be screened from adjacent residential property by an opaque landscape buffer at least 15 feet wide or a ten-foot-wide opaque landscape buffer outside a six-foot high solid fence or wall. 
(10)  Tree preservation bonus density. Each existing healthy tree that is preserved in a required open space area may receive a bonus credit of 0.25 tree density units if, in the opinion of the county arborist/urban forester, the tree is retained along with an intact area of undisturbed soil containing natural habitat and groundcover that includes all of the area below the crown of the tree. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 6, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 206-8. - RM residential multi-family district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The RM district is mainly comprised of multi-family residential buildings where surrounding land uses are compatible with higher-density residential development or suitable transitional buffers are provided per the requirements of chapter 328, article I. Appropriate areas must have adequate urban amenities and public facilities, including public water and sewer systems. Because density is increased, it is critical that all factors relating to drainage, topography, open space and other environmental impacts be examined carefully to ensure suitability. All RM developments shall be located on a major thoroughfare. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures permitted in the RM district are as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the RM district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the RM district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(e)  Property development standards. 
Property  in the RM district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 1 development standards for residential zoning districts and the following provisions: 
(1)  Minimum lot width: 60 feet for duplexes, otherwise 100 feet. 
(2)  No parking is allowed in the required front yard. 
(3)  Building size: No building shall contain more than six dwelling units. 
(4)  Buildings shall be separated by a minimum of 15 feet side-to-side, 40 feet front to back, front to front, or back to back. 
(5)  The building shall be placed on a permanent foundation, either slab or pier, which meets the requirements of the Standard Building Code. A permanent foundation wall, or curtain wall, un-pierced, except for required ventilation and access, shall enclose the area located under the home to the ground level. Such a wall shall have a minimum thickness of 3.5 inches and shall be constructed of masonry, brick, or similar material. Installation shall meet or exceed any applicable rules or regulations promulgated by the Georgia Fire Safety Commissioner and shall be completed prior to permanent electrical service. 
(6)  Open space requirement. 
a.  RM developments including more than 50 dwelling units must provide 400 square feet of landscaped outdoor recreation space per unit in the development. 
b.  Where abutting incompatible uses or districts, a buffer is required in conformance with chapter 328, article I of the UDO. 
(7)  Landscaping. Front yards shall be sodded, and sites shall provide landscaping and tree protection and replacement as provided in article II of chapter 328 of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 206-9. - CID civic-institutional district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  Intent. The CID district is intended to implement the policies of the board of commissioners adopted in the Rockdale County 2020 Comprehensive Plan and the recommendations of the Salem Road Corridor Study. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of the CID district is: 
a.  To provide the community with places for assembly, places of worship, offices and service centers for public and nonprofit agencies, education, medical services and recreation. 
b.  To provide a range of community services for the needs of a diverse population. 
c.  To provide community services in walkable centers that are within convenient range of residents and employees located in adjacent neighborhoods. 
d.  To encourage design flexibility for innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, greenspace, community design and public amenities. 
(3)  Application. This zoning district may be applied only to property located in the SRCO. 
(4)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures permitted in the CID district are as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(5)  Supportive commercial uses. Supportive commercial uses shall be permitted in the CID district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses provided they do not occupy more than 15 percent of the gross floor area of a land development project. 
(6)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the CID district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses, the standards detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO and the following provisions: 
a.  Places of worship on tracts over five acres are allowed one accessory dwelling unit not to exceed 1,200 square feet for use by a caretaker who shall be an employee of the religious organization that owns the property. 
(7)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the CID district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(8)  Property development standards. Property in the CID district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 2 development standards for non-residential zoning districts and the following provisions: 
a.  Open space: Minimum ten percent, which may not include ball fields or outdoor recreation. 
b.  Minimum principal building size: 3,000 square feet. 
c.  Spacing between buildings: 20 feet. 
d.  Maximum building height: 60 feet. 
e.  Minimum frontage at setback: 100 feet. 
(9)  Tree preservation bonus density. Each existing healthy tree located within a required open space area may receive a bonus credit of 0.25 tree density units if, in the opinion of the county arborist/urban forester, the tree is retained along with an intact area of undisturbed soil containing natural habitat and groundcover that includes all of the area below the crown of the tree. 
(10)  Compatibility with existing development and transition to adjacent zones. 
a.  Buildings over 35 feet high shall not be closer than 75 feet from the property lines of adjacent single-family residential property. 
b.  Parking lots, loading docks, dumpsters and outdoor recreation fields with outdoor lighting shall be screened from adjacent residential property by an opaque buffer at least 25-foot wide or a 15-foot wide opaque buffer outside an eight-foot high opaque fence or wall. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 7, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 206-10. - O-I office-institutional district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the O-I district is to promote a suitable business environment for service-oriented business and professional services, administrative services, non-profit, public institutions and related offices located along with community facilities. Limited retail and service uses normally supportive of office and institutional tenants also are permitted as accessory uses within the same building. This district may serve as a transition between less intense residential and more intense commercial or industrial districts. Uses within this district should be located on streets classified as arterial or collector streets and shall not generate excessive noise, traffic congestion or other health issues. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures permitted in the O-I district are as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the O-I district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the O-I district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(e)  Property development standards. Property in the O-I district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 2 development standards for non-residential zoning districts and the following provisions: 
(1)  Minimum floor area: 1,000 gross square feet. 
(2)  Parking requirements. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with chapter 222 of the UDO. 
b.  No vehicular parking shall be permitted in the area between the street right-of-way and the building facades facing that street. 
(3)  Buffer: Where abutting incompatible uses or districts, a buffer is required in conformance with article I of chapter 328 of the UDO. 
(4)  All uses in this district shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building with no outside storage of equipment, vehicles or materials. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 206-11. - NC neighborhood commercial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  Intent. The NC district is intended to implement the policies of the board of commissioners adopted in the Rockdale County 2020 Comprehensive Plan and the recommendations of the Salem Road Corridor Study. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of the NC district is: 
a.  To provide low-impact commercial services and retail goods in developments that are walkable, have a similar appearance to residential buildings and that are located within convenient range of residents and employees in adjacent neighborhoods. 
b.  To provide for the needs of a diverse population with well-designed and human-scale structures that are compatible with other residential neighborhoods. 
c.  To provide a transition between single-family residential neighborhoods and commercial, civic or office uses. 
d.  To encourage design flexibility for innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, greenspace, community design and public amenities. 
(3)  Application. This zoning district may be applied only to property located in the SRCO. 
(4)  Uses. The principal uses and structures, accessory uses and structures, and special uses and structures listed in subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section are permitted within the NC district. Any use or structure not specifically listed is prohibited. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the NC district as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the NC district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the NC district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(e)  Property development standards. Property in the NC district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 2 development standards for non-residential zoning districts and the following provisions: 
(1)  Maximum building size: 15,000 square feet; 7,500 square feet on ground floor. 
(2)  Minimum principal building size: 1,500 square feet. 
(3)  Maximum building length or width: 150 feet. 
(4)  Spacing between buildings: Minimum 20 feet. 
(5)  Tree preservation bonus density. Each existing healthy tree located within a required open space area may receive a bonus credit of 0.25 tree density units if, in the opinion of the county arborist/urban forester, the tree is retained along with an intact area of undisturbed soil containing natural habitat and groundcover that includes all of the area below the crown of the tree. 
(6)  Compatibility with existing development within zones and transition to adjacent zones. 
a.  Buildings over 35 feet high shall not be closer than 75 feet from the property lines of adjacent single-family residential property. 
b.  All property lines abutting residential zoning districts shall be screened from adjacent residential property by an opaque landscape buffer at least 50 feet wide or a 25-foot wide opaque landscape buffer outside a six-foot high solid fence or wall. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 8, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 206-12. - C-1 local commercial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The C-1 district is composed primarily of low-intensity retail and commercial services generally designed to serve the common and frequent needs of the residents of nearby neighborhoods. C-1 districts should be located on collector streets where they are convenient by car and on foot to surrounding neighborhoods but will not cause excessive traffic on residential streets. It is the intent of this district to encourage such uses to be of a residential scale and character that is compatible with adjacent neighborhoods. Businesses should provide storefronts and entrances that are oriented to the street and adjacent to sidewalks, with most of the parking to the side or rear. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the C-1 district as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the C-1 district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the C-1 district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(e)  Property in the C-1 district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 1 development standards for non-residential zoning districts. 
(f)  Property development standards. 
(1)  Minimum floor area: 1,000 gross square feet. 
(2)  Parking requirements. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with chapter 222 of the UDO. 
b.  No more than 25 percent of the required vehicle parking shall be permitted in the area between the street right-of-way and the front building setback line. 
(3)  Buffer: Where abutting incompatible uses or districts, a buffer is required in conformance with article 1 of chapter 328 of the UDO. 
(4)  There shall be no outside storage. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2008-11, § 4, 9-23-2008) 
Sec. 206-13. - C-2 general commercial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the C-2 district is to provide suitable areas for the various types of community and regional-oriented commercial activities including retail uses and wholesale uses, serving a large sector of the community. C-2 districts are intended to be located along arterial streets and at locations that are appropriate for community and regional commercial areas, as opposed to locations that primarily serve local neighborhoods. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures permitted in the C-2 district are as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the C-2 district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the C-2 district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(e)  Property development standards. 
(1)  Minimum floor area: 1,000 gross square feet. 
(2)  Parking requirements. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with chapter 222 of the UDO. 
b.  No more than 25 percent of the required vehicle parking shall be permitted in the area between the street right-of-way and the front building setback line. 
(3)  Buffer: Where abutting incompatible uses or districts, a buffer is required in conformance with article 1 of chapter 328 of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2008-11, § 5, 9-23-2008) 
Sec. 206-14. - MxD mixed-use development district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  Intent. The MxD district is intended to implement the policies of the board of commissioners adopted in the Rockdale County 2020 Comprehensive Plan and the recommendations of the Salem Road Corridor Study. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of the MxD district is: 
a.  To improve efficiency of land use and transportation systems and quality of life by providing flexibility to develop interrelated uses in compact, walkable developments. 
b.  To provide places of employment, along with residences, commercial services and retail goods in buildings that are convenient to and compatible with adjacent neighborhoods. 
c.  To encourage design flexibility for innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, greenspace, community design and public amenities. 
(3)  Application. This zoning district may be applied only to property located in the SRCO. 
(4)  Uses. The principal uses and structures, accessory uses and structures, and special uses and structures listed in subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section are permitted within the MxD district. Any use or structure not specifically listed is prohibited. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the MxD district as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses and in accordance with the following provision: 
Mixed-use developments shall include two or more of the following types of uses: retail/commercial, office, or residential. The combination of uses shall maintain a scale, balance and location so as to reduce general traffic congestion and constitute a unified and complementary development. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the MxD district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the MxD district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(e)  Property development standards. Property in the MxD district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 1 development standards for non-residential zoning districts and the following provisions: 
(1)  Maximum impervious cover: 75 percent of parcel; not including portions of the parcel that are in floodplain or wetlands. 
(2)  Minimum heated floor area: 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings and single-family zero lot line dwellings: 1,800 square feet. 
b.  Two-family dwellings and townhouses: 
1.  One bedroom: 900 square feet. 
2.  Two-bedroom: 1,200 square feet. 
3.  Three-bedroom: 1,400 square feet. 
c.  Personal care homes: 1,320 square feet, plus 80 square feet for each bed. 
d.  Non-residential buildings, other than garages and unoccupied storage buildings, shall contain a minimum of 2,000 square feet of heated floor area. 
(3)  Maximum building size: 25,000 square feet on ground floor, not to exceed a total floor area of 50,000 square feet; north of Flat Shoals Road, a building not to exceed 200,000 square feet on the ground floor may be approved by the director by administrative permit; south of Flat Shoals Road, a building not to exceed 40,000 square feet on the ground floor may be approved by the director by administrative permit. 
(4)  Maximum building length or width: 250 feet; north of Flat Shoals Road, a building not to exceed a length or width of 450 feet may be approved by the director by administrative permit. 
(5)  Standards for approving an administrative permit pursuant to subsections (3) and (4) of this subsection (e) shall be as follows: 
a.  The property to be developed contains a minimum of 20 acres. 
b.  The property has safe and proximate vehicular access to and from I-20. 
c.  The proposed building is to be occupied by a single major tenant. 
d.  The building will not be visible from Salem Road. 
e.  The proposed building is part of a planned development that provides safe and convenient access for bicycles and pedestrians. 
f.  The building meets all applicable standards of chapter 210-2, Salem Road Overlay District (SRCO). 
(6)  Spacing between buildings: Minimum 20 feet. 
(7)  Maximum front yard setback: 50 feet; except north of Flat Shoals Road, exclusive of Salem Road property frontage. 
(8)  Minimum rear yard: 40 feet. 
(9)  Minimum lot size: One acre. 
(10)  Maximum building height: 60 feet, except buildings located between Flat Shoals Road and I-20 may be up to 100 feet in height. 
(11)  Tree preservation bonus density. Each existing healthy tree that is preserved may receive a bonus credit of 0.25 tree density units if, in the opinion of the county arborist/urban forester, the tree is retained along with an intact area of undisturbed soil containing natural habitat and groundcover that includes all of the area below the crown of the tree. 
(12)  Compatibility with existing development within zones and transition to adjacent zones: 
a.  Buildings over 35 feet high shall not be closer than 75 feet from the property lines of adjacent single-family residential property. 
b.  Parcels that abut property zoned for residential use at the time of adoption of this chapter shall provide a 50-foot buffer that includes a double row of six-foot high evergreen trees planted a maximum of ten feet on center and placed along an earthen berm located along the interior side of the buffer not less than four feet in height, or by an alternative buffer design approved by the director that provides an effective year-round visual screen for the existing residences. 
c.  Parcels zoned MxD that are larger than five acres shall be designed so as to place new residential units adjacent to all abutting residentially zoned property. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 9, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 0-2017-19, § I, 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 206-15. - OBP office-business park district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the OBP district is to provide places for a mixture of commercial, business, office distribution and wholesale uses to be integrated in planned and harmonious developments located on land adjacent to major arterials and principal highway intersections that have adequate infrastructure to accommodate these uses. The OBP district shall be located only on arterial streets. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures permitted in the OBP district are as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the OBP district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Supportive uses. Supportive uses shall be permitted in the OBP district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses, provided that they do not occupy more than 15 percent of the gross floor area of a land development project. 
(e)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the OBP district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(f)  Property development standards. Property in the OBP district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 1 development standards for residential zoning districts and the following provisions: 
(1)  Minimum floor area: 1,000 gross square feet. 
(2)  Parking requirements. 
a.  Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with chapter 222 of the UDO. 
b.  No more than 25 percent of the required vehicular parking may be located in the area between the street right-of-way and the facades of buildings facing that street. 
(3)  Off-street loading and service areas shall be oriented away from I-20 and adjacent residential property. It shall be screened from public streets by an opaque buffer at least eight feet in height. 
(4)  Where abutting incompatible uses or districts, a buffer is required in conformance with article I of chapter 328 of the UDO. 
(5)  Outside storage is permitted by conditional use only and must be completely screened as provided in chapter 328 of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 206-16. - M-1 limited industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the M-1 district is to provide a suitable location along arterial highways for wholesale warehousing, trade shops and light manufacturing uses, usually located on or near existing community facilities and transportation corridors. The intent of this district is to establish areas of industrial use that would not be objectionable by reasons of dust, odor, noise, traffic safety or congestion. Such uses should be encouraged to locate away from residential districts in accordance with policies outlined in the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan and under the following conditions: 
(1)  Such proposed use will not detrimentally impact or alter nearby property values. 
(2)  The site plan for such use provides for adequate ingress and egress of vehicular traffic and will not cause health, safety or unreasonable traffic safety or congestion problems in the area. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the M-1 district as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the M-1 district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the M-1 district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(e)  Property development standards. Property in the M-1 district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 1 development standards for non-residential zoning districts and the following provisions: 
(1)  Minimum floor area: 2,000 gross square feet. 
(2)  Parking requirements: Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with chapter 222 of the UDO. 
(3)  Off-street loading and service areas shall be oriented away from I-20 and adjacent residential property. It shall be screened from public streets by an opaque buffer at least eight feet in height. 
(4)  Buffer. Where abutting incompatible uses or districts, a buffer is required in conformance with article I of chapter 238 of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 206-17. - M-2 general industrial district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the M-2 district is to provide suitable locations accessible to interstate highways and railroad lines for assembly, warehousing, processing and manufacturing uses. The intent of this district is to establish such areas of industrial use in locations that would protect densely populated areas from dust, odor, noise, traffic safety or congestion. Such uses should be encouraged to locate away from residential districts in accordance with policies outlined in the county comprehensive plan and under the following conditions: 
(1)  The site plan for such use provides for adequate ingress and egress of vehicular traffic and will not cause health, safety or unreasonable traffic safety or congestion problems in the area. 
(b)  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures shall be permitted in the M-2 district as listed in the UDO in section 218-1 table of permitted uses. 
(c)  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the M-2 district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses and provisions detailed in section 218-7 accessory use standards of the UDO. 
(d)  Special uses. Special uses may be permitted in the M-2 district in accordance with section 218-1 table of permitted uses. Special uses shall be subject to approval of a special use permit and subject to the additional use standards established in section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(e)  Property development standards. Property in the M-2 district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, dimensional standards for zoning districts, table 1 development standards for non-residential zoning districts and the following provisions: 
(1)  Minimum floor area: 2,000 gross square feet. 
(2)  Parking requirements. Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided in accordance with chapter 222 of the UDO. 
(3)  Off-street loading and service areas shall be oriented away from I-20 and adjacent residential property. It shall be screened from public streets by an opaque buffer at least eight feet in height. 
(4)  Buffer. Where abutting incompatible uses or districts, a buffer is required in conformance with article I of chapter 328 the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 206-18. - CSO conservation subdivision ordinance. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. 
(1)  Intent. The CSO zoning classification is intended to allow and encourage flexibility of design of single-family detached residential development in the medium density residential and conservation subdivision categories of the comprehensive plan future land use map. 
(2)  Purpose. 
a.  To provide a residential zoning district that permits flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
b.  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
c.  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
d.  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils, which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
e.  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
f.  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
g.  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
h.  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
i.  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
j.  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
k.  To protect prime agricultural land and preserve farming as an economic activity. 
(b)  General regulations. 
(1)  Applicability of regulations. This conservation subdivision ordinance zoning district is available only within the medium density residential and conservation subdivision land use categories as designated on the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan Future Land Use Map. 
(2)  Timber harvesting. The CSO zoning classification shall not be used on property that has been timber harvested within 36 months. 
(3)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single ownership or in multiple ownerships. If held in multiple ownerships, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(4)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the CSO zoning district shall be determined by either of the following two methods: 
a.  Calculation method: The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the gross area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the R-1 zoning district regulations. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
1.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
2.  The 100-year floodplain; 
3.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; and 
5.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
b.  Yield method: The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible in the R-1 zoning district regulations. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(c)  Application requirements. 
(1)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
a.  Property boundaries; 
b.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
c.  Topographic contours of no less that ten-foot intervals; 
d.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in subsection (d)(2); 
e.  General vegetation characteristics; 
f.  General soil types; 
g.  The planned location of protected open space; 
h.  Existing roads and structures; 
i.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(2)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in subsection (d)(5)b, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(3)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in subsection (d)(6), shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(4)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the UDO, including Chapter 302, Subdivision Regulations. 
(d)  Open space. 
(1)  Definition. 
Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(2)  Standards to determine open space. 
a.  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross parcel(s) area. 
b.  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
1.  The 100-year floodplain. 
2.  Riparian zones of at least 75 foot width along all perennial and intermittent streams. 
3.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area. 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
5.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species. 
6.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
c.  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
1.  Important historic sites. 
2.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area. 
3.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measure from their outermost drip line. 
4.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads. 
5.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area. 
6.  Existing trials that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
d.  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement, except that historic structures and existing trails may be counted. Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
e.  At least 25 percent of the open space shall consist of land that is suitable for building. 
f.  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space shall adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
g.  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(3)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
a.  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
b.  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
c.  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
d.  Passive recreation areas, such as open fields; 
e.  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space. 
f.  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
g.  Landscaped stormwater management facilities, community wastewater disposal systems and individual wastewater disposal systems located on soils particularly suited to such uses. Such facilities shall be located outside primary conservation areas; 
h.  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; 
i.  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(4)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
a.  Golf courses; 
b.  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
c.  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; 
d.  Impoundments; 
e.  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(5)  Ownership and management of open space. 
a.  Ownership of open space. A homeowners association representing residents of the conservation subdivision shall own the open space. Membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. The homeowners association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the homeowners association. 
b.  Management plan. Applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
1.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
2.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
3.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the board of commissioners; and 
4.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
c.  In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, Rockdale County may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the homeowners association, or to the individual properties within the subdivision, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(6)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
a.  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
1.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
A.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
B.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. If the entity accepting the easement is not Rockdale County, than a third right of enforcement favoring Rockdale County shall be included in the easement. 
2.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity. 
3.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by Rockdale County. 
b.  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(7)  Tax assessment of open space. Once a legal instrument for permanent protection has been placed upon the open space, Rockdale County Tax Assessor Office shall be directed to reassess the open space at a lower value to reflect its more limited use. If the open space is used purely for passive recreational purposes and the terms of the instrument for permanent protection effectively prohibit any type of significant economic activity, than the assessment shall be at a value of zero. 
(e)  Permitted uses. Principal uses and structures permitted in the CSO district shall be as listed in section 218-1, Table of Permitted Uses. 
(f)  Property development standards. Property in the CSO district may be developed in accordance with section 214-1 of the UDO, Dimensional Standards for Zoning Districts, Table 1 Development Standards for Residential Zoning Districts and the following provisions: 
(1)  Minimum open space: 40 percent of the gross parcel area as provided in subsection d. 
(2)  Minimum development size: Ten contiguous acres, exclusive of open space. 
(3)  Minimum lot size: 10,000 square feet. Area contained within a lot shall be exclusive of the 100-year floodplain, wetlands, stream buffers, required buffers, and slopes exceeding 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area. 
(4)  Minimum street frontage and lot width at building setback line : 70 feet, continuous from frontage to building line. Street frontage may be reduced to 30 feet for lots with frontage upon a cul-de-sac and 50 feet for lots on the outside of street curves, so long as the lot width at the building setback line (20 feet minimum) is at least 70 feet. 
(5)  Front yard setback : 20 feet minimum; setbacks must be staggered (five-foot minimum staggering) on lots to prevent a "row house" appearance. 
(6)  Rear yard setback : 25 feet minimum. 
(7)  Side yard setback : Ten feet minimum. Air conditioning pads, units and other similar structures shall not encroach into the side yard setback. 
(8)  Housing materials: All sides shall consist of brick, stone, cementitious siding or real (lath and portland) stucco from ground to eaves, with brick, stone, cedar shake, real stucco, painted wood siding or cementitious siding to be used as accents. Metal siding, vinyl siding, metal canopies and exposed standard concrete block are prohibited. Soffits may be constructed of vinyl. 
(9)  Sodded yards: All grassed areas on dwelling lots shall be sodded. 
(10)  Minimum heated floor area of dwelling unit : 1,800 square feet. 
(11)  Minimum main roof slope: 6/12 . 
(12)  Maximum building height : 35 feet. 
(13)  Utilities: Must be served by public water and sewer and must be placed underground. 
(14)  Design features : Buildings shall utilize a minimum of three of the following design features to provide visual relief along the front of the residences: 
a.  Dormers. 
b.  Gables. 
c.  Pillars. 
d.  Posts. 
e.  Covered front porches. 
f.  Recessed entries. 
g.  Cupolas. 
h.  Bay windows (minimum 24 inch projection). 
(15)  Accessory structure: Must be located in the rear yard, shall contain a total floor area no greater than 30 percent of the heated area of the principal structure, and the exterior finish material shall be of the same or visually match the exterior finish of the principal structure. Accessory structures shall not exceed the height of the principal structure and shall meet the minimum side and rear setback requirements of this section. 
(16)  Off-street parking requirements. 
a.  All single-family dwelling units shall include an enclosed garage for a minimum of two cars. Said garage may be attached to or detached from the principal structure, and shall be oriented to the side or rear yard, or if front facing, shall be set even with the front facade of the dwelling and consist of two decorative single-wide garage doors (each not to exceed 12 feet in width) that provide for integrated architectural integrity with the house in order to visually diminish the impact of the garage doors. Double-wide garage doors that provide for integrated architectural integrity with the house may be used for front-facing garages if the garage is set back at least ten feet behind the front facade of the residence. 
b.  A minimum of one additional parking space per six lots shall be established adjacent to recreation areas, clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis court, community room, and exercise or health club, with a minimum of ten spaces required. Parking areas serving playing fields, playgrounds and courts shall provide safe ingress and egress, and shall not be lighted. 
(17)  Variances. No administrative variances shall be granted in the CSO zoning district. Appeals shall be submitted pursuant to section 238-8. 
(18)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of Title 2 of the UDO, applicable subdivision regulations, and other development requirements of Rockdale County. In any case where the standards and requirements of this district conflict with other provisions of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances, including but not limited to subdivision regulations, the requirements of this district shall govern. 
(19)  Compatibility with existing development. Each CSO zoned development that abuts property that is zoned for agricultural or single-family residential use shall provide one of the following forms of transition to adjacent zones: 
a.  Twenty feet natural or enhanced vegetated opaque buffer adjacent to residentially zoned property, to include a three-foot tall berm with plantings to a minimum total height of eight feet, recorded separately from the lots. 
b.  Fifty feet natural or enhanced vegetated opaque buffer adjacent to residentially zoned property recorded separately from the lots. 
c.  One hundred fifty feet deep transition area developed with lots that are not less than the average size of lots that abut the CSO zoned parcel or within 150 feet of its outer boundary, measured as straight-line distance. 
d.  Where possible, connectivity of inter-parcel conservation space or wildlife corridors is encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09, § 25(Exh. A), 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 10, 11-27-2012) 
Chapter 210 - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 210-1. - Procedures governing overlay zoning. 
(a)  Application. 
(1)  Overlay districts are supplemental to the underlying zoning district classifications established in the Rockdale County UDO that govern all properties within Rockdale County. Within areas mapped as overlay zoning districts in this chapter, these overlay district regulations shall be overlaid upon and shall be imposed in addition to said underlying zoning regulations. 
(2)  The provisions of each overlay zoning district apply to all applications for rezoning, land disturbance permits, driveway permits, plan review, plat approval, building permits, utility permits and licenses for all property and rights-of-way within the boundaries of the overlay district. 
(3)  All plan reviews, plat approvals, permits and licenses for parcels located within each overlay district shall meet all of the requirements of the base zoning district in which it is located and, in addition, shall meet the requirements of the overlay zoning district applicable to the parcel. All road and utility projects shall adhere to all requirements of the overlay zoning district. 
(4)  Any parcel of land that is wholly or partly within the boundary shall be included in the overlay district. 
(b)  Relationship to underlying zoning district standards. In any case where the standards and requirements of an overlay zoning district vary from those of the base zoning district, the standards and requirements of the overlay district shall govern. 
(c)  Overlay zoning district boundary maps. The following zoning maps are used in the administration of this chapter. Copies of these maps are available for inspection during normal business hours in the department: 
(1)  Salem Road Corridor Overlay District Map. 
(d)  Map amendments. No change in the boundary of an overlay zoning district shall be authorized, except by the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners pursuant to procedures in section 238-4. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 210-2. - Salem Road Corridor Overlay District (SRCO). 
(a)  Intent and purpose. 
(1)  Intent. The SRCO is intended to implement the policies of the board of commissioners adopted in the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan and the Salem Road Corridor Study. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of the SRCO is: 
a.  To enhance the quality and compatibility of development in the SRCO. 
b.  To encourage appropriate redevelopment of underutilized and blighted property. 
c.  To create a sense of place that is aesthetically appealing, walkable and environmentally responsible. 
d.  To encourage a balance of uses for living, working, shopping and playing that are accessible within a convenient walking distance. 
e.  To promote safe and efficient movement within the SRCO for persons using all modes of travel - motorized vehicles, public transportation, bicycles and walking. 
f.  To encourage innovative development projects that set high standards for landscaping, open space, community design and public amenities. 
g.  To establish consistent and harmonious design standards for public improvement and private property development within the SRCO so as to unify the distinctive visual quality of the Salem Road Corridor. 
(b)  Boundaries. 
(1)  Boundary map. The boundaries of the SRCO are shown on the official zoning maps, which boundary and maps are hereby incorporated into and made part of this SRCO. The provisions of this SRCO shall apply to all parcels of land and rights-of-way, or portions thereof, within the boundaries of the SRCO. Any parcel of land that is wholly or partly within the boundary shall be included. 
(2)  Map amendments. No change in the boundary of the SRCO shall be authorized, except by the board of commissioners pursuant to procedures in section 238-4. 
(c)  Effect of SRCO provisions. 
(1)  Application. This SRCO is supplemental to the underlying zoning district classifications established in UDO governing all properties and approvals within this SRCO. These SRCO regulations shall be overlaid upon and shall be imposed in addition to said underlying zoning regulations and other Rockdale County ordinances. The provisions of this SRCO apply to all applications for rezoning, land disturbance permits, driveway permits, plan review, plat approval, building permits and utility permits for all property and rights-of-way within the boundaries of the SRCO. 
(2)  All plan reviews, road and utility projects, plat approvals, and permits for parcels located within this SRCO shall meet all of the requirements of the base zoning district in which it is located and, in addition, shall meet the requirements of the SRCO applicable to the parcel. 
(3)  The Salem Road Corridor Overlay (SRCO) Design Standards, dated May 14, 2004 and hereby incorporated by this reference, shall apply to all property and public improvements that are subject to this section. 
(4)  Relationship to underlying zoning district standards. In any case where the standards and requirements of the SRCO conflict with those of the base zoning district or other provisions of the UDO, including but not limited to subdivision regulations, the standards and requirements of the SRCO shall govern. 
(d)  After the effective date of this section, no property located within the SRCO may be rezoned, except to one of the following zoning districts: 
(1)  CSD — Conservation Subdivision District. 
(2)  MUR — Mixed-Use Residential District. 
(3)  NC — Neighborhood Commercial District. 
(4)  MxD — Mixed-Use Development District. 
(5)  CID — Civic-Institutional District. 
(e)  Procedures for rezoning applications. 
(1)  After the effective date of this section, rezoning application procedures for property within the SRCO shall be as provided in section 238-4 of the UDO with the following modifications: 
a.  All such rezoning applications shall be accompanied by 16 copies of a concept plan meeting the standards of subsection (f)(2), below. 
b.  The director and the planning commission shall review and comment on the concept plan as part of making recommendations regarding the board of commissioners' action on the application for rezoning of the property. 
c.  If the rezoning application is approved by the board of commissioners, then such rezoning shall be conditioned to the applicant's developing in substantial conformity with the concept plan, including any modifications or conditions approved by the board of commissioners pursuant to its deliberations of the application. 
(2)  Minor modification of concept plan. In addition to the administrative variances authorized in section 238-14, the director is authorized to approve minor changes in a concept plan that was approved at the time of rezoning, such as minor shifting of the location of streets, easements or incidental features of the plan, provided that such minor medications: 
a.  Do not change the intent of the approved concept plan. 
b.  Do not increase densities. 
c.  Do not change uses. 
d.  Do not increase building height by more than five feet. 
e.  Do not change the outside boundaries of the development tract. 
f.  Do not affect any change to a condition of zoning or require any deviation from the requirements of the UDO. 
(3)  Major modifications of the concept plan. 
a.  Any required modification of a concept plan approved as a condition of zoning that does not meet the criteria of a minor modification in subsection (2) above shall be deemed a major modification. 
b.  Major modifications in a concept plan approved as a condition of zoning within the SRCO shall require a new application subject to all the applicable requirements of chapter 238 of the UDO and this section. 
(f)  Procedures for review and approval of land development requiring subdivision. Land development within the SRCO that requires subdivision shall be authorized subject to the following procedure: 
(1)  Pre-design meeting. Prior to filing an application for preliminary plat approval, the applicant shall schedule a conference with the department to discuss the standards and procedures that apply. The owner of the property, the developer and site designer (engineer, surveyor or landscape architect licensed by the state to work in Georgia) must be present at the pre-design meeting with four copies of the concept plan as outlined below. 
(2)  Contents of concept plan. Prior to applying for preliminary plat review, the developer shall prepare a concept plan to present to staff at a pre-design meeting with the following: 
a.  Statement of intent. A narrative describing the proposed development and explaining how it meets the purpose and intent of the comprehensive land use plan, the Salem Road Corridor Study Summary Report and of this section. 
b.  Concept plan. A plan drawn to a designated scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet (one inch = 100 feet), certified by a professional engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor licensed by the State of Georgia, presented on a sheet having a maximum size of 24 inches × 36 inches, and one 8½ inch × 11 inch reduction of the plan. If presented on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. The concept plan shall represent the conceptual design of the property to be developed, as well as for all adjacent property that is within the developer's ownership or control. The concept plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Boundaries of the entire property, with bearings and distances of the perimeter property lines. 
2.  Total area of the property in acres. 
3.  Approved zoning. 
4.  Scale and north arrow, with north, to the extent feasible, oriented to the top of the plat and on all supporting graphics. 
5.  Banks of streams, lakes and other waterbodies. 
6.  Delineation of any floodplain designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), United States Geological Survey (USGS), or Rockdale County; the delineation of any jurisdictional wetlands as defined by Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
7.  Approximate location and extent of any significant historic or archaeological feature, grave, object or structure marking a place of burial, if known, and a statement indicating how the proposed development will preserve the feature and provide access to it during and after construction. 
8.  A delineation of all existing structures and whether they will be retained or demolished. 
9.  Development density and lot sizes for each dwelling unit type. 
10.  Designation of minimum lot areas and yards. 
11.  Location, character and amount of development, by type of use. 
12.  Building use, location, square footage, density and building height for all parcels. 
13.  Parking areas, points of access to public rights-of-way and vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns within the subject property. 
14.  Areas to be held in joint ownership, common ownership or control and the proposed method of control and management of these areas. 
15.  Indication that the property is served by public water and/or sewer or private water and/or septic field, with conceptual layout of utilities and location of all existing or proposed utility easements having a width of ten feet or more. 
16.  Conceptual plans for drainage with approximate location and estimated size of all proposed stormwater management facilities and a statement as to the type of facility proposed. 
17.  Location and width of required buffers at external site boundaries. 
18.  Location and approximate extent (in acres) of open space and recreation facilities. 
19.  Location, where applicable, of proposed trails, recreation areas, parks, schools, libraries, churches and other public or community uses, facilities or structures on the site. 
20.  Applicable portions of the conceptual design for the streets, alleys and multi-use paths consistent with the Salem Road Conceptual Transportation Plan contained in the Salem Road Corridor Study Summary Report and the Salem Road Corridor Design Standards. 
21.  Public right(s)-of-way, any required or proposed improvements to the public right(s)-of-way and delineation of the existing centerline of all streets abutting the property, including dimensions from the existing centerline to the edge of the pavement and to the right-of-way. 
22.  Width of right-of-way and paved sections of all internal streets. 
23.  Seal and signature of professional person preparing the plan. 
(3)  Preliminary plat application. Following the pre-design meeting, the applicant shall prepare an application for preliminary plat approval, as provided in section 302-23. The application for approval of a preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the required fee and the following information: 
a.  Multi-modal access plan. The multi-modal access plan shall show connections from the system of streets, alleys, sidewalks and multi-use paths shown in the conceptual transportation plan to the entrances of all occupied buildings within the subject property. Convenient pedestrian ways shall be shown from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including designated pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. Where an existing or planned public transportation station or stop is within 1,250 feet (straight line distance) from any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how pedestrians may travel safely and conveniently from such station or stop to the entrance of buildings on the subject property. Where an existing or planned multi-use path is located within 1,500 feet (straight line distance) of the subject property, the access plan shall show how safe, continuous and convenient bicycle and pedestrian access may be provided to the subject property. 
b.  A traffic impact study for developments with more than 200 p.m. peak hour trips. The traffic impact study shall follow the procedures of the American Planning Association Planning Advisory Service Report Number 387, Traffic Impact Analysis. 
c.  Traffic calming plan, in accordance with the Rockdale County Traffic Calming Ordinance. 
d.  Shared parking analysis for use of shared parking, if applicable. Shared parking shall meet the requirements of the SRCO design standards. 
(4)  Review of preliminary plat. Preliminary plats prepared pursuant to this section shall be reviewed, as provided in section 302-23 with respect to their consistency with the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan, the Salem Road Corridor Study Summary Report, the Salem Road Corridor Design Guidelines and the concept plan and its conformity with each of the standards and requirements of this section and all other applicable sections of the UDO. 
(5)  Resubmission. If the preliminary plat is disapproved by the planning commission, the applicant shall not proceed with development activity until he/she resubmits a revised preliminary plat to the planning commission that meets the standards of this section and addresses the reasons for disapproval in a manner that is satisfactory to the planning commission and receives approval from the planning commission. If the preliminary plat becomes void, the applicant shall submit a new preliminary plat application as required in subsection (3) above. Each resubmittal under this paragraph shall be accompanied by a resubmittal fee. 
(6)  Review of multi-modal access plan, traffic impact study, traffic-calming plan, signage master plan and shared parking analysis. 
a.  Concurrent with review of the preliminary plat, the department shall review the multi-modal access plan, the traffic impact study, traffic claiming plan, signage master plan and shared parking analysis, if required. Such review shall assess the consistency of these documents with the Salem Road Corridor Summary Report, Salem Road Corridor Design Guidelines and conformity with each of the standards and requirements of this section. 
b.  If the multi-modal access plan, traffic impact study, traffic calming plan, signage master plan or shared parking analysis is disapproved, the applicant shall have 30 days to revise and resubmit such document so that it meets the standards of this section and addresses the reasons for disapproval in a manner that is satisfactory to the director. Each resubmittal shall be accompanied by a resubmittal fee. 
c.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall be contingent on the director's approval of the multi-modal access plan, traffic impact study, traffic claming plan, signage master plan and shared parking analysis. 
d.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall entitle the applicant to prepare and submit construction plans for site improvements required in this section and other provisions of the UDO. 
(7)  Review of construction plans. The department shall review construction plans prepared pursuant to this section, with respect to their consistency with the Rockdale County Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the Salem Road Corridor Study Summary Report, the Salem Road Corridor Design Guidelines and the preliminary plat and the conformity of the construction plans with each of the standards and requirements of this section and all other applicable sections of the UDO. The construction plans will follow the Rockdale County process for approval of land disturbance permit, UDO sections 302-45 and 302-46. 
(8)  Performance guarantee. The director shall have the authority to require the applicant to establish a performance guarantee or post performance bonds in a form acceptable to Rockdale County in order to guarantee timely installation of required project improvements such as, but not limited to streets, utilities, drainage, sidewalks, landscaping and multi-use trails within the subject development that are consistent with the conceptual transportation plan within the Salem Road Corridor Study Summary Report and the Salem Road Corridor Design Guidelines. Said performance guarantee shall consist of an irrevocable letter of credit or other form of security accepted by the county in an amount equal to up to 125 percent of the construction cost estimated by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia. The performance guarantee shall be for a term not to exceed 12 months, with six-month extensions subject to approval by the director. Release of the performance guarantee shall be upon inspection by the department and acceptance of all improvements by the county. This guarantee may be in addition to any other guarantee otherwise required by Title 3 of the UDO. 
(9)  Final plat. The applicant shall apply for final plat approval following installation, approval and acceptance by Rockdale County of all required site improvements. Final plat approval shall be required prior to approval of building permits for individual sites. The application for final plat approval shall conform to the requirements of sections 302-25 and 302-26. 
(10)  Building plans. 
a.  Following ratification of the final plat by the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners, the applicant may submit building plans for construction on individual lots with required fees. 
b.  Review of building plans. The department will review building plans for conformity with the requirements of this section, section 302-49, building codes, and other requirements of the UDO. If the building plans are disapproved, the applicant shall not be authorized to receive building permits until the building plans are resubmitted and approved by the department. Each resubmittal shall be accompanied by the appropriate fees. 
c.  Building permits. Following approval of building plans by the department, the applicant may apply for building permits based on approved plans. No building permits shall be issued prior to approval of building plans by the department. 
(g)  Procedures for review and approval of land development not requiring subdivision. Land development within the SRCO that does not require subdivision shall be authorized subject to the following procedure: 
(1)  Pre-design meeting. Prior to filing an application for land development the applicant shall schedule a conference with the department to discuss the standards and procedures that apply. The owner of the property, the developer and site designer (engineer, surveyor or landscape architect licensed by the state to work in Georgia) must be present at the pre-design meeting with four copies of the concept plan as outlined. 
(2)  Contents of concept plan. Prior to applying for construction plan review, the developer shall prepare a concept plan with the following: 
a.  Statement of intent. A narrative describing the proposed development and explaining how it meets the purpose and intent of the comprehensive land use plan, the Salem Road Corridor Study Summary Report and of this section. 
b.  Site development plan. A plan drawn to a designated scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, certified by a professional engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor licensed by the State of Georgia, presented on a sheet having a maximum size of 24 inches × 36 inches, and one eight and one-half inches × 11 inches reduction of the plan. If presented on more than one sheet, match lines shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. The site development plan shall represent the conceptual design of the property to be developed, as well as for all adjacent property that is within the developer's ownership or control. The site development plan shall include the following information: 
1.  Boundaries of the entire property, with bearings and distances of the perimeter property lines. 
2.  Total area of the property in acres. 
3.  Approved zoning. 
4.  Scale and north arrow, with north, to the extent feasible, oriented to the top of the plat and on all supporting graphics. 
5.  Banks of streams, lake, and other waterbodies. 
6.  Delineation of any floodplain designated by the FEMA, USGS, or Rockdale County; the delineation of any jurisdictional wet-lands as defined by Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
7.  Approximate location and extent of any significant historic or archaeological feature, grave, object or structure marking a place of burial, if known, and a statement indicating how the proposed development will preserve the feature and provide access to it during and after construction. 
8.  A delineation of all existing structures and whether they will be retained or demolished. 
9.  Designation of buildable area and front, side and rear yards of the parcel. 
10.  Proposed use(s), location, square footage, density and height for all buildings. 
11.  Parking areas, points of access to public rights-of-way and vehicular and pedestrian circulation patterns within the subject property. 
12.  Areas to be held in joint ownership, common ownership or control and the proposed method of control and management of these areas. 
13.  Indication that the property is served by public water and/or sewer or private water and/or septic field, with conceptual layout of utilities and location of all existing or proposed utility easements having a width of ten feet or more. 
14.  Conceptual plans for drainage, with approximate location and estimated size of all proposed stormwater management facilities and a statement as to the type of facility proposed. 
15.  Location and width of required buffers at external site boundaries. 
16.  Location and approximate extent (in acres) of open space and recreation facilities. 
17.  Location, where applicable, of proposed trails, recreation areas, parks, schools, libraries, churches and other public or community uses, facilities or structures on the site. 
18.  Applicable portions of the conceptual design for the streets, alleys and multi-use paths consistent with the Salem Road Conceptual Transportation Plan contained in the Salem Road Corridor Study Summary Report and the Salem Road Corridor Design Standards. 
19.  Public right(s)-of-way, any required or proposed improvements to the public right(s)-of-way and delineation of the existing centerline of all streets abutting the property, including dimensions from the existing centerline to the edge of the pavement and to the right-of-way. 
20.  Width of right-of-way and paved sections of all internal streets. 
21.  Seal and signature of professional person preparing the plan. 
c.  Multi-modal access plan. The multi-modal access plan shall show connections from the system of streets, alleys, sidewalks and multi-use paths shown in the conceptual transportation plan to the entrances of all occupied buildings within the subject property. Convenient pedestrian ways shall be shown from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including designated pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. Where an existing or planned public transportation station or stop is within 1,250 feet (straight line distance) from any boundary of the subject property, the access plan shall show how pedestrians may travel safely and conveniently from such station or stop to the entrance of buildings on the subject property. Where an existing or planned multi-use path is located within 1,500 feet of the subject property, the access plan shall show how safe, continuous and convenient bicycle access may be provided to the subject property. 
d.  A traffic impact study for developments with more than 200 p.m. peak hour trips. The traffic impact study shall follow the procedures of the American Planning Association Planning Advisory Service Report Number 387, Traffic Impact Analysis. 
e.  Traffic calming plan, in accordance with section 332-10. 
f.  Shared parking analysis for use of shared parking, if applicable. The shared parking shall meet the requirements of the SRCO design standards. 
(3)  Review of multi-modal access plan, traffic impact study, traffic-calming plan, signage master plan and shared parking analysis. 
a.  The department shall review the multi-modal access plan, the traffic impact study, traffic calming plan, signage master plan and shared parking analysis, if required. Such review shall assess the consistency of these documents with the Salem Road Corridor Summary Report and the Salem Road Corridor Design Guidelines and conformity with each of the standards and requirements of this section. 
b.  Approval of the site development plan shall be contingent on the department's approval of the multi-modal access plan, traffic impact study, traffic calming plan, signage master plan and shared parking analysis, if required. 
(4)  Submission and review of construction plans. Construction plans consistent with the site development plan shall be submitted to the department with the required fees. The department shall review construction plans prepared pursuant to this section, with respect to their consistency with the Rockdale County Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the Salem Road Corridor Study Summary Report, the Salem Road Corridor Design Guidelines, the site development plan and its conformity with each of the standards and requirements of this section and all other applicable sections of the UDO. The constructions plans will follow the Rockdale County Process for Approval of Land Disturbance Permit, UDO sections 302-45 and 302-46. 
(5)  Land disturbance permit. Approval of construction plans shall entitle the applicant to schedule a pre-construction conference with the department and to obtain land disturbance permits for construction of site improvements required in this section and other requirements of the UDO. 
(6)  Performance guarantee. The director shall have the authority to require the applicant to establish a performance guarantee or post performance bonds in a form acceptable to Rockdale County in order to guarantee timely installation of required project improvements such as, but not limited to streets, utilities, drainage, sidewalks, landscaping and multi-use trails within the subject development that are consistent with the conceptual transportation plan within the Salem Road Corridor Study Summary Report and the Salem Road Corridor Design Guidelines. Said performance guarantee shall consist of an irrevocable letter of credit or other form of security accepted by the county in an amount equal to up to 125 percent of the construction cost estimated by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia. The performance guarantee shall be for a term not to exceed 12 months, with six-month extensions subject to approval by the director. Release of the performance guarantee shall be upon inspection by the department and acceptance of all improvements by the county. This guarantee may be in addition to any other guarantee otherwise required by the UDO. 
(7)  Right-of-way dedication. If dedication of right-of-way or other land to Rockdale County is required by this section, acceptance by the county shall be contingent on the developer submitting a metes and bounds description of the required right-of-way and transferring title to such land by deed to the county prior to issuance of building permits. 
(8)  Building plans. 
a.  Following issuance of a land disturbance permit, the applicant may submit building plans for construction on individual lots, along with required fees. The department will review building plans for conformity with the requirements of this section, building codes and other requirements of the UDO. 
b.  Review of building plans. The department will review building plans for conformity with the requirements of this section, section 302-49, building codes, and other requirements of the UDO. If the building plans are disapproved, the applicant shall not be authorized to receive building permits until the building plans are resubmitted and approved by the department. Each resubmittal shall be accompanied by the appropriate fees. 
c.  Building permits. Following approval of building plans by the department, the applicant may apply for building permits based on approved plans. No building permits shall be issued prior to approval of building plans by the department. 
(h)  Appeals. Appeals of final decisions of the director by aggrieved persons shall be reviewed by the board of adjustment, as provided in section 238-8. 
(i)  Public improvement standards. Public rights-of-way within the SRCO shall be improved in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Street standards. Street standards, by type, as shown on the conceptual transportation plan and the Salem Road Corridor Study SRCO design standards. 
a.  Boulevard (Salem Road). 
1.  45-mph design speed. 
2.  Minimum 126-foot right-of-way. 
3.  Minimum 14-foot wide landscaped median (back of curb to back of curb). 
4.  Four travel lanes at 11 feet each. 
5.  18- to 24-inch wide curb and gutter. 
6.  Eight-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip along outside curb (both sides of street). 
7.  Ten-foot (minimum) wide curvilinear multi-use paved path outside landscaped strip. 
8.  Street lights required in landscaped strip. 
9.  Pedestrian lights required two feet off the back of the multi-use path. 
10.  Trees required in landscaped strip. 
b.  Collectors. 
1.  35-mph design speed. 
2.  Minimum 66-foot right-of-way. 
3.  Two or three travel lanes at 11 feet each. 
4.  18- to 24-inch wide curb and gutter. 
5.  Five-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip along outside curb. 
6.  Five-foot (minimum) wide sidewalk outside landscaped strip. 
7.  Maximum street grade of six percent. 
c.  Local streets. 
1.  25-mph design speed. 
2.  Minimum 64-foot right-of-way. 
3.  Two travel lanes at ten feet each. 
4.  Two on-street parallel parking lanes at eight feet each, with curbed bulb outs at intersections, where appropriate. 
5.  18- to 24-inch wide curb and gutter. 
6.  Five-foot (minimum) wide landscaped strip along outside curb. 
7.  Five-foot (minimum) wide sidewalk outside landscaped strip. 
8.  Maximum street grade of eight percent. 
d.  Alleys. 
1.  20-foot right-of-way. 
2.  16-foot wide paved travel lane. 
3.  Utility easements as required by director. 
4.  Maximum street grade of eight percent. 
e.  Multi-use paths. 
1.  No motorized vehicles, except golf carts. 
2.  Maximum grade of six percent. 
3.  14-foot wide right-of-way. 
4.  Ten feet paved width. 
5.  Shoulder width variable, based on topography. 
6.  Five-foot flare at street intersections, with ramp to street and bollards spaced six feet apart to block motorized traffic, except golf carts. 
7.  Multi-use paths shall be located outside all required buffers, except that a required buffer may contain one or more crossings of a multi-use path provided that such crossing: 
A.  Is part of an approved multi-modal access plan required in subsection (7)a of this subsection. 
B.  Is approximately perpendicular to the required buffer. 
C.  Is designed to have the least disruption to the intended screening provided by the required buffer. 
(2)  Network standards. 
a.  Connectivity. Within a development that includes more than five acres, the following standards apply: 
1.  No public street may be longer than 600 feet without an intersection with another public street. Cul-de-sacs are prohibited, except where approved by the director, because of unusual site conditions; such as steep topography, streams, lakes, floodplains, wetlands, or stream crossings, safety hazards or other unusual property development or access constraints. 
2.  Continuous pedestrian walkways must be provided to connect building entrances to required sidewalks along street frontage. 
b.  Sidewalks. 
1.  Minimum width: Five feet. 
2.  Location: On both sides of streets, at least five feet behind curb. 
c.  Crosswalks. 
1.  All intersections shall contain crosswalks that connect to sidewalks in all quadrants. 
2.  Crosswalks shall be either demarcated with high-reflectivity thermoplastic paint or brick pavers. 
(3)  Street trees. 
a.  Street trees shall be provided in medians and required landscaped strips adjacent to all streets. 
b.  Street trees shall be a minimum of two-inch diameter breast height (dbh) at the time of planting, and be warranted by the developer for a period of two years. 
c.  Street trees shall be spaced an average of 30 feet apart. 
d.  Spacing of street trees and streetlight standards may be adjusted to account for driveways, utility poles, fire hydrants and other obstructions and to provide adequate visual clearance for intersections, driveways and traffic control devices. 
e.  No street tree or streetlight standard shall be placed within ten feet of another tree, streetlight standard, utility pole or within five feet of a fire hydrant. 
f.  Appropriate street tree species include: 
1.  Eastern Hornbeam. 
2.  Red Maple. 
3.  Southern Sugar Maple. 
4.  Willow Oak. 
5.  Other trees similar to the above and suitable for urban pedestrian environment, upon approval of the county arborist/urban forester. 
6.  No more than 25 (or 25 percent of the total number, whichever is greater) of the trees installed may be of any one genus. 
(4)  Landscaping. 
a.  Medians and landscaped strips shall be planted with grass and a variety of low, hardy shrubbery and flowering plants with mulched beds. Areas of exposed earth shall not be allowed. Landscaping shall be approved by the county arborist/urban forester. 
b.  Maintenance. All landscape materials required by this section or other section of the UDO shall be maintained by the property owner or property owners' association. Such maintenance shall keep landscape materials health, neat and orderly in appearance, and free of litter and debris. Landscape materials that die or that, in the opinion of the county arborist/urban forester, are diseased, shall be replaced by the property owner or property owners' association. 
(5)  Street and pedestrian lighting. 
a.  Streetlights of a design as approved by the director shall be provided for automobiles on all boulevards and collectors. 
b.  Additional lighting of a design approved by the director shall be provided for pedestrians and bicyclists along all public streets and along all multi-use trails. These lights shall be a maximum of 15 feet in height with average spacing not to exceed 40 feet apart. When design standards call for pedestrian lighting in the same proximity as the streetlights required in this subsection, a streetlight for automobiles may substitute for lighting for pedestrians that would otherwise be required at approximately the same location. 
(6)  Underground utilities. 
a.  For all new construction and redevelopment, utilities along public streets must be placed underground. 
b.  The director may approve an exception, if subsurface rock or other unique hardship makes such installation unfeasible. 
(7)  Traffic calming. 
a.  Approved traffic-calming measures shall be required, in accordance with section 332-10. 
b.  Traffic-calming measures shall conform to an approved traffic calming plan that indicates the type(s) of traffic-calming measures to be installed, their location and shall be consistent with the details and specifications prepared by the county. 
c.  Traffic-calming measures shall be installed, inspected and approved on each street prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for buildings located on the street where traffic-calming is required. 
(8)  Escrow in lieu of improvements. At the option of the county, the developer shall pay funds into an escrow account in lieu of making project improvements required in this section. Such escrow account shall be established only for the purpose of coordination of such project improvements with a public improvement project that is part of an approved capital improvements program. The amount of the escrow fund shall be established by the director based on the projected construction cost of the improvements, based on the most recent edition of Georgia Department of Transportation "Item Means Summary" or other comparable standardized cost estimation procedure. 
(j)  Property development standards. Property within the SRCO shall be developed in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  Density. Maximum permitted density shall be as provided in the underlying zoning district, except as provided in subsection (2) of this subsection. 
(2)  Density bonus. To encourage public dedication of right-of-way and construction of streets and multi-use paths, other than project improvements, consistent with the Salem Road Conceptual Transportation Plan and Salem Road Corridor Design Standards, the developer shall be entitled to additional intensity of use, in addition to that otherwise allowed, for uses otherwise authorized in the applicable zoning district and in accordance with the following table: 

 
(3)  Access management standards. 
a.  Driveway connections serving uses in zoning districts other than R-1 or CSD shall not be permitted within the functional area of an intersection and shall be consistent with the following standards: 
1.  Not within 150 feet of the centerline of an intersecting collector. 
2.  Not within 100 feet of the centerline of an intersecting local street. 
3.  Driveways on the same side of a public street shall be spaced a minimum of 200 feet apart on center. 
4.  Except where driveways are on opposite sides of a raised median, driveways shall either directly align or have offsets of a minimum of 125 feet, as measured between the centerlines. 
b.  Corner sight distance. All driveways approaching a collector or arterial street shall provide adequate corner sight distance. The minimum corner sight distance from the driveway shall be equal to or exceed ten times the regulated speed of the intersecting street, as measured from the center of the driveway in both directions along the right-of-way line of the intersecting street; unless a more restrictive standard is required by the GDOT. The sight distance shall provide clear visibility of an object two feet above the intersected street when viewed from the centerline of the approaching street at a height of three and one-half feet above the ground. 
c.  No residentially developed property may have a curb cut in excess of 30 feet in width, and no nonresidential property may have a curb cut in excess of 40 feet without approval of the director. 
d.  Out parcels with less than 300 feet of road frontage are restricted to internal access only. 
e.  Driveways that enter a major thoroughfare at traffic signals must have at least two outbound lanes (one for each turning direction) of at least 11 feet in width, and one inbound lane with a maximum width of 11 feet. 
f.  Except for single-family and two-family residences, driveway grades shall conform to the requirements of the GDOT design standards. 
g.  Driveways shall intersect roads or streets at an angle between 75 and 105 degrees. 
h.  Driveway aprons shall be constructed so as to provide a minimum slope of one-quarter inch per foot away from the edge of pavement of the public street to prevent the direct discharge of surface water onto the travel lane of the abutting road or street. 
i.  Minimum number of driveways required per the Table of Vehicular Access Points. 
Table of Vehicular Access Points 

 
(4)  Access easements and inter-parcel access. Inter-parcel access, joint driveways, cross access drives and access easements shall be provided, as follows, except where the director determines that they are unfeasible because of topographic or other site-specific constraints: 
a.  Abutting nonresidential developments on major collectors and arterials shall provide a cross-access drive and sidewalk access to allow circulation between sites. 
b.  Joint driveways and cross access easements shall be established for multi-parcel, nonresidential development wherever feasible along boulevards. The building site shall incorporate the following: 
1.  Continuous cross-access drive connecting adjacent parcels along the thoroughfare. 
2.  A design speed of 15 mph and a two-way travel aisle with a minimum of 20 feet to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles and loading vehicles. 
3.  Driveway aprons, stub-outs and other design features to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross access via a service drive. 
c.  The director may reduce the required separation distance of access points where the minimum required distance proves impractical, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
1.  Joint-access driveways and/or cross-access easements are provided in accordance with this section. 
2.  The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation system for vehicles and pedestrians in accordance with this section. 
(5)  Lot standards. 
a.  Minimum lot width for commercial property: 100 feet at right-of-way line. 
b.  Reverse-fronting lots required for residential subdivisions on streets classified as boulevards or collectors. A landscaped median on the boulevard or collector street, in lieu of reverse-fronting lots, may be approved by the director, provided the residential lots facing the boulevard or collector have a minimum of 100 feet street frontage and utilize shared driveways at a minimum ratio of 2:1. 
(k)  Standards for required open space. 
(1)  Categories of open space. Open space required in the SRCO shall be held under unitary ownership or control and shall consist of any of the following three categories of land: 
a.  Primary conservation area. This category includes streams; wetlands designated by the national wetlands inventory; 100-year floodplain, as identified on federal insurance rate maps; steep slopes exceeding 25 percent; areas of exposed rock; and private cemeteries and burial grounds. These areas shall be left in a natural and undisturbed state, except for the fewest possible perpendicular crossings of essential access roads and utility lines. 
b.  Secondary conservation area. This category includes land in water supply watersheds; aquifer recharge areas identified in the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan; riparian and wetland buffers that are over 25 feet in width; significant habitat areas, as identified in the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan; areas containing archaeologically or historically significant structures or sites, as identified in the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan; and related contextual areas, soils unsuitable for septic tanks, prime agricultural soils, mature hardwood forest, meadows, farm fields, pastures and other areas with scenic views. 
c.  Outdoor recreation area. This category includes greenways, trails, bikeways, paths, tennis courts, ball fields, playfields, courts, golf courses, swimming pools, clubhouses, toilets, dressing rooms, lockers, bicycle facilities, equestrian facilities, beaches, docks, seating areas, amphitheaters, stages, band shells, community buildings, fountains, plazas, patios, decks, lawns, picnic shelters and picnic areas, landscaping and other land containing outdoor recreation structures and facilities. Lakes and ponds are allowed in outdoor recreation areas, but their surface area shall not be counted as open space. 
(2)  Impervious areas. Parking lots, drives, walks, buildings and other impervious surfaces may be included in required open space, provided that they constitute no more than ten percent of the total required open space. 
(3)  Accessibility of open space. Open space shall be designed and located for the convenient access and enjoyment of all users of the property. Open space shall be within 1,000 feet of all occupied buildings in the development. All occupied buildings shall be connected to the open space by improved pathways or sidewalks. 
(4)  Contiguous open space. Not less than 50 percent of required open space shall be in a contiguous tract. 
(5)  Interconnected open space network. It is the intent of this section that the protected conservation areas, open spaces, greenways, bikeways, trails, sidewalks and outdoor recreation areas within a development that provides open space be continuous with compatible areas containing similar features on abutting property. The design of developments shall provide for maximum connections, providing pedestrian and bike access to off-site and on-site attractions such as public trails, paths, parks, wildlife refuges, public facilities; such as community centers, schools, libraries, fire and police stations, senior centers, railroad right-of-way, utility easements and institutions; such as universities, churches, museums and other cultural facilities. 
(6)  Best management practices (BMPs). Active recreation areas, such as golf courses, playing fields, swimming pools and tennis courts, shall employ applicable BMPs, as provided in section 306-4 of the UDO, and shall not be permitted in primary conservation areas. 
(7)  Ownership, maintenance, and control of open space. Common open space within a development shall be held in unitary ownership or control and perpetually administered and maintained by any of the following methods, either individually or in combination, and subject to approval by the county: 
a.  Fee-simple dedication. Open space or common areas within developments may be offered for dedication to the public at the time of application. Dedication shall take the form of a fee simple ownership by the county. The county may, but shall not be required to, accept undivided open space, provided that: 
1.  The size, location, type of development, cost of development or maintenance of such open space or common area or the availability of public open space would make public use desirable or necessary. 
2.  Such land is accessible to the public. 
3.  There is no cost of acquisition, other than any cost incidental to the transfer of ownership such as title insurance. 
4.  The developer conveys to the county a copy of the deed of conveyance and a title certificate or, at the request of the director, a commitment for a policy of title insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, assuring unencumbered title for all lands proposed to be conveyed to the county, other appropriate governmental agency or other organization, including the nonprofit organization. 
b.  Property owners' association. The undivided open space and associated facilities may be held in common ownership in perpetuity by a property owners' association established in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia. The association shall be formed and operated under the following additional provisions: 
1.  The developer shall provide a description of the association, including its bylaws and methods for maintaining open space. 
2.  The association shall be organized by the developer and shall be operated by the developer until the sale of two-thirds of the lots within the development. 
3.  Membership in the association is mandatory for all purchasers of property and their successors. 
4.  The association shall be responsible for perpetual maintenance of insurance and taxes on undivided open space, enforceable by liens placed by the county on the association. The association may place liens on the homes or house lots of its members who fail to pay their association dues in a timely manner. Such liens may require the imposition of penalty interest charges. 
5.  The members of the association shall share equitably the cost of maintaining and developing such undivided open space. Shares shall be defined within the association bylaws. 
6.  In the event of a proposed transfer, within the methods here permitted, of undivided open space land by the property owners' association, notice of such action shall be given to all property owners within the development. 
7.  The association shall administer common facilities and property and perpetually maintain the undivided open space. 
8.  Where a property owners' association accepts dedication of common open space that contains maintenance of landscaping and improvements, the association may require the developer to post financial security to ensure structural integrity and maintenance of improvements for a term not to exceed 24 months from the date of acceptance of dedication. The amount of financial security shall not exceed 15 percent of the actual cost of installation of said improvements. 
c.  Private conservation organization. The owner of open space may transfer easements to a private, non-profit organization among whose purposes it is to perpetually conserve open space, provided that: 
1.  The organization is a conservation organization with perpetual existence. 
2.  The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper reversion or retransfer, in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions. 
3.  A perpetual maintenance agreement acceptable to the county is entered into by the developer and the organization. 
4.  Prior to dedication or conveyance of open space, the following documents shall be submitted to and approved by the county: 
A.  Specification of the ownership of the common open space. 
B.  The articles of incorporation or other organizational documentation for the non-profit organization. 
C.  The bylaws of the non-profit organization. 
5.  The covenants or restrictions related to the use of common property, including the system and amounts of assessments for perpetuation and maintenance. 
6.  A document granting the right of entry upon such common property to the county law enforcement officers, rescue squad personnel and fire fighting personnel while in the pursuit of their duties; and, in the case of private streets and common driveways, permitting the enforcement of cleared emergency vehicle access. 
7.  A specification of methods of maintenance, responsibilities of maintenance and a recommended time schedule for the maintenance of major facilities; including streets, street signs, pools, sidewalks, parking areas and buildings. 
8.  A guarantee that any association formed to own and maintain open space will not be dissolved without the consent of the county. 
9.  A copy of the proposed notice that will be given to prospective buyers regarding the organization, assessments and fiscal program. 
10.  A specification of compulsory membership and compulsory assessment provisions. 
11.  The documents set forth in paragraph c.4. of this subsection (7) shall be reviewed and approved by the director, and such approval shall be obtained before any final plat is recorded or final site plan is approved. Such documents, once approved, shall become part of the recorded subdivision plat or approved site plan. 
(8)  Liens by Rockdale County. In the event that the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the county may assume responsibility for the maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, property owners' association or to the individual property owners that make up the property owners' association and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
(l)  Environmental controls. 
(1)  BMPs. Site development shall incorporate BMPs designed to protect water quality, as provided in section 306-4 of the UDO. 
(2)  Parking lot landscaping. 
a.  Parking lots shall incorporate landscaped areas covering at least 15 percent of the surface area. 
b.  Parking lots shall be landscaped such that every parking space is no more than 50 feet from a shade tree or street tree. 
c.  Landscaped areas in parking lots shall be depressed below paved surfaces and designed with flush curbs or curb inlets to absorb stormwater runoff. 
(m)  Architectural standards. 
(1)  Minimum building height: 18 feet on boulevards and collectors. 
(2)  Minimum front yard building setback: 25 feet. 
(3)  Street orientation. Principal building entrances shall be oriented to public streets wherever possible. When approved by the director, a principal building entrance may be oriented to a side yard provided said entrance is not more than 100 feet from the right-of-way of an adjacent street and directly connected to the adjacent street frontage by a continuous sidewalk not less than five feet in width. 
(4)  Residential garage doors shall be oriented to the side or rear yard, or shall be set back at least 40 feet behind the front facade of the residence. 
(5)  Massing and modulation. The massing of building facades oriented to public streets shall incorporate modulation with horizontal and vertical breaks at least every 100 feet. 
(6)  Building materials. Building materials for facades oriented to public streets shall be constructed of brick, stone, or textured concrete masonry units, stucco, or glass. Front facades of single-family dwellings shall be constructed with brick, stone, stucco, wood siding or similar material approved by the director. 
(7)  Prohibited materials. Metal siding, vinyl siding, and standard concrete block are prohibited. 
(8)  All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view from all public streets. 
(9)  Satellite dish antennae. No satellite dishes shall be permitted within view from public streets. 
(10)  Fenestration. At least 40 percent of non-residential facades facing boulevards must be clear glass. 
(n)  Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be required as in section 222-2 of the UDO, except as provided below: 
(1)  Minimum parking required for residential uses. 
a.  Single-family dwellings: Two spaces per dwelling unit. 
b.  Multi-family dwellings: One and one-half spaces per dwelling unit. 
c.  Bed and breakfast inn: Two spaces, plus one space per guest bedroom. 
d.  Personal care homes: One space per bedroom plus one space per caregiver. 
(2)  Minimum parking required for commercial uses and services. 
a.  Commercial, retail, and service uses: One space per 300 square feet. 
b.  Restaurants, full service: One space per 75 square feet of seating area. 
c.  Supportive commercial uses (in MUR and CID): One space per 300 square feet. 
(3)  Minimum parking required for professional office uses: One space per 300 square feet. 
(4)  Minimum parking required for outdoor recreation facilities: Ten spaces per acre of recreational land, plus one space per 400 square feet of related buildings. 
(5)  Other uses. Minimum number of parking spaces shall be as provided in section 222-2 of the UDO, subject to subsection (6) below. 
(6)  Additional parking standards. These additional parking standards also shall apply to all property within the SRCO: 
a.  Maximum parking authorized. Except for single-family dwellings the maximum parking in the applicable zoning district shall be 125 percent of the minimum allowable number of parking spaces in subsection (n)(1)(5) above. Any parking spaces in excess of 105 percent of the minimum shall be constructed on previous surfaces. 
b.  Alternative pervious surfaces may be approved by the director. 
c.  Where a parking lot is adjacent to a street or public right-of-way, the parking lot shall be screened from the right-of-way by a minimum three feet high and three feet wide, dense evergreen hedge or by a brick, stone or textured concrete masonry unit wall not less than three feet high. 
d.  Lighting. Parking lots with more than 50 spaces must be illuminated. Lighting fixtures must use cut-off fixture types that minimize the diffusion of light to other properties. 
e.  Bicycle parking. All uses that are required to provide off-street parking spaces for motorized vehicles shall also provide bicycle parking spaces. Uses that require up to 50 off-street parking spaces for motorized vehicles shall provide at least one bicycle space, plus a minimum of one more bicycle space for each additional 50 parking spaces required for motorized vehicles. 
f.  Shared parking. 
1.  The director may approve a reduction of up to 25 percent in the number of parking spaces required for a specific use where inter-parcel access is provided and a shared parking analysis approved by the director demonstrates that adequate parking will be provided with the approved reduction. 
2.  In no case shall parking spaces that are farther than 1,000 feet from a building entrance be allowed to satisfy off street parking requirements for a use. 
g.  On-street parking. 
1.  The director may approve credit for on-street parking spaces provided on streets classified as local streets as a means to reduce the off-street parking requirements for a parcel. 
2.  The number of on-street parking spaces credited for a parcel shall not exceed the number of feet of linear frontage of the parcel along local streets (not including frontage devoted to driveways) divided by the constant 24. 
h.  The director may approve an administrative variance to permit an increase in the maximum authorized number of parking spaces required in subsection (n)(6)a. provided that the applicant prepares a parking analysis taking into consideration the possible allowances in subsections (n)(6)g. and (n)(6)h. that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the director that: 
1.  The applicant has made adequate provision for access to the site by pedestrians and bicyclists. 
2.  There is no feasible alternative that would provide for the safe and adequate provision of parking for the proposed use. 
3.  The applicant has a unique hardship that is not self-imposed. 
4.  Such hardship can only be resolved by increasing the maximum authorized number of parking spaces for the subject use or site. 
(7)  Dumpsters. Dumpsters shall be placed on a concrete pad and screened by an opaque fence or wall that is a minimum of eight feet in height. Dumpsters shall only be located in the area between the rear of the principal structure and the rear lot setback line, or between the side of the principal building and the side lot setback line. 
(8)  Drive-through windows. 
a.  Drive-through windows shall be screened from view from a boulevard and from adjacent residentially zoned property. 
b.  No outdoor speakers shall be directed toward adjoining residentially zoned property. 
(o)  Off-street loading requirements. Off-street loading spaces shall be provided as in section 226-1, except as follows: 
(1)  Buildings with more than 5,000 square feet of commercial, retail, services or professional offices shall provide a minimum of one off-street loading space. 
(2)  Buildings with more than 25,000 square feet of commercial, retail, services or professional offices shall provide a minimum of one off-street loading space for each 25,000 gross square feet or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Off-street loading shall be limited to the area between the rear of the principal structure and the rear lot setback line, or between the side of the principal building and the side lot setback line. 
(p)  Minor alterations and additions. Applications for land disturbance permits, driveway permits, sign permits, plan review, plat approval, building permits and utility permits for properties within the Salem Road Corridor Overlay District shall meet all of the requirements of the base zoning district in which the parcel is located and all provisions of the SRCO unless such application meets one of the following exceptions: 
(1)  Alterations to existing single-family dwellings located within a subdivision of record zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3 with a final plat approved prior to enactment of this section shall not be subject to the provisions of this SRCO, provided that such alterations are limited to the following actions: 
a.  Additions of heated floor area less than 50 percent of the existing floor area. 
b.  Construction of an accessory structure or garage not to exceed 500 square feet in floor area. 
c.  Improvements to outdoor space, such as swimming pools, courts for basketball, tennis or handball, gazebos, trellises, patios, decks, balconies, and similar non-occupied structures; or interior renovations. 
(2)  Construction of a single-family dwelling on an existing lot of record zoned R-1, R-2, or R-3 within a single-family residential subdivision with a final plat approved prior to enactment of this section shall not be subject to the provisions of this SRCO provided that such new construction shall be of similar floor area, materials and design as the single-family dwellings on adjacent lots in the same subdivision. 
(3)  Replacement, reconstruction, restoration, or repair of a single-family dwelling that is destroyed or damaged by fire or other natural occurrence shall not be subject to the provisions of this SRCO, provided that such dwelling is located on an existing lot of record zoned R-1, R-2, or R-3 within a single-family residential subdivision with a final plat approved prior to enactment of this section, and provided that such new construction shall be of similar floor area, materials and design as the single-family dwellings on adjacent lots in the same subdivision. 
(4)  Construction, rehabilitation, restoration and repair of a nonresidential structure existing prior to the enactment of this section shall not be subject to those provisions of the SRCO that are wholly unrelated to the nature of the permit sought until such time as the cumulative effect of all such permits on a single parcel results in an increase in the total floor area of the existing structure by 20 percent or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less. 
(q)  Signs. 
(1)  All ground signs shall be attached to a permanent wall or pilasters constructed of brick, stone or textured concrete masonry units no more than eight feet in height. 
(2)  All signs may be illuminated, provided the light source is external and oriented downwards, such as a gooseneck lamp. 
(3)  Sign table for nonresidential districts. 

 
(4)  Sign table for residential districts. 

 
(5)  All other signs shall be regulated as provided under chapter 230 of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-23, § 2, 10-9-2007; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 11, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 0-2015-13, §§ II—VI, 12-8-2015) 
Sec. 210-3. - Stonecrest Area Overlay District. 
[Reserved] 
Sec. 210-4. - Milstead Historic Area Overlay District. 
[Reserved] 
Chapter 214 - STANDARDS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 214-1. - Dimensional standards of zoning districts. 
Dimensional standards for zoning districts are summarized in Tables 1, 2 and 3. See chapter 206 for additional standards. Should a standard in Table 1, 2, or 3 conflict with a standard in chapter 206, the chapter 206 standard shall apply. 
TABLE 1: Development Standards for Residential Zoning Districts 

 
TABLE 2: Development Standards for Non-Residential Zoning Districts 

 
TABLE 3: Minimum Floor Area for RM, MUR and MxD Zoning Districts 

 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 214-2. - Building projections into yards. 
(a)  No part of a lot's required yard, setback, buffer or open space shall be included as part of the yard, setback, buffer or open space required for another lot, except as specifically provided for herein. 
(b)  Architectural features such as cornices, eaves, steps, gutters and fire escapes may project not more than three feet beyond any required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct access for service and/or emergency vehicles; provided, however, that canopies that extend from faces of buildings over sidewalks or entryways to shelter pedestrians shall be allowed to encroach into required setbacks so long as they are no closer than five feet to the street right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 214-3. - Corner lots. 
The side of a corner lot fronting on the street with the highest functional classification, according to the Rockdale County/City of Conyers Functional Classification System, shall be deemed to be the front of the lot. If both streets have the same functional classification, then the front of the lot shall be deemed to be the side with the least street frontage. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 214-4. - Height limits. 
The height limitations of this article shall not apply to church spires, belfries, flag poles, monuments, cupolas, domes, ornamental towers or observation towers not intended for human occupancy, water towers, transmission towers, radio or television towers or antennas. These exclusions shall not apply in the vicinity of airports where Federal Aviation Administration runway protection zone standards shall apply. The height of telecommunication facilities is regulated in chapter 218, article IV. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 214-5. - One principal use authorized per lot. 
Only one principal use shall be authorized on each lot except where otherwise specifically authorized within a mixed use zoning district including OBP, MUR, and MxD. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 214-6. - Fences, walls and hedges. 
All fences, walls (landscape, screening and retaining) and hedges shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Plastic slats shall be strictly prohibited. 
(2)  Solid, opaque fences shall be strictly prohibited along any street right-of-way. 
(3)  No opaque fence or landscape wall shall extend over 20 linear feet in length without a visual articulation, such as a column, setback or vegetative planting. 
(4)  All fences shall be constructed with the finished side facing adjoining properties. 
(5)  Prohibited materials of construction in all zoning districts shall include tires, scrap and sheet metal, plastic and fiberglass, medium density fiberboard and plywood, exposed common concrete block, junk or other discarded materials. 
(6)  The height of a fence, landscape wall or hedge shall be measured from the normal finished grade to the highest point of said structure. Ornamental features such as columns and gates shall be allowed to exceed the maximum height of a fence or wall by no more than 18 inches. Ornamental features shall be distanced by a minimum of ten linear feet. 
(7)  Maximum fence heights may be exceeded when the appearance of an even fence line is desired due to the slope of a property. 
(8)  The director of planning and development may administratively approve an increase in the height of a fence, wall or hedge up to 150 percent of the maximum allowable height, as provided for in section 238-14. 
(9)  Fences over seven feet in height are required to be permitted and inspected by the chief building official. 
(10)  Retaining walls over four feet in height are required to be permitted and inspected by the chief building official. 
Table of Fence, Wall and Hedge Requirements 

 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 21, 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 0-2013-14, § I, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 0-2015-05, § I, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 214-7. - Exterior building materials. 
(a)  In nonresidential zoning districts, sheet metal, vinyl siding, exposed common concrete block and similar materials shall not be permitted as exterior materials on sides of buildings facing any road. The exterior materials of the face of said buildings on the sides facing a road shall consist of glass, brick, stone, architectural concrete block, real stucco or similar building materials. 
(b)  In residential zoning districts, sheet metal, vinyl siding, exposed common concrete block and similar materials shall not be permitted as exterior building materials on principal use structures except that soffits, gables and eaves may be finished in vinyl. Refer to section 218-7 Accessory use standards for allowable exterior materials on accessory structures in residential zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 4, 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 0-2013-12, § II, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 214-8. - Minimum lot size. 
Tables 1 and 2 in section 214-1 show the minimum lot size, minimum lot width and maximum coverage for each land development district. However, notwithstanding said standards of the UDO, no lot shall have a lesser area than that approved by the Rockdale County Board of Health for safe drinking water and septic tank operation. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 214-9. - Minimum space between buildings. 
The minimum distance between buildings located on the same lot shall be 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 214-10. - Uses requiring occupation tax and business license. 
All uses requiring an occupation tax and business license pursuant to chapter 222 shall be located in a zoning district that permits such business activity in accordance with the Table of Uses in section 218-1. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 214-11. - Truck stops prohibited. 
Truck stops are prohibited. Furthermore, no adjoining or adjacent uses shall be physically connected or used so as to effectively create a truck stop. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 214-12. - Business license requirements. 
All uses requiring an occupation tax and business license pursuant to the Code of Ordinances, chapter 22, shall comply with all such licensing requirements and shall not be considered lawful uses under Title 2 of the UDO if in violation of such licensing requirements. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 214-13. - Mailbox support structures. 
Mailbox support structures erected within or adjacent to the right-of-way of any public street in unincorporated Rockdale County upon which the permanent posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour shall consist of a single wooden post not exceeding four inches by four inches in size or a single metal pole not exceeding two inches in diameter. 
(Ord. No. 2007-09, § 22, 5-22-2007) 
Chapter 218 - USE REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES 

Sec. 218-1. - Table of permitted uses. 
(a)  The uses set forth in the table below shall be permitted only as listed within each zoning district and only in the manner so listed. Any use not listed in said table is prohibited in all districts. No use shall be permitted and no structure associated with such use shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged unless the use is permitted as one of the following: 
(1)  P: A permitted use. 
(2)  C: A use requiring a special use permit subject to approval following the application procedures and requirements in section [chapter] 238 of the UDO. 
(3)  S: A supportive commercial use that is on the same lot or parcel with a permitted use in a zoning district and established for the sole convenience of nearby residents, employees, patients, patrons or visitors within walking distance. 
(4)  A: An accessory use subject to the requirements specified and generally applicable to accessory uses. 
(b)  Any use not listed with the letter P, C, S, or A in a particular zoning district shall be prohibited in that zoning district, unless it is a nonconforming use lawfully established prior to the effective date of the regulation that rendered it legally nonconforming. See [chapter] section 234. 
(c)  Any use listed with a "Yes" in the column headed by the words "Suppl. Reg?" in the table below shall satisfy the applicable supplemental use standards established in section 218-13 of this chapter, in addition to the development regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(d)  Restrictions on the location of telecommunication facilities in certain zoning districts are provided in section 218-24. 
(e)  The table of permitted uses for the watershed protection (W-P) district is provided in section 206-2. 
(f)  The majority of uses listed in the table below are based on the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). Where the use is not defined in section [chapter] 106 and where the use has a NAICS code indicated in the table below, the NAICS definition shall apply. For uses that fall within more than one use category, the more detailed definition shall apply (the definition of a six-digit NAICS class usurps the definition of a five-digit NAICS class, the definition of a five-digit NAICS class usurps the definition of a four-digit NAICS class and so on). All remaining uses identified in the UDO are intended to have the commonly accepted definitions contained in the most recent edition of the Merriam-Webster Dictionary. 

 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 6, 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 0-2007-23, § 3, 10-9-2007; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 5, 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 0-2010-09, § 2, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 0-2012-19, § II, 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 0-2013-03, §§ II, III, 4-23-2013; Ord. No. 0-2013-13, § 2, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 0-2014-13, § 2, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 0-2015-02, § II, 2-10-2015; Ord. No. 0-2015-07, §§ I—V, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 0-2015-13, § I, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-01, § I, 2-14-2017; Ord. No. 0-2017-17, § I, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 0-2017-24, § I, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 218-2. - Special event permits. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as provided in subsection 218-2(l) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or cause to be conducted any special event in unincorporated Rockdale County without first obtaining a valid permit for such event. Said permit shall be valid for a period of time not to exceed ten consecutive days. 
(b)  Application procedures. The following application procedures shall govern special event permits: 
(1)  Applications for special event permits shall be submitted on a form provided by the department. A nonrefundable application fee shall accompany the application as established by the board of commissioners to defray the cost of processing the application. The complete application must be submitted at least 30 days prior to the starting day of the proposed special event. 
(2)  The application shall contain each of the following unless the department deems an item inapplicable to the type of event proposed: 
a.  Name, address, phone and email of the applicant. 
b.  Delineation of boundaries. The outermost boundaries of the special event shall be fully and clearly delineated on a map, which shall be no smaller than 8½ × 11 inches in size, and attached to the application for a permit. All public streets and/or sidewalks within and adjacent to such area(s) shall be clearly identified. The department shall require, as part of the approval for the event, that areas no less than five feet in width shall be designated and preserved for public circulation and access to adjoining business establishments outside the area(s) delineated for the event. 
c.  The date(s), hours and duration of the event. 
d.  Estimated attendance figures. 
e.  Completed and signed application forms. 
f.  A statement of the type of special event proposed. 
g.  If the special event is to be located on public property, obtain and maintain for the duration of the special event comprehensive general liability insurance in a minimum amount of $500,000.00 combined limits for bodily injury and/or property damage that names Rockdale County as an additional named insured. A certificate evidencing such insurance shall be provided with the application. 
(c)  Signs. Special event signs shall be authorized as provided under chapter 230 of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Vendors. 
(1)  Sales permitted. The sale of food or any merchandise or services of any type by a vendor shall be allowed as a component of a special event located on public property provided such vendor is approved and authorized in writing by the permit holder of the event and shall be conducted in accordance with such conditions and limitations as shall be imposed in writing by the permit holder and submitted as part of the application for a permit. Vending on private property is prohibited. Beer, wine and liquor sales, service and consumption shall be prohibited on public property, including public streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way and parks. 
(2)  Authorization of vendors. The permit holder of a special event shall have sole responsibility and authority to allow or disallow sidewalk or street vending as a component of an event and to designate the location and activities of such vendors. It shall be unlawful for any vendor to engage in such business on private property or at any location or in any manner not authorized by the permit holder of the event. 
(3)  Identification required. Any public property vendor authorized by the permit holder shall be required to prominently display on his or her person a badge identifying the vendor as an authorized participant in the event. Such identification shall be not less than three inches by three inches, shall state that the bearer is an official participant in the event, and shall bear the signature of the permit holder of the event. 
(4)  Food sales. The vendor of any food, whether hot or cold, as part of a special event located on public property shall be subject to all rules and regulations of the Rockdale County Environmental Health Department. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder of an event to ensure compliance with this section by any such vendor. 
(e)  Sanitation. 
(1)  The permit holder of a special event shall be required to provide temporary outdoor toilet facilities at any event at which 100 or more persons are expected to be in attendance. The number of toilets and their locations shall be determined by the Rockdale County Environmental Health Department. 
(2)  The permit holder of the special event shall be required to provide temporary garbage receptacles at any event at which 50 or more persons are expected to be in attendance. The number of receptacles and their locations shall be determined by the Rockdale County Environmental Health Department. 
(3)  The permit holder shall be responsible for cleaning the public property area(s) on which the event was held to its pre-event condition within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event. If the permit holder fails to clean up such areas, such clean up shall be arranged by Rockdale County and the costs charged to the permit holder. 
(f)  Public safety. 
(1)  Traffic and crowd control shall be provided by the Rockdale County Sheriff's Department and the number of officers and/or special arrangements shall be determined by the sheriff. The permit holder shall be responsible for costs associated with public safety. 
(2)  A special event shall be limited to the specific geographic area(s) within which the event is to take place and the permit holder of the special event shall be responsible for the provision of sheriff and sanitation services within the boundaries of the event for a period of two hours past the conclusion of the event or until the area is cleared of all activities related to such event. 
(g)  Other permits required. The permit holder shall obtain other permits that may be required by other chapters of this Code. Except as specifically authorized herein, nothing in this section is intended to authorize activity otherwise prohibited by the Rockdale County Code. Special events held on private property shall be limited to two special events per calendar year per private property location. 
(h)  Indemnification. The permit holder of any special event shall hold Rockdale County, its officers, employees and agents harmless from any liability or damages for property damage or bodily injury, including death, which may arise from any acts or omissions emanating from a special event located on or involving any portion of public property. Such indemnification shall be submitted with the application on a form provided by Rockdale County. 
(i)  Additional charges. Rockdale County may assess additional costs against the permit holder for special events located on public property should the holder fail to provide sanitary cleanup such that any public property used for the special event is left in the same condition as that preceding the event, or fail to repair or replace public property or equipment damaged or destroyed during a special event. The director of the department of recreation and maintenance shall transmit an itemized bill setting forth any verifiable expenses for sanitary cleanup and repair or replacement of public property or equipment incurred by Rockdale County to the permit holder within 30 days of the conclusion of the event. Should the permit holder refuse to pay such bill within 30 days of the date of said billing, Rockdale County may seek legal recourse authorized under applicable law for recovery of said expenses. The applicant shall sign a statement prior to issuance of a special event permit agreeing to payment of these additional costs on a form provided by Rockdale County. 
(j)  Administrative review. 
(1)  The director shall cause the application to be circulated to each government department or other agency whose services the director determines would be affected by the nature and activities of the proposed event. Each such department or agency shall review the application and note the services which it will be required to perform, the number of personnel to perform such services, the length of time to perform such services, the estimated cost to perform such services, and any other information which would assist the department or agency in facilitating the event and services required. 
(2)  Each department and/or agency reviewing an application may recommend in writing certain conditions or restrictions deemed necessary to facilitate the event, to comply with other laws or regulations, or to ensure the safety, health and welfare of the community. In reviewing the recommendations of the departments, the director may impose and enforce such conditions or restrictions as a part of the permit. A violation of the permit, including such conditions or restrictions, shall be deemed a violation of this section. 
(k)  Permit decision. 
(1)  After considering all comments and conditions of the reviewing departments and agencies as well as other information pertaining to the proposed event as described on the application, and after the payment of all applicable fees and costs, the director shall approve or conditionally approve the application and issue a permit for a special event upon a finding that satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made by the applicant concerning all requirements of this section to the satisfaction of each reviewing department and agency. If such satisfactory provisions and arrangements have not been made by the applicant, the permit shall be denied. 
(2)  The director shall either issue, issue with conditions or deny the permit application no later than 20 days following the date the completed application is filed. If the permit is denied, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the denial and the reason(s) for denial. 
(3)  Appeals from final decisions of the director regarding special event permits shall be to the board of adjustment pursuant to section 238-8. Decisions made by the board of adjustment shall be final. All appeals of the decisions made by the board of adjustment shall be by writ of certiorari from the Rockdale County Superior Court pursuant to section 238-13. 
(l)  Exemptions. 
(1)  Funeral processions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any procession conducted under the supervision and direction of a funeral director in conjunction with any funeral. 
(2)  Government sponsored events. The director shall be authorized to waive or otherwise expedite any or all of the review process and fees applicable to such review and permit for special events sponsored and held by Rockdale County Government, Rockdale County Public School System, the State of Georgia, and the Federal Government. Events on public property for which a contract has been awarded by the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners to a person, group, organization, association, club or other entity shall be exempt from this permit. 
(3)  Constitutionally protected activities. 
a.  Except as provided in subsection b. [below], any person, group or organization engaged in any picketing, demonstrations, assembly, gathering, procession or other free speech activity protected by the U.S. Constitution or the Georgia Constitution shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. Said person, group or organization engaged in said protected activity shall be prohibited from blocking the ingress and egress of any public or private place. 
b.  Planned assemblies, marches, or similar constitutionally protected free speech activity that will require street closings or will compromise the ability of the county to respond to public safety emergencies shall be required to comply with this section with the following modifications: 
1.  The complete application may be submitted up to 20 days prior to the starting date of the planned free speech activity; 
2.  Permit decisions shall be made by the director within ten days of receipt of the completed application; 
3.  Appeals from the final permit decision shall be expedited so that they are heard by the board of adjustment within seven days of filing a notice of appeal. 
(4)  Small private gatherings. The provisions of this section shall not apply to gatherings or activities located on private property which will make no use of public property, including streets, other than for lawful parking. Garage sales, yard sales, and similar sales on private property are exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-2010-05, § 2, 4-27-2010; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 12, 11-27-2012) 
Secs. 218-3—218-6. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ACCESSORY USE STANDARDS 

Sec. 218-7. - Accessory use standards. 
(a)  All accessory buildings, structures and uses of land, including off-street parking, shall be clearly subordinate to and supportive of the principal use and located on the same lot as the principal dwelling to which they are accessory. 
(b)  All accessory buildings or structures shall be located in the rear yard or in the side yard behind the front yard building line. Accessory buildings in front yards are prohibited. Accessory structures are prohibited in the side yard of a corner lot that faces a public street. Front yards for corner lots shall be as defined in section 214-3. 
(c)  Accessory structures in residential zoning districts may be finished with any material, including metal, vinyl siding and concrete block, providing the style and color of the structure match those of the principal structure and create visual cohesion throughout the property. Accessory structures finished in metal shall be visually screened from the street. Accessory structures shall be assembled in a professional manner and maintained in good condition. 
(d)  No accessory building shall be utilized unless the principal structure is occupied, and no accessory building shall be used for any type of human habitation. 
(e)  No accessory building shall be erected on a lot prior to the time of construction of the principal building to which it is accessory, except that structures for the storage of farm equipment or for the shelter of livestock may be constructed on lots zoned A-R (Agricultural-Residential) and used for agricultural purposes in accordance with the minimum building setback requirements of the zoning district and livestock regulations. 
(f)  No accessory buildings or structures shall be closer than ten feet from an abutting side or rear property line, except that accessory structures appurtenant to the keeping and raising of livestock shall comply with the setback requirements specified in section 218-13 Standards of Use and Development. 
(g)  There shall be a distance of not less than 20 feet between a principal and detached accessory building located on the same lot or parcel. 
(h)  The following accessory uses and structures, including similar uses and structures, shall be permitted in the A-R district, provided that they comply with all conditions and standards in subsections (a) through (g): 
(1)  Garages for the parking of automobiles, decks, garbage pads and storage buildings, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Maximum height of two stories or 35 feet. 
b.  On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
c.  No garage or other accessory building, structure or use shall be closer than ten feet to a side or rear lot line or the nearest point along any required buffer, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Heating and air conditioning units, provided that heating and air conditioning units, and related equipment, shall be located within the buildable area of the lot. 
(3)  Swimming pools in compliance with section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(4)  Tennis courts and other play and outdoor recreation areas. 
(5)  Antennae and satellite dishes in compliance with section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(6)  Doghouses, runs, pens, rabbits hutches, cages and other similar structures for the housing of household pets, but not including hobby kennels or pet boarding kennels. 
(7)  Gardening and composting. 
(8)  Statues, arbors, trellises, clotheslines, barbeque stoves, flagpoles, fences, walls and hedges, gates and gateposts and basketball goals. 
(9)  Barns and other similar buildings that are customarily incidental to agricultural operations; maximum height of 50 feet. 
(10)  Livestock quarters and enclosures in compliance with section 218-13 of the UDO. 
(11)  The number of household pets on a single lot shall be limited to five (not including litters under six months of age). 
(12)  Accessory buildings in the A-R district shall not be used for storage or warehousing of bulk items, such as food, clothing, furniture, household supplies, automobile parts, building materials, landscaping supplies and other large quantities of items not listed. 
(i)  All residential accessory uses and structures permitted above, except for those provided in subsection (h)(9) and (10), are permitted in the R-1, R-2, CRS, CSD, CSO, MUR, RM and WP districts provided that they comply with all stated conditions and standards of subsection (a) through (g), and meet each of the following additional standards: 
(1)  The accessory structure must maintain a residential appearance and shall not produce impacts detrimental to adjacent properties as a result of traffic, noise, light, refuse, parking or other activities. 
(2)  No accessory structure in a residential district shall be used by other than family members of the owner, lessee or tenant of the premises, unless otherwise allowed by provisions of the UDO. 
(3)  Accessory buildings in residential districts shall not be used for any type of human habitation or commercial operation whether permanent or part-time. Furthermore, accessory buildings in residential districts shall not be used for storage or warehousing of bulk items, such as food, clothing, furniture, household supplies, automobile parts, building materials, landscaping supplies and other large quantities of items not listed. 
(4)  No accessory building shall exceed a height of 35 feet. 
(5)  Accessory buildings shall be located at least 20 feet from the principal structure on a lot. 
(6)  Satellite dish antennae shall be permitted as accessory structures only in rear yards, unless it can be documented that reception is impaired by such location. In this case, an antenna would be permitted in a side yard. Satellite dish antenna larger than 18 inches shall not be located on the roof of a residential structure. 
(j)  The size and number of accessory structures, excluding swimming pools, in R-1, R-2, CRS, CSD, CSO, MUR and RM districts shall comply with the following table. 

 
* Subject to the maximum percentage of impervious surface as required in section 214-1. Impervious surface area of pools and associated patios, cabanas, etc., shall be calculated as a part of the total maximum allowable impervious area. 
(k)  The size and number of accessory structures, excluding swimming pools, in A-R and WP districts shall comply with the following table. 

 
* Subject to the maximum percentage of impervious surface as required in section 214-1. Impervious surface area of pools and associated patios, cabanas, etc., shall be calculated as a part of the total maximum allowable impervious area. 
(l)  The following accessory uses and structures, including similar uses and structures, shall be permitted in the O-I, NC, MxD, C-1, C-2 or OBP districts, provided that they comply with all stated conditions and standards of subsections (c) through (g): 
(1)  Free-standing parking structures with the following conditions: 
a.  Maximum height of 50 feet and no more than four stories. 
b.  When abutting any residential property line, structures shall not be located closer than ten feet to the nearest point along any required buffer as established in section 328 of the UDO. 
(2)  Heating and air conditioning units with the following conditions: 
a.  When abutting a residential district, heating and air conditioning units shall not be located within any required buffer as established in section 328 of the Rockdale County UDO. 
b.  When abutting a zoning district, other than residential district, heating and air conditioning units shall not be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line. 
c.  Units may be installed on the roof of any structure so long as the unit does not exceed the height restriction and the units are placed so as to be hidden from a front or side view. 
d.  No ground-based heating and air conditioning unit shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
(3)  Incidental storage structures. 
(4)  Antennae and satellite dishes in compliance with article IV of this chapter. 
(5)  Garbage dumpsters and recycling collection bins in compliance with the requirements of section 226-3 of the UDO. 
(m)  The following industrial/manufacturing accessory uses and structures, including similar uses and structures, shall be permitted in the M-1 and M-2 districts, provided that they comply with all stated conditions and standards in subsection (c) through (g): 
(1)  Uses permitted in subsection (l) above. 
(2)  Caretaker dwellings in compliance with section 218-13 of this chapter. 
(n)  Any owner(s) of the property for which relief is sought, or the authorized agent(s) of the owner(s) of the property, seeking to construct more than the maximum number and/or size of accessory structures allowed by this code, may apply for a dimensional variance to the board of adjustment. The procedure for applying for a dimensional variance to the board of adjustment is set forth in the UDO section 238-9. Appeals from final decisions of the board of adjustment shall be as provided in UDO section 238-13. 
(o)  Truck vans, mobile homes, converted mobile homes, self-storage containers, trailers, recreational vehicles, bus bodies, vehicles, and similarly prefabricated items shall not be permitted as accessory structures on property in any zoning district. 
(p)  Temporary placement of self-storage containers in non-industrial zoning districts for the limited purpose of loading and unloading shall be allowed for a period of time not to exceed 30 days in any one calendar year. 
(q)  Transport containers, as defined in section 106-1, shall only be permitted as accessory structures on property in the Limited Industrial (M-1) and General Industrial (M-2) zoning districts, and are subject to the following standards: 
(1)  An accessory structure permit must be obtained prior to placement of a transport container. 
(2)  Transport containers must be accessory to the permitted use of the property and included in the calculation of overall lot coverage. 
(3)  Transport containers must meet the requirements of the International Building Code. 
(4)  Transport containers must meet outdoor screening requirements on all primary road frontages, as specified in sections 328-7 and 214-6. 
(5)  Transport containers must not occupy required off-street parking, loading, or landscaping areas. 
(6)  Materials stored in transport containers shall be subject to review and approval by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 7—9, 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 0-2007-23, §§ 4—6, 10-9-2007; Ord. No. 0-2008-20, § 1, 12-23-2008; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 13, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 0-2013-12, § II, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 0-2015-08, § I, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 0-2016-12, §§ I—IV, 9-27-2016) 
Secs. 218-8—218-11. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUPPLEMENTAL USE STANDARDS 

Sec. 218-12. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The uses listed in section 218-13 are in alphabetic order. Each of these uses are indicated in the table of permitted uses as requiring supplemental use standards. The purpose of these Supplemental Use Standards is to supplement article I, permitted and special uses by providing more specific standards for certain uses listed in the table of permitted uses for which site development and design standards are necessary to ensure that they will be compatible with surrounding uses, have minimal impact on the environment, promote the health, safety and welfare of the community and meet the intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  These standards apply to specific uses in all zoning districts and shall be enforced by the department. 
(c)  Where a special use permit is required in order for a use to be authorized in any zoning district, these standards shall be reviewed, considered and applied by the department, the planning commission and the board of commissioners, along with standards in subsection 238-6(m), prior to granting a special use permit for a given use. 
(d)  Any use that is regulated by this article and is authorized in a zoning district shall be developed in conformity with the applicable supplemental use standards for that use provided in this article. No permit shall be issued for a use, building or structure that does not conform to applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 218-13. - Standards of use and development. 
(a)  Adult entertainment establishments. This use is subject to all provisions of chapter 22, article V, the provisions of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances, and all of the following: 
(1)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any school, place of worship, public park, hospital, government building, library, licensed adult day center, child care learning center, group day care home, family day care home or pre-kindergarten (Pre-K), establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, or property zoned for residential purposes. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the proposed adult entertainment establishment to the nearest point on the property line of such school, place of worship, public park, hospital, government building, library, licensed adult day center, child care learning center, group day care home, family day care home or pre-kindergarten (Pre-K), establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, or property zoned for residential purposes. 
(2)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 1,000 feet of any other licensed adult entertainment establishment. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the proposed adult entertainment establishment to the nearest point on the property line of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(3)  No adult entertainment establishment shall sell or dispense alcoholic beverages upon the premises of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(a1)  Adult day care center. 
(1)  The use shall comply with all applicable State of Georgia, Department of Human Resources requirements and regulations. 
(b)  Air transportation—Airport, private. 
(1)  All such uses proposed by a public authority shall include a certified copy of the law, regulation, or other official act adopted by the governmental entity proposing the use and authorizing the establishment of the proposed use at the proposed location. 
(2)  All applications shall include evidence that the proposed facility will meet the standards and requirements imposed by agencies such as the Federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable federal, state or local statutes. 
(3)  A statement shall be provided detailing noise abatement procedures, methods and devices that will be employed on the operation of the facility, and sufficient analysis shall be presented to indicate what adjoining lands will be affected by the anticipated noise. 
(4)  All facilities shall be located and so designed that the operation thereof will not seriously affect adjacent areas, particularly with respect to noise levels. 
(5)  All areas used by aircraft under its own power shall be provided with an all-weather, dustless surface. 
(6)  A map shall be presented showing the landing and take-off corridors as projected, with the map to cover an area within at least a 5,000-foot radius of the boundaries of the proposed facility. 
(7)  Prior to receiving zoning approval by Rockdale County at least one Public Information Meeting in Rockdale County shall be conducted by the applicant, in addition to that required in chapter 238. 
(c)  Amusement arcade; amusement theme park. 
(1)  An outdoor recreation facility consisting of amusement rides, games, water slides, amusement vehicles, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, batting cages, water slides or any similar commercial outdoor recreation shall be limited as follows: 
a.  Minimum lot size: Five acres. 
b.  Maximum lot size: 20 acres. 
c.  Outdoor rides, games, water slides, amusement vehicles, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, water slides or other similar commercial outdoor recreation facilities and equipment must be enclosed within an eight feet high fence with gates that are to be locked except when the facility is open to the public. 
d.  Outdoor activities are limited to the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
e.  A site plan shall be prepared at a scale of one inch = 50 feet to indicate access and egress, type, location and height of recreation facilities, buildings and other structures and lights, parking areas, landscaping, buffers and drainage. A site location plan at a scale of one inch = 200 feet shall illustrate surrounding property uses and the location of the nearest residence. 
f.  The site shall have at least one approved entrance to a street classified by Rockdale County as an arterial. 
g.  All outdoor equipment, rides, vehicles and structures taller than 35 feet shall be setback at least 75 feet from property lines. 
h.  Lighting must be designed to direct light downward and away from adjacent properties. 
i.  An environmental-acoustical study shall be submitted to the director for review and approval. The study shall be prepared by an acoustical engineer indicating compliance with all Rockdale County noise ordinances. It shall identify and analyze all sources of noise emanating from the site including outdoor speakers, sound effects or sound systems as well as rides, vehicles, and mechanical equipment. Noise levels shall not exceed 65 decibels, dbA measured at property lines. 
j.  If any structure taller than 35 feet is proposed, the development shall prepare a view shed analysis to be reviewed and approved by the director to demonstrate that such structures will not be visible year-round from the windows or yard of any single-family residential property. 
k.  A 100-foot buffer shall be maintained adjacent to all abutting residentially zoned property. 
(d)  Antennae, amateur radio. 
(1)  No such antenna structure, including any support upon which it may be constructed, shall exceed a combined height of 50 feet. 
(2)  Amateur radio service antenna structures exceeding 50 feet in height shall be permitted only by the board of adjustment subject to all of the requirements of the UDO. 
(3)  Amateur radio service antennae shall be located a distance of at least one-half the height of the tower from all property lines. 
(e)  Antennae, satellite. 
(1)  Satellite antennae shall be located as follows: 
a.  In any office, commercial, industrial or multifamily residential district, satellite antennae may be located anywhere in the buildable area of the lot or on a building thereon, subject to applicable zoning district setback regulations. 
b.  In other districts, satellite antennae shall be located only to the rear of any principal structure. If usable communication signals cannot be obtained from the rear location, the satellite antenna may be located in the side yard. Both locations shall be subject to applicable zoning district setbacks or regulations. 
c.  In the event that usable satellite communication signals cannot be received by locating the antennae in the rear or to the side of the principal structure, such antennae may be placed in the front yard or on the roof of the dwelling, provided that approval of the director shall be obtained prior to such installation. The director shall issue such a permit only upon a showing by the applicant that usable communication signals are not receivable from any location on the property other than the location selected by the applicant. 
(2)  Satellite antennae shall comply with the following regulations for height, screening and grounds: 
a.  In any district other than office, commercial, industrial or multifamily residential, a satellite antenna shall not exceed 36 inches in diameter. 
b.  A ground-mounted satellite antenna shall not exceed 20 feet in height including any platform or structure upon which said antenna is mounted or affixed. All non-ground-mounted satellite antennae shall not exceed 35 feet in height. 
c.  If usable satellite signals cannot be obtained from an antenna installed in compliance with the height limitation imposed by subsection (2) above, such satellite antenna may be installed at a greater height, provided the greater height is approved by the director. Such approval shall be granted only upon a showing by the applicant that installation at a greater height is necessary for the reception of usable communication signals. Under no circumstances shall said antennae exceed 50 feet in height. 
d.  Except in office, commercial, industrial or multifamily residential districts, satellite antennae shall be located and designed to screen and reduce visual impact from surrounding properties at street level and from public streets. 
e.  All satellite antennae shall meet all manufacturers' specifications, be located on non-combustible and corrosion-resistant material and be erected in a secure, wind-resistant manner. 
f.  All satellite antennae shall be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning. 
(f)  Automotive repair and maintenance, minor. 
(1)  Minor repair shall be limited to routine maintenance, alignment, installation of oil, filters, batteries, installation of tires, carburetors, fuel injection, ignition parts, brake repairs and other manor accessory parts and repair services that do not require disassembly of major vehicle components, transmission, glass, painting or body work. 
(2)  All repair and maintenance activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
(3)  There shall be no outdoor storage. 
(4)  Battery exchange stations. Electric vehicle battery exchange stations shall be considered for zoning purposes the same as minor automotive repair and maintenance businesses (NAICS 8111). 
Battery exchange stations shall be allowed in the same zoning districts as minor and major automotive repair and maintenance businesses as described in Section 218-1 of the Code of Rockdale County, Georgia, as amended, entitled "Table of permitted uses". 
Battery exchange stations shall comply with the all the supplemental standards listed in this subsection (f). 
(g)  Automotive repair and maintenance, major. 
(1)  Outdoor storage shall be in rear yard, screened by an eight-foot high fence or wall and be limited to 25 percent of parcel area. 
(2)  A property that includes outdoor storage and repair shall be no closer than 200 feet from a property zoned or used residentially, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points of the two properties in question. 
(3)  There shall be no junkyards. 
(g1)  Banquet hall, events center. 
(1)  Shall be located on a collector or arterial road, as defined by the Rockdale County Department of Transportation, with the minimum lot frontage and direct access to the same collector or arterial road. 
(h)  Bed and breakfast inn. 
(1)  The operator of the establishment shall reside on the site. 
(2)  The use requires conditional use approval by the planning commission, board of commissioners and fire marshal. 
(3)  The use shall have a lot area of not less than 20,000 square feet and a floor area within the dwelling unit of no less than 2,500 square feet. 
(4)  No guest shall reside in a bed and breakfast inn for a period in excess of 14 days. 
(5)  One parking space shall be provided for each guest bedroom, and one space shall be provided for the operator's or owner's unit in the building. 
(6)  The residential character of the neighborhood shall not be changed as a result of increased traffic in the neighborhood caused by the use. 
(7)  The structure shall be compatible with the character of the neighborhood in terms of height, setbacks and bulk. Any modifications to the structure shall be compatible with the character of the neighborhood. 
(8)  The proposed use shall maintain acceptable residential noise standards. 
(9)  No restaurant use shall be permitted. Breakfast may be served on the premises only for guests and employees of the bed and breakfast inn. 
(10)  Rooms may not be equipped with cooking facilities. 
(11)  Bed and breakfast inn uses must comply with all other applicable provisions in the UDO. 
(i)  Building material and garden equipment and supplies dealers. 
(1)  All outside storage shall be completely screened from view from all streets and adjacent residentially zoned property. 
(2)  Security fencing, a minimum of six feet in height, shall be provided around the outside of all storage areas. 
(3)  All storage areas shall be maintained in a manner so as to limit dust from drifting onto adjoining properties. 
(j)  Car washes. 
(1)  Paved stacking lanes with the capacity for up to five vehicles shall be provided for vehicles waiting to use automatic car wash facilities and two vehicles per bay for self-service car washes. 
(2)  No storage or repair of vehicles shall be allowed within the car washing facility. 
(3)  The use shall provide a safe access to the street. Access shall only be through defined driveway locations. 
(4)  Commercial car wash water recycling requirement. 
(a)  All commercial in-bay and conveyor car washes that are constructed after July 11, 2017, must utilize a recycling system where a minimum of 50 percent of water utilized must be recycled. 
(b)  Self-service car washes are not required to install recycled water systems. 
(k)  Cellular and other wireless telecommunications. See article IV of this chapter. 
(l)  Cemeteries. Private and public cemeteries shall comply with all provisions of state law. In addition: 
(1)  A plat of the cemetery shall be recorded in the office of the Rockdale County Clerk of Superior Court. 
(2)  Any new private cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than 20 acres. 
(3)  The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a thoroughfare by way of an access way not less than 20 feet wide. 
(4)  Any new cemetery shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than four feet in height. 
(5)  All structures shall be set back no less than 25 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
(6)  All graves or burial lots shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any property line or minor street right-of-way lines and not less than 50 feet from any collector, arterial, expressway or freeway right-of-way line. 
(7)  The entire cemetery property shall be landscaped and maintained. 
(8)  Prior to approval of the request for the location of a new cemetery, a site plan and perpetual care plan must be submitted to the department. 
(l1)  Child care learning center. 
(1)  The use shall comply with all applicable State of Georgia, Bright from the Start, Rules for Child Care Learning Centers. 
(l2)  Civic and social organization. 
(1)  Shall be located on a collector or arterial road, as defined by the Rockdale County Department of Transportation, with the minimum lot frontage and direct access to the same collector or arterial road. 
(2)  The accessory use shall be permitted by right in the zoning district where the organization is established. It shall be clearly subordinate to and supportive of the principal activities of the civic or social organization, and located on the same lot as the organization. The organization shall be established, registered as a non-profit with Rockdale County, and in operation prior to the occupancy of accessory uses and facilities. 
(3)  The following not-for-profit uses may be permitted as accessory to a civic or social organization only upon approval of a special use permit in accordance with section 238-6, provided that they meet all regulations specific to the proposed use or facility contained in this section and each of the additional standards provided in subsections (3) and (4) of this section. 
a.  Outdoor recreation facilities 5,000 square feet or larger. 
b.  Non-profit day care center, adult or child, maintained and operated by the civic or social organization. 
1.  Shall comply with section 218-13, Supplemental use standards for adult day center, child care learning center, group day care home, or pre-kindergarten (Pre-K). 
c.  Soup kitchen. 
d.  Food bank, clothes closet, and other redistribution of goods of a similar nature. 
(4)  Standards for approval of special use permits for uses listed in subsection (2): 
a.  Outdoor activity shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
b.  Additional parking shall be required at one space per 1,000 square feet of accessory use. 
c.  The scale, intensity and operation of the accessory use or facility shall not generate unreasonable noise, traffic congestion, or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous properties. 
d.  No signage shall be allowed to advertise accessory uses requiring a special use permit. 
(m)  Colleges, universities, and professional schools. 
(1)  A DRI review application shall be completed, as required in section 238-5 of the UDO. 
(n)  Compost facility. 
(1)  Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, branches, leaves, grass clippings or similar putrescent vegetative materials; not including manure, animal products or inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics, metals or similar materials. 
(2)  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), provide a three-foot high landscaped earthen berm with a maximum slope of three to one and/or a minimum six-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
(o)  Reserved. 
(p)  Reserved. 
(q)  Drug rehabilitation center. If in a residential district or abutting a residential district, the following standards shall apply. 
(1)  No meals or overnight accommodation shall be provided. 
(2)  The outer appearance of the building shall be compatible in height, style, front yard, roof type, fenestration and floor area with buildings on the same block. 
(3)  Services shall only be provided on a temporary, "out-patient basis" during daylight hours, and consistent with subsection (1) above. 
(4)  If located within a residential district, at least 1,000 feet shall separate a drug rehabilitation center from another drug rehabilitation center, transitional housing facility, rooming and boarding house, or personal care home. 
(5)  The operator must be licensed to provide treatment and rehabilitation services for persons with drug and alcohol dependency by the State of Georgia. 
(6)  If a rezoning or special use permit application is made for location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center or other facility for treatment of any dependency, public hearing requirements shall conform to O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4(f). 
(r)  Dwelling, caretaker/employee. 
(1)  The use must maintain a residential appearance and shall produce no impacts in appearance, noise, light and traffic that are detrimental to adjacent properties. 
(2)  The size of the house can be no more than 800 square feet. 
(s)  Dwelling, multi-family. In approving the site plan for a multifamily development, the county shall determine that the streets, driveways, parking areas and other public and private drives shown on the plan meet the following standards: 
(1)  Multi-family developments with more than 50 units must have access to a collector or arterial street. 
(2)  Private streets may be permitted, provided such streets meet the standards of public streets as specified in chapter 332, article I. 
(3)  Adequate provision is made for vehicular traffic to and from the premises and for vehicular traffic and pedestrian traffic to and from the proposed buildings, structures and parking areas on the premises; including fire fighting and police equipment and personnel, ambulance service, garbage collection service, postal service, delivery service and other public and private services and individuals who would require access to the premises. 
(4)  Insofar as practicable, off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks; and no off-street parking space shall be more than 100 feet, by the most direct pedestrian route, from a door of the dwelling unit it intends to serve. 
(5)  Multifamily developments may not abut a single-family residential zoning district on more than 75 percent of the boundary of the site. 
(6)  Not more than 50 percent of the lot area shall be occupied by buildings. 
(7)  Open space and recreation. 
(8)  Multi-family residential developments with more than 50 dwelling units shall provide a minimum of 400 feet of open space or outdoor recreation per dwelling unit. 
(9)  A residential sprinkler system for the suppression of fire shall be installed in each residential unit in all multi-family dwellings permitted in the county. No waiver or variance to this requirement shall be permitted. 
(t)  Dwelling, single-family zero lot line. 
(1)  Adjacent interior lots on the block face shall be developed as zero lot line dwellings. 
(2)  The side yard requirement may be eliminated on one side of each lot. The remaining side yard shall maintain the minimum side yard dimension of the zoning district. 
(3)  Each lot shall meet the minimum area requirements of the zoning district. 
(4)  Easement agreements shall be recorded which allow maintenance and access for that side of the dwelling adjacent to the property line. 
(5)  When the minimum side yard is used, a privacy fence at least six feet high is required between buildings. 
(u)  Electric power generation. 
(1)  Structures shall be placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
(2)  Structures are to be enclosed by a chain link fence at least eight feet high. 
(3)  The lot shall be suitably landscaped, including a buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the front, side and rear property lines; planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
(u1)  Electric vehicle charging station. 
(1)  Location. Charging stations shall be located in off-street parking lots subject to Chapter 222, Off-street parking standards of the Code of Rockdale County, Georgia, as amended. 
a.  Parking spaces associated with charging stations count towards the minimum and maximum space requirements and must remain available to all vehicles for parking. 
b.  Charging stations shall be located outside of congested areas such as main access points to the roadway, and sufficient space must be provided for hoses and cords not to impede pedestrian pathways, driving lanes or adjacent parking spaces. 
c.  Charging stations may be installed in landscape areas, but shall be excluded from area calculations pursuant to section 222-9, Landscaping in parking lots and section 328-25, Requirements for other developments. 
d.  Charging stations must be protected from vehicular impact by wheel stops, curbs or bollards. 
(2)  Signage. Each charging station space must be adequately posted, stating days and hours of operation, time limit for charging, voltage/amperage available, charging fees and instructions for safe use. Signs shall comply with chapter 230, Sign regulations. 
(3)  Maintenance. The name and phone number of the party responsible for maintenance of the equipment must be labeled on the stations. 
(4)  Accessibility. At least one charging station per parking lot must meet the American Disability Act standards. 
(u2)  Electric vehicle charging unit. 
(1)  Location. Charging units shall be installed on an interior or exterior wall of a building. 
(2)  Signage. On properties other than single-family homes or duplexes, each charging unit must be adequately posted, stating days and hours of operation, time limit for charging, voltage/amperage available, charging fees and instructions for safe use. Signs shall comply with chapter 230, Sign regulations. 
(3)  Maintenance. On properties other than single-family homes or duplexes, the name and phone number of the party responsible for maintenance of the equipment must be labeled on each unit. 
(4)  The installation of a charging unit providing voltage over 120V requires an electrical permit delivered by the department of planning and development. 
(v)  Electric, petroleum or gas substation. 
(1)  Structures shall be placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
(2)  Structures are to be enclosed by a chain link fence at least eight feet high. 
(3)  The lot shall be suitably landscaped, including a buffer strip at least ten feet wide along the front, side and rear property lines; planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
(v1)  Family day care home. 
(1)  The use shall comply with all applicable State of Georgia, Bright from the Start, Rules and Regulations for Family Day Care Homes. 
(2)  The use shall maintain a residential appearance compativle with the neighborhood and shall not negatively impact adjacent or nearby properties as a result of traffic, noise, light, refuse, parking or other hazard or nuisance. 
(3)  No signage shall be allowed for a family day care home. 
(w)  Farming, general. 
(1)  All structures, buildings or enclosed areas used for the operation shall be a minimum of 100 feet from all property lines. 
(2)  Equipment-producing noise or sound in excess of 70 decibels shall be located no closer than 100 feet to the nearest residence. 
(3)  All unpaved storage areas shall be maintained in a manner which prevents dust from adversely impacting adjacent properties. 
(x)  Fitness and recreational sports centers. This regulation shall apply equally to outdoor tennis courts, neighborhood recreation centers, basketball courts, ice rink, hockey rink, soccer, field hockey and football fields, baseball and softball fields, gymnasiums, spas, group exercise and fitness centers, yoga, karate and similar facilities. 
If in a residential district or abutting a residential district, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
(2)  Outdoor recreation activities shall be limited to the hours of 8:30 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  No outdoor loudspeakers or sound amplification systems shall be permitted. 
(4)  No outdoor storage shall be permitted. 
(5)  No building, swimming pool, tennis court, ball field or other form of outdoor recreation shall be closer than 50 feet from abutting property zoned for single-family residential use. Outdoor lights shall be no more than ten feet in height nor closer than 25 feet from a property line. Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be cut-off luminaries designed to cast light downward and away from adjacent property. 
(6)  Property lines abutting property zones for single-family residential use shall provide a minimum 25 feet buffer continuous except where penetrated from driveways or utility lines that shall be located perpendicular to property lines. 
(7)  Swimming pools shall meet applicable regulations contained elsewhere in this article. 
(y)  Flea market. 
(1)  The market must provide adequate off-street parking for its employees, dealers and customers. 
(2)  The market must provide adequate restroom facilities located within the structure or building. 
(3)  A building permit shall be required for interior spaces. 
(4)  For outdoor flea markets see temporary use, commercial retail. 
(z)  Forestry and logging. See also "timber harvesting" at section 328-37. 
(1)  Such activities shall be conducted consistent with "Georgia's Best Management Practices for Forestry." 
(2)  Forestry and logging activities taking place on commercially zoned property shall preserve undisturbed buffers as required in section 328-37. 
(3)  Forestry and logging activities taking place on property that is adjacent to occupied residential property shall preserve a 50 feet undisturbed buffer. 
(z1)  Fruit and vegetable market. 
(1)  Shall be located on an arterial road, as defined by the Rockdale County Department of Transportation, with the minimum lot frontage and direct access to the same arterial road. Fruit and vegetable markets shall be excluded from residential properties located on arterial roads that are a part of a recorded subdivision, defined as the common development of five lots or more, subject to a required preliminary plat pursuant to section 302-23. 
(2)  Shall be located no closer than 100 feet from a property zoned or used residentially, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points of the properties. 
(3)  Shall obtain a Food Sales Establishment License from the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(aa)  Gasoline station and gasoline station with convenience store. 
(1)  The use shall not be established on any lot that is adjacent to any residential district. 
(2)  The use shall not be within 100 feet of a residential district. 
(3)  All repair and maintenance activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
(4)  Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
(5)  Only minor automotive repair and maintenance is allowed and shall be confined within the principal structure, out of public view. 
(6)  The use shall have a minimum frontage on the primary street of 150 feet and shall meet the applicable minimum lot size requirement found in section 214-1. 
(7)  Gas pumps, canopies, air hoses and other accessories, appurtenances and equipment shall be set back at least 25 feet from the right-of-way. 
(8)  Vehicular entrances or exits: 
a.  Shall not be allowed more than one curb cut for the first 200 feet of street frontage. 
b.  Shall contain an access width along curb line of the street of not more than 35 feet, as measured parallel to the street at its narrowest point and shall not be located closer than 50 feet to a street intersection or closer than ten feet to the adjoining property. 
c.  Shall provide for adequate acceleration and deceleration lanes, if required by the Georgia Department of Transportation or Rockdale County. 
(9)  All drives, parking, storage and service areas shall be paved and curbed. 
(10)  Outside above-ground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil, and other flammable liquids or gases shall be prohibited at any gasoline service station. 
(11)  Overnight accommodations, showers, and overnight customer parking are prohibited. 
(12)  The use shall not be combined with any other use(s) or facility so as to create a truck stop. See section 106-1. 
(bb)  Greenhouse, nursery and floriculture production. 
(1)  Any structure shall be set back at least 100 feet from any residential property line. 
(bb1)  Group day care home. 
(1)  The use shall comply with all applicable State of Georgia, Bright from the Start, Rules and Regulations for Group Day Care Homes. 
(cc)  Halfway house. Prohibited in all residential districts. If abutting a residential district, the following standards shall apply. 
(1)  No more than 15 residents, not including attendants and employees of the operator. 
(2)  Operator must be licensed for treatment of drug and alcohol dependency. 
(3)  Parking must be provided in an enclosed garage or in the rear or side yard. 
(4)  The outer appearance of the building shall be compatible in height, style, front yard, roof type, fenestration and floor area with buildings on the same block. 
(5)  Services shall not be provided on an "out-patient basis" to persons who are not regular residents of the facility, as described in subsection (1) above. 
(6)  At least 1,000 feet shall separate the halfway house from another halfway house, transitional housing facility, rooming and boarding house, or personal care home. 
(7)  If a rezoning or special use permit application is made for location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center or other facility for treatment of any dependency, public hearing requirements shall conform to O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4(f). 
(dd)  Home occupation. A home occupation, as defined by the UDO shall be governed by the following requirements: 
(1)  Only residents of the dwelling containing the home occupation may be engaged in the home occupation. The home occupation shall not involve group assembly or group instruction on the premises. 
(2)  The home occupation shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the dwelling and shall not change the residential character of the building. 
(3)  No products may be produced, stored or sold on the premises except bona fide agricultural products grown on the premises in the A-R and W-P districts and cottage foods produced on the premises in those districts indicated in the table of permitted uses, section 218-1. The following standards shall apply to all cottage food production: 
a.  The use shall comply with all of the Cottage Food Regulations, Chapter 40-7-19, of the Rules of the Georgia Department of Agriculture, Food Safety Division for standards, licensing and inspections. 
b.  Cottage food production shall be restricted to the following non-potentially hazardous foods, as defined by the Georgia Department of Agriculture: 
1.  Loaf breads, rolls, and biscuits; 
2.  Cakes and cupcakes (except those that require refrigeration due to cream cheese icing, fillings, or high moisture content such as tres leche); 
3.  Pastries and cookies; 
4.  Candies and confections; 
5.  Fruit pies; 
6.  Jams, jellies, and preserves (not to include fruit butters whose commercial sterility may be affected by reduced sugar/pectin levels); 
7.  Dried fruits; 
8.  Dry herbs, seasonings and mixtures; 
9.  Cereals, trail mixes and granola; 
10.  Coated or uncoated nuts; 
11.  Vinegar and flavored vinegars; and 
12.  Popcorn, popcorn balls, and cotton candy. 
c.  The sale of cottage food products must be to the end consumer. No distribution or wholesale allowed including, but not limited to, hotels, restaurants, convenience stores, or institutions. 
d.  The cottage food operator shall provide to the department of planning and development a copy of the cottage food license issued by the Georgia Department of Agriculture, Food Safety Division, prior to obtaining a county business license. 
e.  Rockdale County reserves the right of entry to the residence during normal business hours, or at other reasonable times, for investigation of consumer complaints, a foodborne disease outbreak, or other public health emergency. Refusal to allow entry during normal business hours or at other reasonable times shall result in revocation of the business license issued by the county. 
(4)  Use of the building for the purpose of a home occupation shall not exceed 25 percent of the square footage of one floor of the principal building. 
(5)  No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building shall be permitted. No exterior evidence of the conduct of a home occupation shall be allowed. No signage of any kind for the home occupation is allowed. 
(6)  The home occupation shall not constitute a nuisance to the neighborhood. Furthermore, except as would be caused by a typical residential use, no noise, vibration, dust, odor, smoke, glare or electric disturbance that is perceptible beyond any property line will be permitted to occur as a result of the home occupation. 
(7)  No accessory buildings or outside storage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. 
(8)  Only one vehicle shall be permitted in connection with the home occupation. That vehicle must be one that is designed and used primarily as a passenger vehicle with a carrying capacity of less than three-fourths ton. 
(9)  No earth-moving equipment or heavy construction or hauling equipment shall be allowed on the premises. 
(10)  Pursuant to the above requirements, a home occupation includes, but is not limited to, activities such as the following: 
a.  Art studio. 
b.  Dressmaking. 
c.  Teaching of any kind, provided instruction is limited to not more than two pupils at a time. 
d.  However, a home occupation shall not be interpreted to include any occupation or profession providing medical or mental health services including, but not limited to, physician, veterinarian, dentist, psychiatrist or psychologist. 
(11)  No more than one vehicle used in the home occupation may be parked on the premises overnight, and no more than one additional vehicle connected with the home occupation may be parked on the premises during the day, provided the gross vehicle weight of each such vehicle shall not exceed two tons. Material kept on such vehicles shall be enclosed or kept in the bed of the vehicle, but not stored on exposed racks on the vehicle. 
(ee)  Horse stables, riding and boarding. See livestock quarters and enclosures for applicable regulations. 
(ff)  Hospital. 
(1)  The lot shall have access to a major thoroughfare. 
(2)  Side and rear setbacks shall be at least 25 feet or the minimum required by the zoning district, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Front building setback shall be at least 50 feet. 
(gg)  Hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels. 
(1)  Hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels must be constructed on a tract of land containing no less than two acres. 
(2)  Hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels are limited to no more than 25 guest rooms per acre. 
(3)  All guest rooms shall be accessed internally to the building with no direct room access to the outside. The lobby shall be a minimum of 700 square feet in size. 
(4)  Each guest room must contain a minimum square footage per unit of 300 square feet and shall be accessed with a magnetic keycard entry/locking device. 
(5)  Hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels must contain an enclosed, heated and air conditioned laundry space containing a minimum of three clothes washers and three clothes dryers for the use of guests. 
(6)  Daily maid service must be included in the standard room rate. 
(7)  Hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels must provide a minimum of 1,000 square feet for recreational use by guests. In computing the 1,000 square feet requirement, swimming pools, fitness or recreation centers and other recreational facilities may be used in determining the square footage required by this subsection. 
(8)  No extended stay motel/hotel may be located within 1,000 feet of another extended stay hotel. 
(9)  No guest shall register, reside in, or occupy any room or rooms within the same licensed facility for more than 60 days. Upon approval by the hotel management, a guest may be allowed to stay a maximum of 60 additional days. 
(10)  Management must be on the property 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
(11)  A 75-foot natural buffer, enhanced with an additional 25-foot landscaped buffer, shall be provided adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
(12)  No business license shall be issued for any business operating from any guest room of the facility. 
(13)  No applicant shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an extended-stay hotel under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the occupation tax certificate. 
(14)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an extended-stay hotel is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this subsection. 
(gg1)  Indoor shooting range. 
(1)  Buildings containing ranges shall have walls, ceilings and floors that are either impenetrable to the bullets of the firearms being used within it, or have internal baffling built so that the bullets cannot hit the walls or ceilings. Provisions shall also be made to stop glancing bullets or particles of bullets at the sides of the target area. 
(2)  A system of ventilation shall be installed within the range in accordance with the standards and requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency (the "EPA"). 
(3)  The range shall be so constructed and insulated that the discharge of firearms within it shall not disturb persons outside the premises. The discharge of firearms shall be deemed to constitute a disturbance if the noise level exceeds fifty-five decibels (55dBA) at a distance of 50 feet or more from the building containing the range. Sound measurements shall be made with a sound level meter. 
(4)  Hearing protectors which fully cover the shooters' ears will be provided by the range and made available for all shooters or other persons in the firing area. 
(5)  There shall be a minimum of one instructor for each five firing points in use. All instructors will be required to be certified by the National Rifle Association or similar organization. The owner of the range shall require personnel, instructors and attendants to be at least 18 years of age. 
(6)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to enter a range unless accompanied by an adult. 
(7)  No weapons other than handguns or rimfire rifles with a .22 caliber or less shall be allowed on the premises. All weapons brought into the range shall be in a case designed for the weapons so that no part of the weapon will be visible. Certified law enforcement officers are exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(8)  Loaded weapons shall only be allowed in the firing area of the range and shall not be permitted in any other place inside the building or premises or within the property boundaries outside the building. 
(9)  Not more than one person shall shoot from a firing point at one time. All of the persons except instructors must stand behind the firing point. No person shall be allowed in front of a firing point at any time during operating hours except instructors and/or employees and law enforcement officers. 
(10)  An emergency system shall be installed within each range, capable of alerting the people on the range to stop firing immediately. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a range to permit any person or persons to bring any alcoholic beverages on the premises of any range, or to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises or to permit alcoholic beverages to be left at any place on the premises. It shall also be unlawful for any person operating a range to permit any intoxicated person to be or remain in the premises of a range. 
(12)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a range to permit any form of gambling or wagering. 
(13)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee or instructor to brief patrons concerning the rules and regulations in the range before they are permitted to use the firing range. The licensee shall keep posted in a conspicuous place inside the building and outside the building a sign stating the rules and regulations of the range. 
(14)  All ranges shall be subject to all requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Act, and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. 
(hh)  Industrialized home. All industrialized homes must comply with the following regulations for dwelling units: 
(1)  At the time an application for installation of any industrialized home is presented for review, the applicant must present evidence of the following: 
a.  The serial number for the home as provided by the manufacturer. 
b.  Proof of the identity of the manufacturer. 
c.  Proof of inspection of the home at the date of manufacture, including DCA insignias. 
(2)  No industrialized home shall be in a state of disrepair at the time of its installation at the intended location within the unincorporated areas of the county. Proof of an approved department of community affairs insignia may be accepted as evidence of a new industrialized home's compliance with this subsection. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of the director or his designee to inspect industrialized homes being placed or relocated within the unincorporated areas of the county. Public services and engineering staff shall conduct such inspections necessary to ensure the following: 
a.  External connections to gas, plumbing, electric and any other utility systems shall be constructed and installed in a manner that meets all county building codes. 
b.  Each industrialized home site shall include an approved potable water source and an approved sewage disposal system meeting the requirements of the state department of human resources and the county health department. 
c.  Steps and landings of the requisite size and composition per section 1113 of the Standard Building Code of the Southern Building Code Congress International (SBCCI), shall, at a minimum, be required of all industrialized homes, with such provisions being expressly incorporated by reference herein as part of this requirement. 
(4)  All industrialized home sites shall conform to all regulations for the zoning district in that the property is located. 
(5)  No industrialized home may be attached to another industrialized home by means of a breezeway, corridor or hallway. Industrialized homes designed to be part of a multi-unit residential structure are prohibited. 
(6)  Industrialized homes are not permitted to be used as accessory structures. 
(ii)  Inter-modal terminal facility. 
(1)  All such uses proposed by a public authority shall include a certified copy of the law, UDO, resolution or other official act adopted by the governmental entity proposing the use and authorizing the establishment of the proposed use at the proposed location. 
(2)  All applications shall include evidence that the proposed facility will meet the standards and requirements imposed by regulating agencies and all other applicable federal, state or local statutes, UDOs, or rules or regulations. 
(3)  A statement shall be provided detailing noise abatement procedures, methods and devices that will be employed in the operation of the facility, and sufficient analysis shall be presented to indicate what adjoining lands will be affected by the anticipated noise. 
(4)  All facilities shall be located and so designed that the operation thereof will not seriously affect adjacent residential areas, particularly with respect to noise levels. 
(5)  All facilities shall provide a 200-foot landscaped buffer adjacent to any residentially zoned property. 
(6)  All facilities shall complete a visibility study to ensure that no lights, structures or storage buildings are visible from existing residences. 
(jj)  Kennel, hobby. 
(1)  The lot size shall be no less than two acres. 
(2)  All structures housing animals shall be located at least 100 feet from property lines or street right-of-way. 
(3)  All areas maintaining animals outside shall be located no closer than 100 feet from property lines or street right-of-way. 
(kk)  Kennel, pet boarding. 
(1)  The lot size shall be no less than two acres. 
(2)  Any building or enclosed structures for the housing of animals shall have minimum side and rear setbacks of at least 100 feet. 
(3)  All areas maintaining animals outside shall be completely enclosed by walls or fences at least six feet in height and shall be located no closer than 200 feet from property lines or street right-of-way. 
(ll)  Landfill, inert waste. 
(1)  Standards. 
a.  Minimum acreage of site: 25 acres. 
b.  No facility shall be permitted within 500 feet of a residential dwelling, private well, or school. 
c.  A minimum 100-foot-wide buffer, meeting the requirements of this chapter, shall be maintained on all property lines including property lines abutting a public street. 
d.  All facilities shall be enclosed with a security fence at least six feet in height with openings therein not more than those in two-inch mesh wire or some other similar fencing materials and placed inside the buffer. A minimum six-foot-high solid fence or wall is required inside buffers adjacent to property zoned or used for residential purposes. A sight line study shall be submitted to county staff for approval. 
e.  Access to inert waste landfills shall be limited to authorized entrances that shall be closed when the site is not in operation. Access shall not be derived through any residential subdivision or development. Routes and entrances shall be approved by the director of public works to ensure that access is derived from paved streets and that such streets will withstand maximum load limits established by the county. 
f.  Materials placed in inert waste landfills shall be spread in layers and compacted to the least practical volume. 
g.  A uniform compacted layer of clean earth no less than one foot in depth shall be placed overall exposed inert waste material at least monthly. 
h.  The inert waste landfill site shall be graded and drained to minimize runoff onto the landfill surface, to prevent erosion and to drain water from the surface of the landfill. 
i.  The property owner shall obtain a land disturbing permit for any inert waste landfill. 
j.  No hazardous wastes, industrial wastes, demolition wastes, biomedical wastes, asbestos, or liquid waste shall be allowed in an inert waste landfill. 
k.  This section shall not prohibit the burial of dry waste building materials on the same property of a structure currently under construction. However, hazardous materials may not be included in this disposal. 
l.  Suitable means, such as stockpiled soil, shall be provided to prevent and control fires. 
m.  A uniform compacted layer of final cover not less than two feet in depth and a vegetative cover shall be placed over the final lift not less than one month following final placement of inert waste within the lift. 
n.  Notice of final closure must be provided to the inspections department within 30 days of receiving the final load of waste. Any site not receiving waste in excess of 180 days shall be deemed abandoned and in violation of this section unless properly closed. Notice of closure must include the date of final waste receipt and an accurate legal description of the boundaries of the landfill. 
(mm)  Landfills, sanitary (municipal). 
(1)  Standards. 
a.  Minimum acreage of site: 100 acres. 
b.  No facility shall be permitted within 500 feet of a residential dwelling, private well, or school. 
c.  A minimum 200-foot-wide buffer, meeting the requirements of this chapter, shall be maintained against all property lines including property lines abutting a public street. 
d.  All facilities shall be enclosed with a security fence at least six feet high with openings therein not more than those in two-inch mesh wire or some other similar fencing materials and placed inside the buffer. A minimum six-foot-high solid fence or wall is required inside the buffers adjacent to property zoned or used for residential purposes. A sight line study shall be submitted to county staff for approval. 
e.  Limited access. A gate or other barrier shall be maintained at potential vehicular access points to block unauthorized access to the site when an attendant is not on duty. Access shall not be derived through any residential subdivision or development. Routes and entrances shall be approved by the director of public works to ensure that access is derived from paved streets and that such streets will withstand maximum load limits established by the county. 
f.  The property owner shall obtain a land disturbing permit for any sanitary landfill. 
g.  Groundwater protection. The site must be designed with adequate soil buffers or artificial lines and leachate collection and treatment systems to preclude, to the maximum extent possible, the contamination of drinking water supplies. 
h.  Erosion and sedimentation control. All surface runoff from disturbed areas must be controlled by the use of appropriate erosion and sedimentation control measures or devices. Sediment basins must be designed to handle both the hydraulic loading for the 25-year, 24-hour storm and the sediment loading from the drainage basin for the life of the site. 
i.  Revegetation. The plan must call for the revegetation of any disturbed area that will remain exposed for more than three months. Revegetation of final cover must take place within two weeks after final cover placement. 
j.  Sequence of filling. The plan must define a sequence of filling the entire site that minimizes any problems with drainage or provides for all-weather access roads to the working area. 
k.  Daily cover. The composition of daily cover shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Must be capable of preventing disease vectors, odors, blowing litter, and other nuisances. 
2.  Must be capable of covering solid waste after it is placed without change in its properties and without regard to weather. 
3.  Must be capable of allowing loaded vehicles to successfully maneuver over it after placement. 
4.  Must be noncombustible. 
5.  Forty percent by weight of the fragments in the daily cover shall pass through a two millimeter, No. 10 sieve. 
6.  Must not include rock fragments that are greater than six inches in diameter. 
l.  Intermediate or monthly cover. The composition of intermediate or monthly cover shall meet the same criteria for daily cover and be capable of supporting the germination and propagation of vegetative cover. 
m.  Final cover. The composition of final cover shall meet the same criteria as for monthly cover and must compact well and preclude the excessive infiltration of surface water. 
n.  Final grading. The grade of final slopes shall be designed, installed and maintained to: 
1.  Ensure permanent slope stability. 
2.  Control erosion due to rapid water velocity and other factors. 
3.  Allow compaction, seeding and revegetation of cover material placed on slopes. 
4.  Ensure minimal percolation of precipitation into and surface runoff onto the disposal area. 
5.  The grade of the final surface of the facility may not be less than three percent nor greater than 33 percent. 
o.  Fire protection, groundwater monitoring, methane gas control, liners and leachate collection, closure, post-closure care and financial responsibility shall be in conformance with chapter 391-3-4, Solid Waste Management Rules of the Environmental Protection Division of the State Department of Natural Resources. 
(2)  Any operator of any sanitary landfill shall comply with the performance requirements of chapter 391-3-4, Solid Waste Management Rules of the Environmental Protection Division of the State Department of Natural Resources 
(3)  No regulated quantities of hazardous waste may be accepted. The operation must have a plan for excluding regulated quantities of hazardous waste. 
(4)  No person in responsible charge of a sanitary landfill which has a leachate collection system shall perform the duties of a sanitary landfill operator without being duly certified by the state. 
(5)  No sanitary landfill which has a leachate collection system shall be operated in the state unless the person in responsible charge is duly certified by the state. 
(nn)  Libraries and archives. When located in residential districts, such uses shall: 
(1)  Be located on a collector or arterial street. 
(2)  Provide a 50 feet buffer adjacent to residential zoning. 
(3)  Set back driveways and parking areas a minimum of 25 feet from side and rear property lines. 
(oo)  Livestock quarters and enclosures (includes poultry). The keeping and raising of all farm animals and fowl and use of private stables shall be limited to property located within the R-1 (Single Family Residential) zoning district, the A-R (Agricultural-Residential) zoning district, and the W-P (Watershed Protection) zoning district, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  In the R-1 zoning district, the keeping and raising of all farm animals and fowl and use of private stables shall be limited to properties with a minimum of three acres outside the boundaries of any recorded subdivision, defined as the common development of five lots or more, subject to a required preliminary plat pursuant to section 302-23. 
(2)  In the R-1 zoning district, the maximum number of livestock shall be limited to two adult hooved animals per three acres. 
(3)  In the A-R zoning district, the keeping and raising of all farm animals and fowl and use of private stables shall be limited to properties with a minimum lot size of three acres. 
(4)  In the A-R zoning district, the maximum number of livestock shall be equal to two adult hoofed animals per acre. 
(5)  In the W-P zoning district, the keeping and raising of all farm animals and fowl and use of private stables shall be limited to properties with a minimum lot size of three acres. 
(6)  In the W-P zoning district, the maximum number of livestock shall be limited to two adult hoofed animals per three acres. 
(7)  In the R-1 zoning district, the A-R zoning district, and the W-P zoning district, any structure, pen, corral or other building appurtenant to the keeping and raising of livestock or poultry must be located a minimum of 200 feet from any property line or state water as defined in O.C.G.A. 12-7-3. 
(8)  In the W-P zoning district, a fence shall be erected a minimum of 150 feet from any state water, as defined in O.C.G.A. 12-7-3, so as to prevent livestock from entry into any state water. 
(9)  The keeping and raising of all farm animals and fowl shall be subject to all regulations promulgated by the Rockdale County Health Department. 
(pp)  Manufactured home. All manufactured homes must comply with the following regulations for dwelling units: 
(1)  A scaled site plan prepared by a state-certified surveyor, landscape architect or engineer shall be required with all applications for a building permit to install a manufactured home in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(2)  At the time an application for installation of any class of manufactured home in the unincorporated area of the county is presented for review, the applicant must present evidence of the following: 
a.  The serial number for the home as provided by the manufacturer. 
b.  Proof of the identity of the manufacturer. 
c.  Proof of inspection of the home at the date of manufacture, including HUD insignias. 
(3)  No class B manufactured home may be brought in and placed within the unincorporated areas of Rockdale County except in an existing manufactured home park. 
(4)  No class C manufactured homes shall be brought into and placed within the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(5)  No manufactured home shall be in a state of disrepair at the time of its installation at the intended location within the unincorporated areas of the county. Proof of an approved housing and urban development insignia may be accepted as evidence of a new manufactured home's compliance with this subsection. The state of repair of a manufactured home which has previously been utilized as a residential dwelling shall be determined based on the home's compliance with the following provisions: 
a.  Sanitary facilities. Every manufactured home shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, a lavatory sink, a tub or shower, and a toilet all in working condition when properly connected to an approved water and sewer system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be in a sanitary working condition free from leaks and obstructions. 
b.  Hot and cold water supply. Every kitchen sink, lavatory sink, and tub or shower in a manufactured home must be connected to a supply of both hot and cold water. 
c.  Water heating facilities. Every manufactured home shall have water-heating facilities in safe working condition. 
d.  Heating facilities. Every manufactured home shall have heating facilities in safe working condition. Where a central heating system is not provided, each manufactured home shall be provided with facilities whereby heating appliances may be connected. 
1.  Unvented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited except for gas heaters listed for unvented use and the total input rating of the unvented heaters is less than 30 BTU per hour per cubic foot of room content. 
2.  Unvented fuel burning heaters shall be prohibited in bedrooms. 
e.  Smoke detector. Every manufactured home shall be provided with a smoke detector approved by the state that is installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
f.  Windows. Every habitable room excluding bathrooms, kitchens, and hallways shall have at least one window that can be opened, facing directly to the outdoors. All window panes shall be intact and free of cracks or other structural flaws. 
g.  Ventilation. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can be opened, or such other device that will ventilate the room. 
h.  Electrical. 
1.  Distribution panels. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers or fuses, with all unused openings covered with blank covers approved and listed for that purpose. Connections shall be checked for tightness. Panels shall be accessible. 
2.  Electrical system. The electrical system (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and in working condition. The manufactured home may be subjected to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
i.  Exterior walls. The exterior of the manufactured home shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other condition that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the manufactured home. 
j.  Exterior siding. The exterior siding of the manufactured home shall be free of rot and rust and must be uniform in appearance. 
k.  Roofs. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects, which might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
l.  Interior floors, walls and ceiling. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be kept in sound condition to prevent the admittance of rain or moisture. 
(6)  For manufactured homes that are to be relocated in the unincorporated area of the county from a site outside of the unincorporated area of the county, an inspection for compliance with each of the applicable requirements set forth in subsections (5)a through (5)l of this section shall be conducted prior to the home being brought into the county. Noncompliance with any of the provisions of this subsection shall cause a manufactured home previously used as a residential dwelling to be in a state of disrepair for purposes of this section. The installation of such home shall not be permitted absent correction of the defect by the applicant and approval by the director 
(7)  It shall be the responsibility of the director to inspect manufactured homes being placed or relocated within the unincorporated areas of the county. Public services and engineering staff shall conduct such inspections necessary to ensure the following: 
a.  External connections to gas, plumbing, electric and any other utility systems shall be constructed and installed in a manner that meets all county building codes. 
b.  Each manufactured home site shall include an approved potable water source and an approved sewage disposal system meeting the requirements of the state department of human resources and the county health department. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-160 through 8-2-168. All manufactured homes with the exception of those located in existing manufactured home parks shall be placed on a permanent foundation, either slab or piers on poured concrete footings, in accordance with the manufacturer's permanent installation instructions. If the manufacturer's instructions are no longer available, the rules and regulations of the safety division of the state department of insurance (chapter 120-3-7, as amended) shall be followed regarding installation. 
d.  Steps and landings of the requisite size and composition per section 1113 of the Standard Building Code of the Southern Building Code Congress International (SBCCI), shall, at a minimum, be required of all manufactured homes, with such provisions being expressly incorporated by reference herein as part of this requirement. 
(8)  All manufactured home sites shall conform to all regulations for the zoning district in which the property is located. 
(9)  No manufactured home may be attached to another manufactured home by means of a breezeway, corridor or hallway. 
(10)  Manufactured homes are not permitted to be used as accessory structures. 
(11)  The following language shall appear on the face of all permit applications for manufactured homes: 
"The applicant is advised that the use(s) and/or structure(s) associated with this application may be restricted or prohibited by private covenants or other private legal restrictions and/or agreements applicable to the property which is the subject of the application. Investigation and compliance with any such private covenants and restrictions is solely the responsibility of the applicant. Issuance by Rockdale County of any permit pursuant to this application has no effect or impact upon, and does not certify the compliance or noncompliance of, such private covenants and restrictions." 
(12)  The following provisions shall apply to all nonconforming manufactured homes: 
a.  Any nonconforming manufactured home that is moved shall not be relocated within the county nor replaced by another manufactured home except in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
b.  Any nonconforming manufactured home that is destroyed to the extent of more than 50 percent of the total square footage of the preexisting structure shall not be rebuilt or replaced with a manufactured home unless such manufactured home is a class A manufactured home as currently defined, or a class B manufactured home if such nonconforming home was located in an existing manufactured home park. 
c.  A nonconforming manufactured home shall not be enlarged or expanded in size, nor shall any additions or structural alterations or changes in foundation be made thereto, unless the nonconforming home is made to conform to the provisions of this Code, or the enlargement or expansion is for the purpose of more closely complying with the requirements applicable to manufactured homes. Variances may not be granted to enlarge or expand a nonconforming manufactured home. 
d.  Whenever the use of a nonconforming manufactured home has been discontinued for a period of one year, it shall not thereafter be used and all future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this Code. 
e.  Nothing in this section shall be construed or interpreted to prevent the normal maintenance and repair of any manufactured home. 
f.  All manufactured homes existing and installed in the county prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived that do not conform to the current provisions applicable to such homes shall be authorized as legally nonconforming. 
(qq)  Massage establishment. Establishments that perform massage therapy must meet the standards of chapter 22, article III. 
(rr)  Mineral extraction; river and stream sand. 
(1)  Standards. 
a.  Adequate land is to be available for tailing ponds, located out of the floodplain. 
b.  A hydrological and geological analysis and drainage plan of the proposed operation shall be submitted to and approved by the director of the department of public services and engineering with the applicable requirements of a land disturbing permit. The plan shall conform to the requirements of a land disturbing plan and include: 
1.  Plans for the property after the operation has ceased. 
2.  Revegetation plans. 
3.  Maintenance of the site during the operation. 
4.  Return water turbidity levels. 
5.  Any other information required by the director. 
(2)  Extraction along Big Haynes Creek shall be limited to the two existing mill ponds located on Big Haynes Creek. 
(3)  Stabilization of the stream and river banks is to be ensured by a 50-foot setback from the banks for all equipment. 
(4)  The use shall not be established within 1,000 feet of a residence or within 500 feet of any property line without the express written consent of the adjoining property owner directly affected. 
(5)  The use shall have direct access to a state highway with any access road having six inches graded, aggregate base. 
(6)  This use shall conform to all state and federal laws. 
(7)  All permits will expire on the one-year anniversary of the issuance unless renewed as complying with the terms of this section. 
(8)  All improved and maintained entrances shall be fenced and locked during non-business hours. The property shall be adequately posted and such notice filed with the proper county authority. 
(ss)  A minimum of 500 feet sight distance shall be required at the junction of access road and the state highway. Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be required and approved by the director of public services and engineering. 
(1)  Establish working hours of 7:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, to reduce the nuisance produced by the operation. 
(tt)  Mineral extraction/rock for production and processing of crushed stone. 
(1)  Standards. 
a.  All improved and maintained entrances shall be fenced and locked during non-business hours. The property shall be adequately posted and such notice filed with the proper county authority. 
b.  Operators shall comply with state department of natural resources, surface mining land reclamation program rules and regulations, and the mining permit number filed with the director of the department of public services and engineering. 
c.  A blasting limit of two inches per second peak particle velocity as measured from any of three mutually perpendicular directions in the ground adjacent to off-site buildings shall not be exceeded. 
d.  An air blast limit of 90 decibels (linear-peak) measured at the property line of adjacent residentially used properties shall not be exceeded. 
e.  Seismographic and noise instrumentation shall be required for a minimum of one blast per three-month period. The records of such instrumentation and records of all blasts (including total charge weight, charge weight per delay, charge depth, date and time, location and meteorological conditions) shall be retained by the operator for a period of not less than two years. Copies of all blast records shall be forwarded to the director of the department of public services and engineering within five days following each blast. All non-instrumental blasts shall be in compliance with the recommended scaled distance, as defined by the United States Department of Interior, Bureau of Mines Bulletin 656 entitled, "Blasting Vibrations and Their Effects on Structures." 
f.  Millisecond-delay blasting shall be used to decrease the vibration level from blasting. 
g.  Blasting shall coincide with the period between 8:00 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. except when on-site hazards to safety dictate otherwise. 
h.  The blasting and extraction shall not be established within 500 feet of any property line. 
i.  These uses shall only be established on a site of not less than 200 acres. 
(uu)  Mini-warehouses and self-storage units. 
(1)  A 75-foot wide buffer shall be required abutting residential property. 
(2)  Buildings shall have a pitched roof with pitch of at least 4:12. 
(3)  No sale of merchandise or flea markets shall be conducted on the property. 
(4)  Access shall be only to streets classified as arterials by Rockdale County. 
(5)  No outdoor storage is permitted. 
(6)  No outdoor speakers or amplification shall be permitted. 
(7)  Outdoor lighting shall be directed downward and away from adjacent property. 
(vv)  Motor vehicle sales. 
(1)  All vehicles shall be parked on paved surfaces or approved pervious paving materials. 
(2)  All outdoor vehicle display areas shall be at least 25 feet from the right-of-way and no closer than 100 feet from the nearest residence. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Other vehicle display shall be located within a building or outside storage that is screened from public view. 
(5)  Vehicle maintenance, repair, painting and body work must take place within a building. 
(uu1)  Mobile food vendor. 
(1)  Permittees selling ice cream from a motor vehicle and mobile food vendors shall be subject to this section. 
(2)  Standards specific to selling ice cream from a motor vehicle. 
a.  Permittees selling ice cream from a motor vehicle shall, before making any sale, park the vehicle at the right curb and at least eight feet from any other vehicle that may be parked on the street and not less than 100 feet from any intersecting street. When the vehicle stops, all sound equipment or other devices used to notify customers of the presence of the permittee shall be stopped and shall not resume until the vehicle is again put in motion. 
b.  No permittees selling ice cream from a motor vehicle using sound equipment or other methods of attracting customers shall operate such equipment before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. daily. 
c.  No permittees selling ice cream from a motor vehicle shall stop or stand and do business for more than 30 minutes at the same location. 
(3)  Standards specific to mobile food vendors. 
a.  No mobile food vendor shall conduct business on public streets or in the public right-of-way except as part of a county-sponsored or approved special event permit. 
b.  Mobile food vendor operations shall be limited to the parking areas of privately owned, non-residential property, except that mobile food vendors may be allowed on privately owned residential property in conjunction with a small private gathering or non-profit event which will make no use of public property, including streets, other than lawful parking. 
c.  Any and all drivers of a mobile food vending vehicle must possess a valid Georgia driver's license. 
d.  All mobile food vendors shall maintain proof of a $1,000,000.00 liability insurance policy, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia, protecting the mobile food vendor, the public, and Rockdale County from all claims of damage to property and bodily injury, including death, which may arise from operation under or in connection with the permit. Such insurance shall name Rockdale County as an additional insured and shall provide that the policy shall not terminate or be canceled prior to the expiration date without 30 days advanced written notice to the county. 
e.  Prior to issuance of the required permit under this article, any person or entity operating as a mobile food vendor shall execute an indemnity agreement indemnifying and releasing Rockdale County, its agents, employees, and elected officials from any and all liability against any and all claims, actions, and suits of any type whatsoever. 
f.  Prior to the issuance of the required permit under this article, mobile food vendors shall submit the written, notarized consent of the private property owner upon whose lot it is requesting to operate, a valid food service permit obtained from the Rockdale County Environmental Health Department, proof of liability insurance, the indemnity agreement releasing Rockdale County, and a valid Georgia driver's license to the Department of Planning & Development. The mobile food vendor permit, written consent of the property owner, food service permit, and Georgia driver's license must be readily available for inspection within the vehicle at all times during hours of operation. 
g.  No mobile food vendor shall be located within 150 linear feet of the property line of a lot containing a single-family home or townhouse without a special event permit, or within 150 linear feet of an entrance to a restaurant. Additionally, no mobile food vendor shall be located within 15 linear feet of any street intersection, pedestrian crosswalk, driveway, fire hydrant, alleys, handicapped parking spaces, or building entrances. Mobile food vendors shall not be located within 100 feet of gas pumps, underground gas storage tanks, and vent pipes. 
h.  Mobile food vendors shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. daily and shall not be left unattended, parked, or stored on a vending site during the restricted hours of operation or while not actively vending. All mobile food vending vehicles must return to their base of operations when not in use. 
i.  Except as may be allowed during a county-sponsored event or approved special event, no more than two mobile food vendors may operate on a single property at any one time. 
j.  No external speakers, sound equipment or other devices shall be used to play music or omit noises for the purpose of advertising the mobile food vendor's location while vending. 
k.  No flashing, blinking, or strobe lights shall be used on or within a mobile food vendor vehicle. 
l.  No mobile food vendor shall be permitted to have or operate as a vehicular drive-through facility or drive-up window. 
m.  All mobile food vending vehicles shall be equipped with a reverse gear signal alarm that is distinguishable from the surrounding noise level and rear-vision mirrors, firmly attached, on each side of the vehicle. 
n.  Free-standing signs or signage that projects from the body of the mobile food vending vehicle shall be prohibited. No sign used on a mobile food vendor vehicle shall be illuminated, flash, or produce motion. 
o.  Mobile food vendors shall conduct business only when positioned on hard-surfaced, designated parking areas and shall not block driveway entrances, parking lot aisles, access to loading areas, or emergency access or fire lanes. 
p.  At no time shall the operation of a mobile food vendor reduce the number of parking spaces available on a property below the minimum required. 
q.  Each mobile food vendor shall provide at least one trash receptacle for its patrons that is regularly emptied and shall remove all such waste materials before departing from the site. Such waste materials shall be disposed of at the mobile food vendor's base of operations. The mobile food vendor shall be responsible for maintaining the area around their vehicle clear of trash and debris at all times. 
r.  The dumping of gray water, grease, or other waste liquids on public or private property or into storm drains shall be prohibited. 
(ww)  Open yard storage business. 
(1)  Intent. The intent of this supplemental regulation is to protect residential property values and to ensure that the community's children will not be visually attracted to or have easy access to potentially dangerous accumulations of materials stored out of doors by businesses regulated under this article. 
(2)  Site development standards. No person shall engage in or operate an open yard storage business in the unincorporated areas of the county unless that business is in compliance with the following: 
a.  Each business shall establish and maintain a transitional buffer around the property upon which the storage area is located, measured from the right-of-way of the nearest public road to the fence, or the property line of any other real property adjoining the property upon which the business is located, whichever is closest. Said transitional buffer shall be at least: 
1.  30 feet in depth for all storage areas under three acres in size. 
2.  50 feet in depth for all storage areas from three acres to ten acres in size; or for any portion of the open yard storage business adjacent to a stream or lake. 
3.  100 feet in depth for all storage areas over ten acres in size. 
(3)  No storage or vehicle parking shall be allowed in any transitional buffer, provided entrance roadways shall be allowed in any transitional buffer. 
(4)  Each such business shall establish and maintain a fence on the inner boundary line of the transitional buffer for that business. 
(5)  Any fence required in this article shall be a substantial and solid wooden, rock, brick or masonry fence or wall of at least six feet in height approved by the director. Said fence shall have openings only for gates at entrance roadways. Each such gate shall be designed and constructed of materials compatible with the fence to which it is attached and shall be capable of being securely locked. All gates shall be approved by the director for those purposes. 
(6)  The transitional buffer shall be undisturbed except for entrance roadways, which roadways shall run generally perpendicular to the buffer zone boundaries. No road shall be built in the transitional buffer to provide access to the perimeter of the property. 
(xx)  Outdoor recreation facility. 
(1)  Side and rear property lines shall include a 50 feet landscaped buffer that shall be continuous except for penetrations necessary to allow driveways and/or utility lines that are placed perpendicular to property lines. 
(2)  Any commercial recreation or entertainment facility that includes amusement rides, water slides, amusement vehicles, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, batting cages, fully enclosed buildings shall meet requirements of amusement arcades. 
(3)  External lighting shall consist of cut-off type fixtures designed to cast light downward and away from adjacent properties. 
(yy)  Outdoor storage. 
(1)  Outdoor storage shall be set back at least 15 feet from any side or rear property lines. 
(2)  Use shall be screened by a solid fence or wall at least eight feet high or as required to screen view from adjacent property and public streets. 
(3)  The setback distance shall be landscaped to provide a year-round vegetative screen. 
(4)  Outdoor storage shall not be located in the area between the front of the principal structure and the public street. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the MxD and NC districts, up to 50 percent of the required front yard may be used for outdoor table service and temporary display of merchandise or items designed for exterior exposure or display. Outdoor display and seating areas shall be set back at least ten feet behind the right-of-way, shall not obstruct sidewalks and shall not be left out overnight. 
(zz)  Passenger car rental. 
(1)  All vehicles shall be parked on paved surfaces or approved pervious paving materials. 
(2)  All outdoor vehicle display areas shall be at least 50 feet from the right of way line and no closer than 100 feet from the nearest residence. 
(3)  Vehicle storage, cleaning and maintenance must take place within a building or outside storage area that is screened from public view. 
(4)  Vehicle repair, painting and body work may not be conducted on the premises. 
(zz1)  Pawnshop and/or pawnbroker. 
(1)  All persons before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or similar place for the purpose of pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging or selling property shall first file an application with a separate processing fee to cover the expense of an investigation and processing the application, which fee shall not be refundable. The application shall include verification from the Rockdale County Planning and Development Department that the proposed premises complies with all zoning and planning requirements. If more than one location is proposed, a separate application must be filed for each location and a separate license must be issued. 
(2)  Every person engaged as a pawnshop operator or pawnbroker within the county shall secure from every person from whom he/she receives any used or previously owned tangible personal property, whether by purchase or through pledge, trade, pawn or exchange; the following: 
a.  Government-issued photo identification card, such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport; 
b.  The name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, date of birth, and social security number or driver's license number; 
c.  A digital photograph clearly showing a frontal view of the subject's face (digital images shall be labeled with the date and time of the transaction and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption); 
d.  The fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger available on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation of the exact finger printed; and 
e.  Written description of property or item received, and digital photograph of property or item, labeled with date and time of transaction. 
(3)  All pawnshops and pawnbrokers shall maintain the required information in subsection (2) above, including digital photographs and fingerprints, for a period of three years and make the same available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(4)  No pawnshop or pawnbroker shall receive, pawn, trade, or buy from a minor goods of any character or description. A minor, for the purposes of this section, is an individual 17 years of age or under. 
(5)  This section shall not be construed to prevent sponsorships, contributions, scholarships, or the purchase of items of de minimis cost for the purpose of contributing to nonprofit organizations, charitable organizations, churches or school systems. 
(6)  Every pawnshop and pawnbroker within Rockdale County shall make correct and truthful entries of information as required by the ordinance from which this subsection derives as soon after the transaction as possible and in no event more than one hour after the applicable time set for closing of the business. The daily electronic reporting shall be by an electronic reporting system required by the sheriff. Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic reporting system via the Internet to the administrator of the electronic reporting system. In the event that the electronic reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, businesses will be notified as soon as possible by the sheriff's office. In this event, the businesses will be required to make records of transactions in paper form as prescribed by the sheriff's office. Such paper forms must include all information required under the ordinance from which this subsection derives related to the business. Businesses shall be responsible for maintaining an adequate inventory of these forms. 
(7)  All pawnshops shall comply with all applicable state regulations including those set forth in Title 44 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(8)  Any person who willfully and intentionally fails to obtain the information and maintain the records, digital photographs and fingerprints, or to file the daily reports required by this chapter shall, be guilty of an offense and punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, incarceration not to exceed six months, or both. 
(zz2)  Parking lots and garages—Commercial vehicles. 
(1)  Truck stop is strictly prohibited. 
(aaa)  Performing arts theater, concert hall, convention center, auditorium. 
(1)  Shall be located on a collector or arterial road, as defined by the Rockdale County Department of Transportation, with the minimum lot frontage and direct access to the same collector or arterial road. 
(2)  All structures shall be located and all activities shall take place at least 100 feet from any property line adjacent to a residential zone or use. 
(bbb)  Personal care home, congregate, family, or group. 
(1)  The home shall maintain a residential appearance compatible with the neighborhood. 
(2)  The home shall meet all state requirements and all applicable rules and regulations as specified by the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia in "Rules and Regulations for Personal Care Homes," Chapter 290-5-35. 
(3)  To prevent a negative institutional atmosphere created by the concentration or clustering of several community residences, no more than one personal care home shall be located on each block, and two or more personal care homes shall not be located on the same street on opposing sides of the same block. 
(ccc)  Place of worship. 
(1)  Shall be located on a collector or arterial road, as defined by the Rockdale County Department of Transportation, with the minimum lot frontage and direct access to the same collector or arterial road. Places of worship shall be excluded from residential properties located on collector or arterial roads and that are part of a recorded subdivision, defined as the common development of five lots or more, subject to a required preliminary plat pursuant to section 302-23. 
(2)  A place of worship shall register yearly with the department of planning and development prior to establishment in Rockdale County. An annual administrative fee shall be paid to the department of planning and development as set forth by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  A place of worship located in a residentially zoned district shall establish a 50-foot, undisturbed and supplemental planted buffer against all adjoining residentially zoned properties. 
(4)  A place of worship signage in nonresidential zoning districts shall be limited to what is permitted in the sign table in chapter 230. In residential zoning districts, signage shall not exceed 32 square feet in area for each panel of a double-sided sign and shall be attached to a permanent wall or pilaster constructed of brick, stone, wood or textured concrete masonry units not to exceed eight feet in height. In all zoning districts the sign shall be setback at least ten feet from the right-of-way and 15 feet from an intersection right-of-way. External, downward illumination is allowed. No more than 30 percent of the sign area may be composed of a reader board. Electronic reader boards shall be permitted only on properties abutting arterial or collector roads, as defined by the Rockdale County Department of Transportation. No signage shall be permitted for accessory uses. 
(5)  Accessory uses and facilities. The place of worship shall be established and occupied prior to the occupancy of accessory uses. No signage shall be permitted for accessory uses. All accessory uses and facilities require separate permitting by the department. Accessory uses and facilities shall be clearly subordinate to the place of worship and intended primarily to be used by members of the place of worship. 
a.  Not-for-profit accessory uses and facilities that are customarily associated with a place of worship are permitted by right such as a chapel, administrative offices, not-for-profit religious bookstore, religious educational facilities for worshippers (i.e., class rooms for religious education), fellowship hall and related kitchen and dining area, ornamental gardens, or outdoor recreational facilities occupying a total of less than 5,000 square feet. 
b.  Not-for-profit uses and facilities requiring a special use permit. The following additional, not-for-profit uses may be permitted as accessory to a place of worship only upon approval of a special use permit in accordance with section 238-6, and provided that they meet all regulations specific to the proposed use or facility contained in this section and each of the additional standards provided in subsection (6) of this section. 
a.  Outdoor recreation facilities 5,000 square feet or larger. 
b.  Indoor recreation facilities, such as gymnasiums. 
c.  Cemetery or mausoleum. 
1.  Shall comply with section 218-13, Supplemental use standards for cemeteries. 
d.  Non-profit adult day center, child care learning center, group day care home, or pre-kindergarten (Pre-K) owned, maintained and operated by the place of worship primarily for the use of facility members. 
1.  Shall comply with section 218-13, Supplemental use standards for adult day center, child care learning center, group day care home, or pre-kindergarten (Pre-K). 
e.  Private school (K-12), owned, maintained and operated by the place of worship primarily for the use of facility members. 
1.  Shall comply with section 218-13, Supplemental use standards for School K-12, private. 
f.  One dwelling for an employee/caretaker of the place of worship in residential zoning districts. 
(6)  Standards for approval of special use permits for additional uses listed in subsection (5): 
a.  Outdoor activity shall be limited to the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. 
b.  Additional parking shall be required at one space per 1,000 square feet of accessory use. 
c.  The scale, intensity, and operation of the accessory use or facility shall not generate unreasonable noise, traffic congestion, or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous properties. 
d.  No signage shall be allowed to advertise accessory uses requiring a special use permit. 
(7)  For-profit retail and wholesale sales and commercial services shall be prohibited from operating in a place of worship. 
(8)  Monastery or convent. 
a.  When in a residential district, any building or structure established in connection with these uses shall be set back not less than 75 feet from any property line, except where this property line is a street right-of-way line, in which case the front yard setback established for the district shall apply. 
b.  This site shall contain at least ten acres and have frontage on a collector or arterial street of at least 100 feet. 
c.  No parking area shall be established within 25 feet of all property lines in non-residential zoning districts. 
d.  Retail sales of books, gifts and products shall be permitted on-site as an accessory use to a convent or monastery provided at least 25 percent of the gross sales of all items sold result from items produced wholly on-site at the convent or monastery by the residents thereof. 
For the purpose of this section, the term "convent" shall be defined as the building or buildings occupied by a community of nuns bound by vows to a religious life under a superior, and a "monastery" shall be defined as a dwelling place of a community of persons under religious vows, particularly monks. 
(ccc1)  Pre-kindergarten (Pre-K). 
(1)  The use shall comply with all applicable State of Georgia, Bright from the Start, requirements and regulations for operating a Georgia's Pre-K Program, pursuant to the current School Year Pre-K Providers' Operating Guidelines. 
(ddd)  Processing plant and manufacturing facility for hazardous materials. 
(1)  Every use shall be so operated as to minimize the emission into the air of dirt, dust, fly ash or any other solid matter that causes damage to property or harm or discomfort to persons or animals at or beyond the lot line of the property on which the use is located and shall comply with applicable federal and state air quality regulations. 
(2)  The applicant shall be responsible for identifying all applicable federal and state regulations and permitting requirements and shall provide evidence of compliance. 
(3)  Such uses shall not be located adjacent to or across the street from any property used or zoned for single-family residential use. 
(eee)  Quarry. 
(1)  Quarry areas being excavated shall be entirely enclosed within a fence located at least ten feet from the edge of any excavation and of such construction and height as to be demonstrably able to exclude children and animals from the quarry area. 
(2)  The operators and owners of the quarry shall present to the board an acceptable comprehensive plan for the reuse of the property at the cessation of operations. 
(3)  In the case of an existing quarry, an extension of quarry operations beyond the areas being quarried or approved for quarrying at the effective date of the UDO shall be permitted and shall not be considered a new operation, provided that the extension does not extend to within 1,000 feet of a residential or commercial zoning district boundary line, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points of the subject district boundaries. 
(fff)  Recovered materials processing facility (recycling center). 
(1)  Activities shall be limited to collection, sorting, compacting, and shipping. 
(2)  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), provide a three-foot high landscape earthen berm with a maximum slope of 3:1 and/or a minimum six feet high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
(3)  The facility shall not be located adjacent to or across the street from any property used or zoned for residential use. 
(4)  Lighting for such facilities shall be placed so as to direct away from any nearby residential areas. 
(5)  Materials collected shall not be visible and shall be deposited in a bin or bunker. All sorting and collection bins shall either be enclosed and have chutes available to the public or be located inside a fully enclosed building. 
(6)  No outdoor storage of non-containerized materials shall be allowed. 
(ggg)  Recreation center and club, private. 
(1)  Buildings, courts, pools and other structures shall be set back not less than 25 feet from any property line, except when such property line abuts a street right of way. In such case, the front setback of the district shall apply. 
(2)  Swimming pools shall comply with the standards established in this article. 
(3)  Outdoor activity shall cease by 10:00 p.m. 
(hhh)  Recreational and vacation camps, rv parks, and campgrounds. 
(1)  Only accessory services and parking related exclusively to the recreational operations shall be allowed. 
(2)  Total floor area of all buildings shall be a minimum of 2,000 square feet. The building(s) shall be located at least 100 feet from all residentially zoned property. 
(3)  The site shall be at least 20 acres in size. 
(4)  All outdoor activities shall take place at least 100 feet from any property line adjacent to a residential zone or use. 
(5)  Outdoor activity areas shall be sufficiently screened and insulated so as to protect adjacent property from noise and other disturbances. 
(6)  No outdoor storage shall be allowed. 
(7)  No outdoor public address system shall be allowed 
(8)  Outdoor recreation activity adjacent to residentially zoned property shall cease before 8:00 p.m. 
(iii)  Residential mental health and substance abuse facility. 
(jjj)  Rooming and boarding house. If in a residential district or abutting a residential district, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  No more than six occupants, not including owner and owner's family if residing on the premises. 
(2)  Parking must be provided in an enclosed garage or in the rear or side yard. 
(3)  The outer appearance of the building shall be compatible in height, style, front yard, roof type, fenestration and floor area with buildings on the same block. 
(4)  If meals are served on the premises, meals may only be served to residents and owner's family members if present. 
(5)  At least 1,000 feet shall separate a rooming and boarding house from another rooming and boarding house, transitional housing facility or personal care home. 
(kkk)  Salvage operation, junkyard, recyclable material wholesalers. 
(1)  The property shall contain a minimum of five acres. 
(2)  Outdoor storage is to be located no closer than 300 feet to a property zoned for residential use, O-I, CID, OBP, NC, C-1, C-2, or MXD, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points on the property lines of the two subject properties. 
(3)  Outdoor storage is to be completely enclosed with a solid fence of not less than eight feet high and no closer than 15 feet from the right-of-way of any adjoining roadway. In no case shall the fence be less than a height necessary to screen effectively all storage and other operations from view. 
(4)  Outdoor storage is to be located no closer than 100 feet from the right-of-way of any major arterial roadway. 
(5)  Outdoor storage yard shall have a maximum slope of five percent. 
(lll)  School K—12, private. 
(1)  Minimum lot size. 
a.  Elementary school: Five acres, plus one additional acre for each 100 students based on the design capacity of the school. 
b.  Middle school: 12 acres plus one additional acre for each 100 students based on the design capacity of the school. 
c.  High school: 20 acres, plus one additional acre for each 100 students based on the design capacity of the school. 
(2)  Private school in residential zoning district. When located in a residential zoning district, the following additional standards shall apply: 
a.  A 50-foot buffer adjacent to residential zoning is required. 
b.  Driveways and parking areas must set back 25 feet from side property lines. 
c.  The scale, intensity, and operation of the use shall not generate unreasonable noise, traffic congestion, or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous residential properties. 
d.  Accessory uses and facilities. In addition to the accessory uses and facilities that are permitted in section 218-7 for the zoning district in which the private school is located, additional accessory uses and facilities are permitted that are customarily associated with schools and intended primarily for the use of students, such as an auditorium, library, administrative offices, cafeteria and related kitchen and dining area, or outdoor recreational facilities occupying less than 10,000 square feet. No signage shall be allowed for accessory uses. 
(3)  The following additional uses may be permitted as accessory to the private school only upon approval of a special use permit in accordance with section 238-6, and provided that they meet all regulations specific to the proposed use or facility contained in this section 218-13, and that they meet each of the additional standards provided in subsection (lll)(4): 
a.  Outdoor recreation facilities 10,000 square feet or larger. 
b.  Indoor recreation facilities such as gymnasiums, health, and fitness facilities. 
c.  Recreation center and club. 
d.  Health and social services; including counseling, outpatient clinics, and the like. 
e.  One dwelling for an employee of the private school. 
(4)  Standards for approval of special use permits for additional uses listed in subsection (lll)(3): 
a.  Outdoor activity shall be limited to the hours of 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., unless a temporary use permit is obtained from the director. 
b.  The scale, intensity, and operation of the accessory use or facility shall not generate unreasonable noise, traffic congestion, or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous residential properties. 
c.  No signage shall be allowed for any accessory or special use. 
(5)  Retail and commercial sales uses shall be prohibited in a residential zoning district. 
(mmm)  School, private residential. A private school or similar institution may include residential facilities and accessory kitchen, dining, and recreational facilities, provided it is granted a conditional use permit and meets the following standards: 
(1)  The site contains at least ten acres. 
(2)  Residential facilities, dormitories, kitchens, dining halls, and recreation facilities constructed on the premises shall be subordinate and accessory to the principal use of the property as a private school and used exclusively by students, faculty, and staff of the school. 
(3)  Residential facilities, dormitories, kitchens, and dining halls occupied for more than 120 days per year shall be permanently constructed facilities meeting provisions of the UDO and the applicable county and state public health and building codes. 
(4)  No parking lots or outdoor lights shall be closer than 100 feet from residences on adjacent property. 
(5)  Provide a 50-feet undisturbed buffer adjacent to residential zoning districts. 
(6)  Recreational facilities shall be located at least 100 feet from property lines of adjacent residential properties. 
(nnn)  Solid waste transfer station/materials recovery facilities. 
(1)  A survey, demonstrating compliance with all standards in this section and sealed by registered surveyor, and site plan are required. 
(2)  Minimum acreage of site: Five acres. 
(3)  Maximum acreage of site: Ten acres. 
(4)  The property shall be located at least 500 feet, measured from nearest property line to nearest property line, from residential zoning districts, nonconforming residential dwellings in nonresidential zoning districts, private or public wells, lakes, medical facilities, childcare facilities, schools or churches. 
(5)  A minimum 100-foot-wide landscaped buffer, to include evergreen species and meeting all other requirements of this chapter, with access only allowed in the buffer, shall be maintained along all property lines including property lines abutting a public street. 
(6)  All facilities shall be enclosed with a solid security fence at least eight feet in height parallel to all property lines and placed on the interior side of the required landscape buffer. A sight line study shall be submitted to county staff for approval. 
(7)  Processing, equipment, materials and waste shall be strictly confined to the interior of the transfer station building. 
(8)  Solid waste shall not be allowed to be stored on the tipping floor in the transfer station building overnight. Vehicles containing waste materials shall not be allowed to remain on-site overnight. 
(9)  All runoff from wash water and stormwater shall be discharged to an on-site wastewater treatment system approved by the county. All paved areas shall drain into the on-site wastewater treatment system. 
(10)  Solid residues from sewerage or other materials treatment processes shall be excluded from transfer station facilities. 
(11)  Dust, odors and similar conditions, rodents, insects, and other such pests shall be controlled in accordance with federal, state and county health codes. All necessary action shall be taken to mitigate such conditions at transfer station facilities. These conditions shall not be detectable at the boundary of the property without the aid of instruments. 
(12)  All parking and queuing of vehicles shall be paved and provided on-site. In addition to the parking requirements of this chapter, a minimum of five spaces for queuing of vehicles containing waste materials shall be provided. No parking or queuing shall be allowed in any buffer area or on a public street. 
(13)  Vehicular access shall not be through any residential subdivision or development. Routes and entrances shall be approved by the director of the department of public services and engineering to ensure that access is derived from paved streets, that such streets will withstand anticipated maximum load limits, and that all safety issues are satisfactorily addressed. 
(14)  All vehicles containing waste materials shall enter and leave the facility in a covered condition as required in subsection m above. 
(15)  Establish operating hours of 5:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and 7:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturday, to reduce the nuisance produced by the operation. 
(16)  The operation of transfer station facilities will comply with any and all current and updated applicable federal, state and local laws regarding the processing and disposal of solid waste. 
(17)  All permits are required to be in force and active from the state environmental protection division prior to permitting of the facility. Permit or certificate of approval from the state environmental protection division is to be provided to the department of public services and engineering on an annual basis at the time of business licensing renewal. 
(ooo)  Sports teams and clubs. 
(1)  All athletic fields shall have access to collector or arterial street. 
(2)  No amplified outdoor sound system speaker may be located closer than 200 feet from the nearest residence, measured along a straight line connecting the source with the nearest point of the nearest residential structure. 
(ppp)  Storage tank, bulk, flammable liquids. 
(1)  No above-ground storage facilities may be located on the same lot as an automobile service station or closer than 500 feet from any residentially zoned property or school. 
(2)  No tank or other structure used for storage of flammable or toxic liquids shall be closer than 100 feet from a property line. 
(3)  A fire prevention, evacuation and safety plan must be approved by the Rockdale County Fire Department. 
(4)  A spill containment and noise and air pollution abatement plan must be approved by the department. 
(qqq)  Storm shelter. Storm shelters are permissible as accessory uses and structures, where permitted, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  If any portion of the structure extends above the ground, that portion above the ground must comply with the minimum setback and lot coverage regulations of the district in which it is located, and the site plan for such shelter must be approved by the director. 
(2)  If the structure is completely underground, it shall comply with yard requirements of an accessory use, and the impervious surface limits or building coverage limits in chapter 206 shall not apply to an underground storm shelter which has no impervious surface extending closer than two feet below natural grade. 
(3)  A storm shelter, underground or above ground, shall be confined to a side or rear yard and shall not be located in the front yard between the main building and the street on which it fronts. 
(4)  Storm shelters may be contained in other structures or may be constructed separately. 
(rrr)  Swimming pool, home. Swimming pools accessory to residences shall be enclosed by a security fence of a minimum height of four feet with a gate containing a self-closing positive latch device to insure that the pool is enclosed at all times. Health department approval shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit. The fence and gate shall be installed prior to filling the pool with water. 
(sss)  Swimming pool, nonresidential. Any constructed or prefabricated pool used other than in conjunction with a private residence requires health department approval. Public pools shall be enclosed by a fence of a minimum height of four feet with all gates containing a self-closing positive latch device to insure the pool is enclosed at all times. 
(ttt)  Temporary building. 
(1)  A temporary building shall be any small building, not to exceed the size of a large house trailer (20 feet by 50 feet), or any portable, movable or mobile building or trailer, which is placed on a construction site within the unincorporated areas of the county; or any building as used for a sales office for real estate brokers and agents properly authorized to do business within the county; or any building as used as an office for the contractor who is properly authorized to do business within the county; or any other properly licensed agents within the county. 
(2)  A temporary building may be located on a particular site during the construction of houses, factories, stores and the like as provided in this section: 
a.  A permit for the construction or location of a temporary building to be used as a real estate sales office or construction office may be issued by the department only after verification of proper zoning and approval of the construction site plans. 
b.  The permit, when issued, shall expire one year from the date of issuance or immediately upon the completion of the construction concerned or if a subdivision, when the last house is sold, if before the one-year limit. 
c.  An extension may be granted to the holder of a permit by the board of commissioners upon request, and may be granted for any length of time so approved, not to exceed a period of six months; and the fee may be prorated on a per-month basis if so deemed by the board of commissioners. 
d.  Cost of the permit shall be as established by the board of commissioners. 
e.  Any violation of this section shall constitute grounds for the refusal of the county to issue any building permit requested by the violator. 
(uuu)  Temporary use, commercial retail. Commercial structures of a seasonal or temporary nature including, but not limited to food stands, vendors or similar uses are permitted only in those commercial districts allowing similar uses on a permanent basis. Such structures shall meet appropriate county building codes, and if connected to utility systems, shall obtain necessary permits. A commercial retail temporary use shall require a permit issued by the department for a duration not to exceed 90 days with a single three-day extension if approved by the director. 
(vvv)  Townhouse. No more than six or fewer than three continuous townhouses shall be connected in a row within the same building. 
(www)  Transitional housing facility. If in an RM district abutting a residential district or authorized by special use permit for a place of worship in a residential district, the following standards shall apply. 
(1)  No more than six residents, not including owner and owner's family if residing on the premises. 
(2)  Parking must be provided in an enclosed garage or in the rear or side yard. 
(3)  The outer appearance of the building shall be compatible in height, style, front setback, roof type, fenestration and floor area with buildings on the same block. 
(4)  If meals are served on the premises, meals may only be served to residents and owner's family members, if present. 
(5)  Services shall not be provided on an "out-patient basis" to persons who are not regular residents of the facility, as described in subsection (1) of this subsection. 
(6)  At least 1,000 feet shall separate a transitional housing facility from another transitional housing facility, rooming and boarding house or personal care home. 
(xxx)  Timber harvesting. See section 328-37. 
(yyy)  Utility structures and buildings. Utility structures and buildings, including electric power generating units and natural gas substations, telephone exchanges, and similar structures must be fenced and properly screened with a six-foot high planted buffer as approved by the department. 
(zzz)  Veterinary services. 
(1)  Any structure used as an animal hospital or veterinary clinic shall be located and its activities conducted at least 50 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points of the subject properties. 
(2)  Medical treatment or care shall be practiced only within an enclosed building or structure. 
(3)  Kennel or boarding operations incidental to the principal use shall be permitted only within an enclosed building or structure located at least 100 feet from any property zoned or used for residential purposes, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points of the subject properties. 
(4)  The building or structure shall be designed to prevent the adverse impact of noise and/or odor from the animals on adjoining properties. 
(aaaa)  Wood product manufacturing (including sawmills and planing mills). 
(1)  The mill and any storage areas must be located at least 200 feet from any property line and 100 feet from any right-of-way line. 
(2)  The saw mill must be at least 500 feet from the nearest residential use on an adjacent property, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points of the subject properties. 
(3)  A portable sawmill may be permitted for up to six months if used solely to process timber removed from the parcel on which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 10, 11, 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 0-2007-23, § 7, 10-9-2007; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, §§ 6, 7, 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 2008-11, § 6, 9-23-2008; Ord. No. 0-2010-09, § 3, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 14, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 0-2012-19, §§ III, IV, 12-11-2012; Ord. No. 0-2013-03, §§ IV—VII, 4-23-2013; Ord. No. 0-2013-10, § II, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 0-2013-13, § 3, 11-12-2013; Ord. No. 0-2014-13, §§ 3, 5—7, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 0-2015-02, §§ II, III, 2-10-2015; Ord. No. 0-2015-07, §§ VIII—XI, 10-13-2015; Ord. No. 0-2015-13, § VII, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-01, § II, 2-14-2017; Ord. No. 0-2017-17, § III, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 0-2017-18, § II, 7-18-2017; Ord. No. 0-2017-22, § II, 9-19-2017; Ord. No. 0-2017-24, § II, 9-19-2017) 
Secs. 218-14—218-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES 

Sec. 218-20. - General. 
(a)  Title. This article shall be known and may be referred to as the "Rockdale County Telecommunications Ordinance." 
(b)  Authority. This article is enacted pursuant to Rockdale County's exclusive zoning and planning authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to article 9, section 2, paragraph 4, and article 9, section 2, paragraph 3, as well as authority granted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to O.C.G.A. § 36-70-3, as well as the general police powers of Rockdale County and other authority provided by federal, state and local laws applicable hereto. 
(c)  Findings, purpose, and intent. Rockdale County finds that the number, height, design, characteristics and location of telecommunications towers and antennas in the county directly affect the public health, safety and general welfare. The county finds that such structures have substantially increased in number in the county, and are likely to continue to do so in the future. The county further finds that such structures, when inappropriately located, have the potential to pose a danger to surrounding property owners and the general public, and substantially detract from the beauty and appearance of the county. The county finds that there is substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address those concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. These regulations are designed and intended to balance the interests of residents of Rockdale County, telecommunication providers and telecommunication customers in the siting of telecommunication facilities in Rockdale County so as to protect the public health, safety and welfare and the integrity and character of residential neighborhoods and to foster, through appropriate land use controls, a competitive environment for telecommunication carriers without prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services or unreasonably discriminating among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services. The purpose and intent of the governing authority of Rockdale County in enacting this article are as follows: 
(1)  Avoid locating telecommunication facilities in residential areas whenever possible. 
(2)  Encourage the location of towers in appropriate nonresidential areas. 
(3)  Protect Rockdale County's built and natural environment by promoting compatible location and design standards for telecommunication facilities. 
(4)  Encourage placement of telecommunication facilities in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal. 
(5)  Maximize the co-location of services on new and existing towers so as to minimize the need for new towers and reduce the total number of towers. 
(6)  Encourage use of alternate telecommunication technologies as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers. 
(7)  Minimize adverse visual effects of telecommunication facilities through careful design, siting, screening, and utilization of innovative technology. 
(8)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties and personal injury from tower failure and falling ice and debris through engineering, careful siting of telecommunication structures, and other requirements. 
(9)  Ensure compliance with applicable federal statutes and regulations, including the Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended. 
(10)  Lessen traffic impacts on surrounding residential areas. 
(11)  Further the implementation of the county's comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 218-21. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  Compliance required. Except as specified in this subsection, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, install, construct, enlarge, move, alter or convert any telecommunications tower or antenna or cause the same to be done within Rockdale County except in accordance with the provisions of this article IV. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, all towers and antennas shall also comply with all development regulations applicable to the district in which said tower or antenna is located. 
(b)  Height limitations. Height limitations applicable to buildings and structures set forth elsewhere in chapter 214 of the UDO shall not apply to towers and antennas which are subject to this section. 
(c)  Public property. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be exempt from the requirements of this article, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the governing authority in accordance with the governing authority's telecommunications leasing policy. 
(d)  Pre-existing towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued and lawfully continues in effect prior to the effective date of this article shall not be required to meet the requirements of this ordinance, other than the requirements of subsections 218-23(b) through (f) inclusive. 
(e)  Amateur radio equipment. This article shall not govern receiving or transmitting equipment owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator provided that the total height of the antenna and its associated tower or other supporting device shall not exceed 100 feet. Additional height may be authorized by the board of adjustment in compliance with chapter 238 of the Rockdale County UDO. 
(f)  Receive-only equipment. This article shall not govern "receive-only" antennas or satellite dishes provided the total height of the antenna or dish and its associated tower or other supporting device shall not exceed 100 feet. Additional height may be authorized by the board of adjustment in compliance with chapter 238 of the Rockdale County UDO. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 218-22. - Application requirements and standards. 
(a)  All telecommunication antennas and towers shall require a permit issued pursuant to the requirements of this article. Prior to review and decision regarding a requested permit, a complete application shall be filed with the department of public services and engineering. Said application shall provide all of the following information and documentation and meet each of the standards set forth below. No application shall be deemed complete and filed until all of the following information has been provided. 
(b)  A survey drawing or plat of the entire tract, sealed by a surveyor registered in the State of Georgia, showing the location of all lot lines, leased areas, easements, access points, structures, screening and landscaping existing on site, and including a metes and bounds legal description of the entire tract. 
(c)  A site plan, prepared and sealed by an appropriate licensed professional, to scale, specifying the location and all dimensions of the telecommunications facilities, as well as all other improvements, height of facilities, topography using two-foot contours, setbacks, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, drives, parking, fences, landscape plan, and all land uses within 500 feet of the exterior boundary of the leased area or proposed tower site. 
(d)  Scaled elevations showing the impact of the proposed telecommunications facility. If the proposal is for a tower, the applicant shall also arrange a balloon test with department of public services and engineering staff, to be conducted at a date and time coordinated by staff, physically demonstrating the actual height and location of the proposed tower. 
(e)  A full description, including photographic exhibits, of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including all residential structures and zoning districts within 500 feet of the exterior boundary of the leased area or proposed telecommunications facility site, existing tree coverage and general topography within said distance, and any districts, structures or sites of historic significance. 
(f)  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise, or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
(g)  A report from a qualified engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting each of the following: 
(1)  Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and all other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design and demonstrating that the proposed facility would provide the required coverage or capacity; 
(2)  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
(3)  Evidence of structural integrity of the telecommunications facility; and 
(4)  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris should a failure occur. 
(h)  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility, including name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, electronic mail address and pager number. 
(i)  Identification of the geographic service area to be served by the subject installation, including accurately scaled color radio frequency (RF) plotted maps showing the applicant's existing network including the proposed site as well as the nearest or associated telecommunications facility site within the network, proposed coverage, and the existing network overlaid with plots of all potential co-location sites and containing sufficient engineering data to show that said sites would not be feasible to fill significant, required service gaps. 
(j)  A site inventory and five-year facilities plan including the following: 
(1)  An inventory of all the applicant's existing and proposed telecommunications facility sites within Rockdale County and within one-half mile of the border thereof, and a map showing each of these sites. If no such sites are located within one-half mile of the border, the applicant's inventory shall include the applicant's nearest facility in each adjoining jurisdiction. The list must include (1) street address, land lot, section, district, and parcel number; (2) zoning district; (3) type of building or structure and number of stories or height; (4) the number of towers, antennas and base transceiver stations per site, the location and type of antenna installation, and the location of the base transceiver station installation(s); (5) the telecommunications facility height and (6) the radio frequency range of megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and effective radiated power. 
(2)  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list the land lots contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
(k)  Applicants for towers must identify all existing towers, and major structures potentially capable of supporting telecommunication equipment, and all towers for which there are applications currently on file with the department of public services and engineering which are located within the applicant's search area. This shall include a description of the distance and location of all such tower and structure sites, both within and outside the applicant's network. Evidence shall be submitted which demonstrates that no existing or pending tower or major structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna and shall consist of analysis of the following: 
(1)  No such towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements; 
(2)  Such towers or structures are not of sufficient telecommunications facility height to meet applicant's engineering requirements and cannot be adequately modified; 
(3)  Such towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment and can not be adequately modified; 
(4)  Such towers, structures and existing tower sites lack space to locate the proposed antenna or to construct a tower for the proposed antenna; 
(5)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on such towers or structures, or the antenna on such towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; and 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other factors that render such towers and structures unusable. 
(7)  If the evidence demonstrates co-location is feasible and if co-location on any such towers or structure would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicant shall justify why such co-location is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower or structure would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. Requests by the applicant to co-locate on existing towers and structures shall be in writing and said written requests as well as written denials of same are required and shall be included in the application materials. The county will review with special care justifications that rely upon undue expense and/or difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The county shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site and on the surrounding area. 
(l)  If the proposed site is zoned A-R, R-1, R-2, CRS, CSD, MUR, RM, MxD or W-P, applicants for towers shall provide evidence as to why alternate sites in the CID, NC, C-I, C-2, O-I, OBP, M-1 or M-2 zoning districts have not been proposed. If requests by the applicant to utilize said alternate sites have been denied, said denials shall be in writing and included in the application materials. The county will review with special care justifications that rely upon undue expense and/or difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The county shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a tower's negative impacts at the proposed site and on the surrounding area. 
(m)  In all zoning districts, applicants shall provide evidence demonstrating that they cannot provide adequate personal wireless communication service consistent with the requirements of their federal license without the use of a telecommunications facility at the specific location requested. 
(n)  The applicant for a tower shall provide evidence establishing that the proposed tower constitutes the least intrusive means necessary to close significant service gaps or otherwise provide coverage mandated by the terms of their federal license. Statements shall be provided demonstrating that all alternatives have been investigated by the applicant, including alternative tower design, alternative technology, multiple smaller sized, less-intrusive towers, alternative locations, co-location opportunities for placement upon existing structures or buildings, and similar alternatives. 
(o)  The applicant shall provide any other evidence necessary to establish compliance with each of the criteria set forth in this article IV. 
(p)  The applicant shall provide any other information requested by the department needed to fully evaluate the potential impact of the proposed facility in accordance with the criteria set forth in this article IV. 
(q)  In order to cover the actual cost to Rockdale County of reviewing these applications and obtaining expert opinion and studies, the following fees are hereby established. For those telecommunications facility applications requiring administrative approval, a fee of $500.00 shall be paid at the time of application. For telecommunication facility applications requiring a special use permit, a fee of $1,000.00 shall be paid at the time of application. If the actual cost to Rockdale County is greater than this fee, the applicant shall be billed for the difference and payment shall be made prior to the hearing before the board. In no case shall the maximum total charge exceed $3,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 218-23. - Requirements for all telecommunications facilities. 
The following requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities: 
(a)  Multiple uses. The presence of existing uses or structures on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot provided said installation is otherwise in accordance with this article IV. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but not limited to set-back requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. 
(b)  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of such a facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable Rockdale County and state building and safety codes for telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. Towers shall be located in a manner such that all ice-fall or debris from the tower or alternative tower structure or guy wires will not fall outside the parcel under the ownership or control of the applicant and on which the tower is located. 
(c)  Regulatory compliance. All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed, to the extent required by any such regulations, then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this article shall bring such telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 
(d)  Security. All telecommunications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device(s) to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. All towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height. 
(e)  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction. If lighting is required, it shall be to the minimum applicable standard and shall be shielded and/or designed so as to minimize disturbance to surrounding areas. 
(f)  Advertising. No signs shall be permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required to be posted by the FCC or FAA. Antennas added to existing structures containing signs shall not be construed as violations of this provision. 
(g)  Visual impact. 
(1)  Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(3)  Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated into horizontal or vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
(4)  The design of the buildings and related structures at a telecommunications facility site shall, to the maximum extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the telecommunication facilities to the existing natural setting and built environment. 
(5)  Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be either below grade or screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(h)  Landscaping. 
(1)  Landscaping shall be provided that effectively screens the view of the equipment shelters or cabinets from adjacent uses to a planted height of at least six feet and in a manner that effectively reduces visual obtrusiveness of the site. The standard buffer shall consist of a landscape strip at least ten feet wide outside the required fence. All landscaping shall be reviewed and approved by the county arborist for compliance with all county landscaping and tree regulations prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy (CO). If there is no county arborist, then the director shall designate the appropriate person to review said regulations. All landscaping shall be maintained for the duration of the facility. 
(2)  Existing trees and vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest extent possible. The applicant shall provide a landscaping plan showing existing trees and vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost, in order to meet the requirements of this section. 
(3)  In locations where the strict application of this landscaping requirement would not result in the minimization of visual impact, as determined by the department, the department may modify or waive this requirement in a manner that is at least equally protective of the visual impact of the tower on adjacent and surrounding properties. 
(i)  Accessory uses. Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed but not used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
(j)  Set backs. Telecommunications towers and antennas shall be set back a distance equal to the total height of the tower from any adjacent property line and all public rights-of-way, measured radially from the base of the tower. In addition, all telecommunication facilities, including towers, guy wires and accessory facilities, shall meet the set back and other development standards specified for the applicable zoning district. 
(k)  Site integration. Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses. Towers and alternative tower structures shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site. 
(l)  Multiple towers. Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all set back, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. The clustering of new towers on the same parcel near existing telecommunications facilities is encouraged in situations in which the other requirements of this article IV are met. 
(m)  Historic areas. Telecommunications facilities shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic properties or scenic view corridors identified by the governing authority or any state or federal law or agency. 
(n)  Co-location design. Any tower proposed for a height of between 80 and 100 feet shall be designed and intended to accommodate two users. Any tower proposed at a height greater than 100 feet and up to 150 feet shall be designed and intended to accommodate at least three users. Any tower proposed for a height of over 150 feet shall be designed and intended to accommodate at least four users. 
(o)  Removal requirements. Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the governing authority notifying the owner of such abandonment. 
(p)  Conditions. In granting administrative or special use permit authorization pursuant to this article IV, conditions may be imposed to minimize or ameliorate any negative impacts or effects of the proposed telecommunications facility on adjacent properties. 
(q)  Annual reports. The owners of all telecommunications facilities operated within Rockdale County shall file an annual report with the Rockdale County Tax Assessor's Office. Said report shall be filed on or before the 31st day of December each year, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Certification that the telecommunications facility is currently in use, and if not in use, the date the telecommunications facility ceased being in use. 
(2)  A report from a licensed professional engineer or other qualified industry expert that the facility structure meets or exceeds all relevant federal or state requirements. 
(3)  A report by a radio frequency engineer or other appropriate industry expert that the facility is in compliance with current FCC radio emission standards as well as the terms of their federal license. 
(4)  An updated, current inventory of the owner's existing telecommunication facility sites within Rockdale County. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 218-24. - District regulations. 
Telecommunications facilities shall be specifically permitted only by administrative approval or by special use permit approval as follows. In addition to the following requirements, all such uses shall comply with the application standards and requirements of section 218-22 and the general standards and requirements of section 218-23 as well as all other applicable county ordinances. 
(a)  Uses permitted administratively. The following telecommunication facilities may be approved administratively by the director following administrative review. 
(1)  In commercial zoning districts C-1 and C-2, locating a tower up to a telecommunications facility height of 35 feet, or 50 feet if designed and intended to accommodate at least two users, including the placement of accompanying antennas and supporting equipment used in connection with the tower or antennas. 
(2)  In industrial zoning districts M-1 and M-2, locating a tower up to a telecommunications facility height of 50 feet, or 100 feet if designed and intended to accommodate at least two users, including the placement of accompanying antennae and supporting equipment used in connection with the tower or antenna. 
(3)  Installing an antenna, including microcells and similar arrays, on an existing structure other than a tower, such as a non-residential building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other free-standing non-residential structure, in any district zoned C-1, C-2, O-I, OBP, M-1 or M-2 so long as said additional antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the telecommunication facility height of said existing structure. For antennas attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ratio (example: ten feet high antenna and supporting structures requires a ten-foot setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement: (i) is shown to reduce the visual impact from surrounding areas; or (ii) is necessary to achieve the antenna's telecommunication purpose and is shown to equal or reduce the visual impact from surrounding areas. 
(4)  Alterations to existing telecommunications towers, alternative tower structure, or antennas, including addition of additional antennas, provided that such alteration does not result in an increase in the existing telecommunications tower or antenna height by more than 20 feet. The director may relax or eliminate the application requirements set forth in section 218-22 for alteration applications if the director determines that said application requirements are not necessary to effectively evaluate the alteration application. 
(5)  Administrative approval for subsection (a)(1) through (4) above shall be granted only upon a finding by the director that (a) compliance with sections 218-22 and 218-23 and all other requirements of county codes, has been fully established; and (b) the proposal is compatible with the land uses surrounding the site and will not create a demonstrated negative impact to any residential areas from which said proposal can be viewed. 
(b)  Uses permitted by special use permit. A special use permit shall be required for all telecommunications facilities not authorized administratively in subsection (a) above. Said telecommunication facilities may be erected, installed, constructed, enlarged, moved, or converted only following approval of a special use permit by the board subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Compliance with section 238-6. The granting of a special use permit for a telecommunications tower or antenna shall be subject to all provisions of section 238-6 of the Rockdale County UDO except: 
a.  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 238-6, special use permits for telecommunication towers and antennas shall not expire, but shall continue indefinitely or for such time as is established by the board in a particular case. 
b.  The procedures referenced in section 238-6 shall be modified so as to allow an additional 30-day time period following receipt of a complete application and prior to the 60-day submission for advertisement, so as to allow additional time to secure independent analysis of submitted data and adequately review all application materials. 
(2)  Compliance with other standards. All proposed telecommunication facilities shall comply with the application standards and requirements of section 218-22 and the general standards and requirements of section 218-23 as well as all other applicable county ordinances. 
(3)  Residential districts not favored. No tower permit shall be granted for any site zoned A-R, R-1, R-2, CRS, CSD, MUR, RM, MxD or W-P unless the evidence establishes that it is not possible to locate said tower in a non-residential district and close significant service gaps or otherwise provide personal wireless communication service mandated by the terms of the applicant's federal telecommunications license. 
(4)  Co-location. No tower permit shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(5)  Least intrusive means required. No tower permit shall be granted unless the evidence establishes that the proposed tower's location and design constitute the least intrusive means necessary to close significant service gaps or otherwise provide personal wireless communication service mandated by the terms of the applicant's federal telecommunications license. 
(c)  Factors considered in granting special use permits. In addition to requiring compliance with subsection (b)(1) through (5) above, the governing authority shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special use permit, as well as those factors set forth in section 238-6 of the Rockdale County UDO. No special use permit shall be granted unless the governing authority determines that the proposed telecommunications facility is compatible with the surrounding land uses as determined by application of the following factors to the specific application: 
(1)  The proposed telecommunications facility height and the height of adjacent or nearby structures and/or tree coverage. 
(2)  Proximity of the telecommunications facility to residential structures and residential district boundaries and the degree of visual intrusiveness of the proposed tower or facility from said residential areas. 
(3)  Nature of uses of adjacent and nearby properties. 
(4)  Surrounding topography, particularly with regard to the ability to screen or fail to screen proposed telecommunications facilities. 
(5)  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage, particularly with regard to the ability to screen or fail to screen proposed telecommunications facilities. 
(6)  Design of the telecommunications facility, with particular reference to design characteristics and/or alternative tower structures that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness. 
(7)  Proposed ingress and egress. 
(8)  The extent to which compliance with subsections 218-22(k) and 218-22(l) has been demonstrated for the particular location selected by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 12, 5-22-2007) 
Sec. 218-25. - Decisions. 
All final decisions made pursuant to this chapter with regard to the issuance or denial of special use permits or administratively approved permits for telecommunications towers and antennas shall be in writing and a written record shall be maintained by the director of the department or by the commissioners as applicable. Such decisions shall be made within a reasonable time from the date completed application is duly filed with the department. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 218-26. - Conflicts. 
If any conflicts occur between the terms of this article and the terms of any other section or ordinance of the Rockdale County Code, the provision imposing the more restrictive standard shall prevail. If said conflicting provisions are equally restrictive, the provisions of this article IV shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Chapter 222 - OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS 

Sec. 222-1. - General requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. Automobile parking space shall be provided for every permitted and conditional use established in accordance with this UDO. 
(b)  Time of completion. Parking and loading areas shall be completed, landscaped and ready for use prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Application for additions and renovations. 
(1)  Additions or renovations to a building or use, other than an addition to an existing residential dwelling unit that does not increase the number of families or household units, that increases its gross floor area by 500 or more square feet shall provide additional parking and loading space commensurate with the addition. 
(2)  When an addition or renovation of an existing building or use increases the gross floor space of a building or use by more than 50 percent, the entire building or use shall meet parking and loading requirements of this UDO, unless an administrative variance is granted in accordance with chapter 238. 
(3)  No addition to an existing building shall reduce the number of spaces or usability of an existing parking or loading area unless it conforms to this UDO. 
(e)  Prohibited uses. 
(1)  No parking areas may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing or long-term storage of any vehicles or equipment, unless permitted by the zoning district in which the area is located. 
(2)  Inoperable vehicles may not be parked in required parking spaces or in any side or front yard, and shall be completely screened from view from all surrounding public streets by a fence or wall as provided in section 328-7. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 222-2. - Parking space requirements. 
(a)  Minimum parking space requirements. The minimum number of parking spaces shall be determined from the table of minimum parking requirements, unless the development qualifies for a reduction in minimum parking requirements as provided in section 222-3. 
(b)  Maximum parking requirements. 
(1)  Maximum parking requirements are established in order to promote efficient use of land, enhance urban form, encourage alternate modes of transportation, provide for better pedestrian movement, reduce the amount of impervious surface and protect air and water quality. 
(2)  The maximum number of parking spaces allowed is 125 percent of the number shown in the table of minimum parking requirements in this section 222-2. 
(3)  For any surface parking lot that provides more than the minimum required number of spaces, the number of parking spaces that are in excess of the minimum shall be placed on pervious paving surfaces approved by the director. Recommended pervious paving materials include those described in Volume 2 - Technical Handbook of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (First Edition, August 2001) as the porous concrete or modular porous paver systems under the limited application stormwater structural controls. 
Table of Minimum Parking Requirements 

 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 222-3. - Reduction in minimum parking requirements. 
(a)  Shared parking may be permitted by the director if the applicant satisfactorily demonstrates that the actual peak parking requirements of the proposed development or use can be satisfied with a lesser number of parking spaces through sharing adjacent parking for two or more proximate uses because peak demand periods for proposed land uses do not occur at the same time periods. 
(b)  Developers requesting reductions based on shared parking shall submit the following to the director for review at the time of submitting a preliminary plat or site development plan for the project: 
(1)  Site plan indicating the location of uses proposing to share parking requirements and design of shared parking facilities. 
(2)  Names and addresses of the owner(s) and uses that share parking. 
(3)  Location and number of parking shared spaces. 
(4)  If there is more than one owner, submit a cross-access legal agreement between owners to assure the continued availability of adequate parking. 
(5)  A shared parking analysis that shall follow the procedures detailed in the paragraph below. 
(c)  The procedures for determining parking requirements in a mixed use development are: 
(1)  Determine the minimum amount of parking required for each separate use described in the table of minimum parking requirements. 
(2)  Multiply the parking requirement for each use by the corresponding percentage for each of the time periods in the table of parking ratios by use and time of day for mixed-use developments. 
(3)  Sum the total parking requirements for all uses for each of the five time periods in the table of parking ratios by use and time of day for mixed-use developments. 
(4)  The parking requirement for the time period having the largest required total number of parking spaces based on use of table of parking ratios by use and time of day for mixed-use developments shall be the minimum required number of parking spaces for the mixed-use development. 
Table of Parking Ratios by Use and Time of Day for Mixed-use Developments 

 
(d)  Any subsequent change in land uses within the participating developments shall require proof that adequate parking will be available. Prior to any change in ownership or use, the owner must apply to the director for an evaluation and confirmation of the reduction. If the director finds that the parking reduction is no longer justified, the director shall notify the owner to construct the number of parking spaces necessary to meet the required level. 
(e)  On-street parking. Up to 50 percent of the on-street parking spaces available within 600 feet of a use may be counted towards the minimum off-street parking requirements, provided that the same parking space cannot be used to contribute to the off-street parking requirements of by more than one parcel. No more than 25 percent of the number of required off-street parking spaces may be provided by on-street parking. 
(f)  Administrative variance. The director shall have the authority to grant a reduction in the total number of off-street parking spaces by up to 20 percent of the number required by the table of minimum parking requirements through administrative variance. Such administrative variance requires review and approval of the applicant's written documentation and justification that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Because of unique circumstances including the shape, topography, soils and vegetation of the site, the provision of the minimum number of required spaces would cause the applicant to suffer unique and undue hardship. 
(2)  The site is located in an environmentally sensitive area, such as a water supply watershed, where stormwater runoff should be minimized. 
(3)  The unique circumstances of the use make the minimum number of parking spaces excessive for actual needs. 
(g)  Landscaped reserve. Where it can be demonstrated that a use or establishment will temporarily need a lesser number of parking spaces than is required (such as phased occupancy of large new facilities or eventual succession of a new use), the number of such spaces required may be reduced by not more than 50 percent, subject to the site plan approval, provided that the following requirements are met: 
(1)  The applicant shall submit documentary evidence to the planning and development director that the use will temporarily justify a lesser number of spaces for a period of time not less than one year. 
(2)  A reserve area provided shall be sufficient to accommodate the difference between the spaces required and the lesser number provided. Said reserve area shall: 
a.  Be inclusive of all associated parking spaces, drive aisles, access routes, transition slopes, and infrastructure. 
b.  Not encroach upon or directly drain to any water body, wetland, undisturbed buffer, impervious setback, floodplain, or other environmentally sensitive area. 
(3)  Said reserved area shall be maintained exclusively as landscaped area and shall be clearly indicated as "Reserve Parking Area" on the site plan. 
(4)  The landscaping may either consist of existing natural vegetation or be developed as a new landscaped area, whichever is granted site plan approval. 
(5)  No structure, mechanical equipment, material stockpile, or trash may be placed in the landscaped reserve; and no parking shall be allowed within the landscaped reserve until developed as a parking lot. 
(6)  Said reserve area shall not be counted toward the minimum open space required by lot coverage provisions of this section. 
(7)  When in the opinion of the planning director additional parking is required, said reserve area may be required to be developed as a parking lot. 
(8)  A separate land disturbance permit shall be required for any modification to the reserve area regarding its location, size, use, configuration, or impervious coverage. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2016-14, § 1, 9-27-2016) 
Sec. 222-4. - Parking structures. 
Parking structures are allowed as an accessory use in the RM, CID, O-I, NC, C-1, C-2, MUR, MxD, OBP, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 222-5. - Handicap-accessible parking. 
(a)  Off-street parking for persons with disabilities is to be provided as required by the federal Americans with Disabilities Act and the Georgia Accessibility Code for all multifamily and non-residential uses. 
Table of Minimum Number of Handicap-Accessible Parking Spaces Required 

 
(b)  Handicap-accessible parking spaces shall be counted as part of the total number of parking spaces required in section 222-2 of the UDO. 
(c)  The number of required handicap-accessible parking spaces is shown in table of minimum number of handicap-accessible parking spaces required in section 222-5. 
(d)  One of every eight handicap-accessible spces, but not less than one per parking lot that provides handicap-accessible spaces, shall be designed to be "van accessible" in accordance with the ADA Accessiblity Guidelines. See subsection 222-7(b)(4) for design of "van-accessible" spaces. 
(e)  The number of parking spaces required for persons with disabilities is not subject to variance and may not be reduced in number to below the minimum number required by the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities, as Amended. 
(f)  Design of handicapped spaces shall be as required in subsection 222-7(b)(3). 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 222-6. - Bicycle parking. 
(a)  Bicycle parking spaces (racks or lockers) must be provided for any use that is required to provide more than 100 parking spaces. At least one bicycle parking space must be provided for each 50 parking spaces. 
(b)  Required bicycle parking spaces shall be no more than 100 feet from the main entrance of the principal building or use on a parcel. 
(c)  Bicycle racks or lockers shall be permanently and securely attached to the ground. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 222-7. - Construction and dimensional requirements of parking areas. 
(a)  Layout. 
(1)  Off-street parking areas shall be laid out, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following requirements (except for single- and two-family residential uses): 
a.  All parking areas shall have access to a public street and shall be designed to ensure ease of mobility, ample clearance, and the safety of pedestrians and vehicles. 
b.  Adequate interior driveways shall connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
c.  Parking spaces shall be separated from sidewalks and streets in public right-of-ways by wheel bumpers and by a strip of land at least ten feet wide reserved as open space and planted in grass, shrubs and trees. 
d.  All parking areas must be striped in conformance with the parking dimension standards of this UDO. 
(2)  Pedestrian movement. 
a.  Parking areas shall be designed to facilitate safe and convenient use by pedestrians. 
b.  The pathways from the principal building entrance to the adjacent streets shall include a sidewalk at least five ft. wide with marked crosswalks across all interior driveways. 
(b)  Parking area dimensions. 
(1)  Standard off-street parking stalls and aisles shall conform to the minimum dimensions provided in the table of minimum parking space requirements and dimensions of parking stalls provided in this subsection. 
Table of Minimum Parking Space Dimensions 

 
*Depth measured perpendicular to aisle to farthest corner of stall or nearest wall. 

Parking Stalls
(2)  Parallel parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet wide and 22 feet and six inches long. 
(3)  Handicap-accessible spaces. Handicap-accessible parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet in width by 19 feet in length and shall be located adjacent to a paved accessible aisle or walkway at least 60 inches in width. If the accessible walkway is at an elevation different from the elevation of the parking space, a 1:6 slope ramp shall be provided up to the walk. An aisle, having a width of not less than three feet shall be from the handicap-accessible spaces to the building entrance. 
(4)  Van-accessible spaces. Van-accessible parking stalls shall have a minimum width of eight feet and a minimum length of 19 feet. Each van-accessible space shall be adjacent to a passenger loading aisle that is a minimum use of eight-foot wide leading to an accessible aisle or walkway at the front of the parking spaces that is a minimum of three feet wide leading to the closest building entrance. 
(5)  Signage. Handicap-accessible parking spaces and van-accessible parking spaces shall be identified by signs meeting the requirements of the ADA Accessibility Guidelines and the MUTCD (Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices). 
(c)  Paving materials for parking lots. 
(1)  All parking areas shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or pervious materials approved by the director. Recommended pervious paving materials include those described in Volume 2—Technical Handbook of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (First Edition, August 2001) as the Porous Concrete or Modular Porous Paver Systems under the Limited Application Stormwater Structural Controls. 
(2)  Paving areas shall be of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 222-8. - Driveways. 
(a)  Parking areas shall provide an adequate ingress and egress with a minimum vertical clearance of 14 feet and a driveway grade no greater than five percent. 
(b)  Driveways entering public streets must be designed as follows: 
(1)  No driveway curb cut may be located closer than 75 feet from the extended curb line of an intersecting street. 
(2)  Except for driveways that are restricted to right-in/right-out access only, no driveway curb cut may be located opposite an exclusive left turn lane that serves an adjacent intersection. 
(3)  Except for driveways that are restricted to right-in/right-out access only, the minimum spacing between driveways along the same side of an arterial or major collector street shall be as follows: 

 
(4)  The centerline of driveway curb cuts located on public streets that are not divided by a raised median should be aligned with the driveways on the opposite side of the street where feasible. Driveways intersecting a public street that are not aligned with an opposing driveway or street shall be offset by a minimum of least 125 feet from a driveway or street on the opposite side of the street. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 222-9. - Landscaping in parking lots. 
(a)  Parking lots shall be designed with landscape areas, in accordance with section 328-21. 
(b)  Where the parking lot fronts a public street or public right-of-way, trees preserved or planted in the perimeter planting strip may be used to meet the parking lot planting requirement. 
(c)  Landscaped median islands in parking lots shall be constructed as stormwater bioretention areas with a grade level that is recessed at least four inches below the grade of the adjacent paved surfaces. Curbs separating recessed landscaped median islands from parking areas shall be either flush with the paved surface or notched at intervals of four feet to allow stormwater runoff to pass through them into the landscaped areas for bioretention. 
(d)  Landscape materials in median islands shall be selected to be compatible with the bioretention function of the landscaped areas, and adequate drainage shall be provided for the chosen species. Recommended plant species are listed in this subsection. Additional appropriate species are listed in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2, Appendix F, Table F.5 on page F-23. 
Approved Plant Species for Bioretention Areas in Parking Lots 

 
Source: Georgia Stormwater Manual, Volume 2, Appendix F, Table F-4, page F-20. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 222-10. - Lighting in parking lots. 
(a)  If parking and loading areas are to be used at night, they shall be properly illuminated for the safety and security of pedestrians and vehicles. 
(b)  Lighting shall be designed to preclude light spillover on to adjacent properties. Parking areas abutting residential uses shall use only cut-off luminary fixtures mounted in such a manner that its cone of light is directed internally and does not cross any property line of the site. 
(c)  Only incandescent, florescent, metal halide or color-corrected, high-pressure sodium may be used. The same type of lighting must be used for the same or similar types of lighting on any one site. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 222-11. - Parking vehicles in residential districts. 
(a)  In any residential zoning district, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand for any period longer than six hours any vehicle in excess of 14,000 pounds gross vehicle weight as identified, classified or defined by the manufacturer, except while actually engaged in loading or unloading. Trailers, mobile homes, motorized homes, boats, boat trailers and utility trailers are exempt from this paragraph. For purposes of this section, trailers are defined as vehicles with or without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by motor vehicles and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the towing vehicle. 
(b)  In any residential district, the parking of any vehicle shall be within a garage, driveway, or carport or within a side or rear yard, except for moving vans that are actually loading and unloading. The parking of any vehicle in excess of 14,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, as identified or classified or defined by the manufacturer, shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2016-13, § 1, 9-27-2016) 
Chapter 226 - OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE 

Sec. 226-1. - Provision of off-street loading spaces. 
(a)  Application. Whenever the normal operation of any development requires that goods, merchandise or equipment be routinely delivered to or shipped from the development, a sufficient off-street loading and unloading area must be provided in accordance with this UDO. 
(b)  Minimum number of spaces. The minimum number of off-street spaces required for buildings containing more than 5,000 gross square feet of retail business, office, wholesale, industrial, governmental and institutional uses including public assembly places, hospitals and educational institutions, shall be one space for the first 25,000 square feet of total floor area or fractional part thereof. For such uses in excess of 25,000 square feet, the building shall provide loading spaces as provided in this subsection. 
Table of Minimum Loading and Unloading Space Requirements 

 
For each additional 100,000 square feet or fraction thereof, one additional space shall be required. 
(c)  Prohibited use. No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be used to satisfy the area requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any portion of any off-street parking area be used to satisfy the area requirements for loading and unloading facilities. 
(d)  Location of off-street loading spaces. 
(1)  All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building that they are intended to serve or on an adjacent lot where shared with the use occupying said adjacent lot. 
(2)  Each required off-street loading space shall have direct access to a street or alley that provides safe and adequate ingress and egress for trucks. 
(e)  Permanent reservation. Areas reserved for off-street loading, in accordance with the requirements of this UDO, shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use that is served, discontinued or modified; except where equivalent loading space is provided and approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 226-2. - Construction and dimensions of off-street loading spaces. 
(a)  Required dimensions for each loading stall. Each loading stall shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 30 feet in length, except that for wholesale and industrial use, loading stalls shall be a minimum of ten feet wide and 50 feet in length. 
(b)  Loading areas shall provide an adequate ingress and egress with a minimum vertical clearance of 12 feet and a driveway grade no greater than four percent. The loading area shall not exceed a grade of two percent. 
(c)  Paving. All required loading areas shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, porous paving blocks, gravel or other materials, as approved by the director. Paving areas shall be of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 226-3. - Dumpsters. 
(a)  Location. Dumpsters shall be enclosed either within a building and out of sight from public streets or located outside to the rear of the principal building. 
(b)  Pad. 
(1)  Dumpsters shall be placed on concrete pads of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
(2)  Restaurants and other food service establishments shall place dumpsters on concrete pads that are designed to slope into a drain that is equipped with a grease trap. 
(c)  Screening. Dumpsters not located in the rear yard shall be surrounded by an opaque enclosure not less than six feet in height and also screened by perimeter planting as required in section 328-7. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Chapter 230 - SIGN REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, adopted Nov. 27, 2012, repealed the former Ch. 230, §§ 230-1—230-14, and enacted a new Ch. 230 as set out herein. The former Ch. 230 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 28, 2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, §§ 8—10, adopted July 24, 2007; Ord. No. 0-2007-23, § 8, adopted Oct. 9, 2007; Ord. No. 2009-13, §§ 2, 3, adopted Sept. 25, 2009; Ord. No. 0-2010-05, §§ 3, 4, adopted Apr. 27, 2010; and Ord. No. 0-2010-14, § 1, adopted July 27, 2010. 

Sec. 230-1. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and be cited as the "Rockdale County Sign Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-2. - Findings and purpose. 
Rockdale County finds that the number, size, design characteristics, and locations of signs in the county directly affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. The county finds that many signs are distracting and dangerous to motorists and pedestrians, are confusing to the public, and can substantially detract from the beauty and appearance of the county. The county finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address those concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. The purpose and intent of the governing authority of Rockdale County in enacting this chapter are as follows: 
(a)  To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Rockdale County and to implement the policies and objectives of the Comprehensive Plan through the enactment of a comprehensive set of regulations governing signs in Rockdale County. 
(b)  To regulate the placement of signs within Rockdale County in order to provide safe operating conditions for pedestrian and vehicular traffic without unnecessary and unsafe distraction to drivers or pedestrians. 
(c)  To regulate the placement of signs in windows to allow emergency services and the public in general to see inside an establishment. 
(d)  To maintain an aesthetically attractive county in which signs are compatible with the use patterns of established zoning districts. 
(e)  To preserve the value of property on which signs are located and from which signs may be viewed. 
(f)  To establish comprehensive sign regulations which effectively balance legitimate business and development needs with a safe and aesthetically attractive environment for residents, workers and visitors of the county. 
(g)  To provide fair and reasonable opportunities for the identification of legitimate businesses which are located in Rockdale County, and to provide for the identification of the availability of products, goods or services so as to promote the economic vitality of businesses and industries which are located within the county. 
(h)  To ensure the protection of free speech and property rights under the Georgia and United States Constitutions. 
(i)  To establish a permit system to allow specific types of signs in zoning districts consistent with the uses, intent and aesthetic characteristics of those districts. 
(j)  To address the needs of certain uses that are specific and do not apply to other uses. 
(k)  To allow certain signs that are small, safe, unobtrusive or incidental to the principal use of the respective lot on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter but exempt from permitting. 
(l)  To provide fair and reasonable regulations in governing the time, place and manner in which signs are permissible. 
(m)  To reflect changes in the practices and the availability of new technologies in the sign industry. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-3. - Effect of provision and administration. 
This sign chapter shall be a part of the zoning ordinance and shall be administered and enforced by the director of [the] department or his/her designee. The enforcing officer's duties shall include issuing permits required by this chapter for signs that meet the requirements of this chapter and are otherwise lawful. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-4. - Definitions. 
(a)  Except as specifically defined herein and in section 106-1, all words used in this article shall be as defined in a recent edition of the Merriam-Webster Dictionary. Words not defined herein or in the above book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence, section and article in which they occur. 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(2)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(3)  The word "erected" includes the words "constructed", "moved", "located" or "relocated". 
(4)  The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel". 
(5)  The word "map" or "zoning map" means the Zoning Map of Rockdale County, Georgia. 
(6)  The word "person" includes the words "individuals", "firms", "partnerships", "corporations", "associations", "governmental bodies" and all other legal entities. 
(7)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary. 
(8)  The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
(c)  Definitions specific to this chapter. 
(1)  Accessory ground sign: A ground sign which is secondary and subordinate in size and appearance to a primary ground sign. 
(2)  Air or gas filled device: An inflatable sign using forced air or other gas to support its structure. Air or gas filled devices may require the use of a power source to remain inflated. 
(3)  Animated sign: A sign or portion of a sign which changes physical position by any movement including rotation; or which gives the visual impression of movement; or which displays blinking, flashing or varying intensity of light. 
(4)  Balloon: An inflatable device typically made of latex, vinyl or mylar using forced air or other gas to support its structure. 
(5)  Banner: A type of temporary sign made of fabric or similar material, intended to be hung either with or without a frame. 
(6)  Barber pole, traditional: A type of wall sign utilized by a licensed barber, made of a striped vertical cylinder which may rotate and may have a ball on top. 
(7)  Billboard: A ground sign with a sign area of between 401 and 672 square feet intended for the public traveling on the interstate highway. Synonym of "oversized sign." 
(8)  Canopy sign: A type of wall sign affixed to, superimposed on or painted on any canopy, which is a roof-like structure extended over a sidewalk or walkway or vehicle access area. 
(9)  Double-faced sign: A sign which has two display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
(10)  Drive-through board: A ground or wall sign that informs on the products or services offered at a drive-through facility. 
(11)  Electronic sign: A type of sign whose message may be changed at intervals by electronic process or by remote control. Electronic signs are generally internally illuminated. 
(12)  External illumination: Illumination device or system, independent of the sign face, projecting light primarily toward the sign. 
(13)  Flag: A piece of fabric or other flexible material intended to be attached to a flagpole or similar device. 
(14)  Free speech sign: A sign intended to be displayed for a finite period of time, such as a real estate for sale sign, a campaign sign, a political sign, or a yard sale sign, by way of examples. 
(15)  Ground sign: A permanent, non-movable sign affixed to a structure attached to the ground and independent from a building for support. 
(16)  Interior project directional sign: A sign located within a subdivision or planned center, intended to guide pedestrians and drivers. 
(17)  Internal illumination: Illumination device or system attached to or integrated in the sign face. Includes backlit panels, neon and light boxes. 
(18)  Multi-faced sign: A sign structure with more than two sign faces designed so that each face can be seen from a different direction. 
(19)  Multiple message billboard: An animated type of billboard which changes the message or copy on the sign digitally by means of lights or light emitting diodes (LED), or electronically by movement or rotation of panels or slats. 
(20)  Nonconforming sign: A sign lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter that does not conform to all the standards and regulations of the adopted or amended ordinance. 
(21)  Obsolete sign: A sign and/or sign structure which no longer correctly directs any person or no longer advertises a bona-fide business, product or service where such sign and/or structure is located. 
(22)  Pennant and/or streamer: A sign not exceeding one square foot in sign area made of flexible material such as cloth of plastic, suspended and fastened to a stringer in combination with other such signs, and designed to move in the wind. 
(23)  Portable sign: A type of temporary sign designed to be transported or that is not permanently attached to the ground or a structure. Includes commercial signs carried, worn or held by people. 
(24)  Primary ground sign: A prominent ground sign which is larger than other signs on the property. 
(25)  Promotional banner-flag: A type of portable sign made of fabric or similar material, attached to a pole. Includes signs commercially known as "swooper", "feather", "wing", "blade" and "sail". 
(26)  Roof sign: A sign projecting over the coping of a flat roof, or wholly or partially over the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, and supported by or attached to said roof. 
(27)  Sign: An object, device, display, structure, or part thereof which is used to advertise, identify, display, or direct attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. 
(28)  Sign structure: Poles, beams, columns, posts, foundation, cabinet or other means providing structural support for the sign. 
(29)  Temporary sign: A sign not permanently embedded in the ground, or not permanently affixed to a building or sign structure and displayed for a finite period of time. 
(30)  Vehicle sign: A sign attached to or painted on a vehicle parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is used for transporting people or materials in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. A vehicle sign is a type of portable sign. 
(31)  Wall sign: A sign painted on, attached to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure. 
(32)  Window sign: A sign installed on the interior or exterior of a window and intended to be viewed from the outside of the building. Includes signs made of perforated film and other semi-opaque materials. Window signs are distinct from wall signs. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-5. - Applicability. 
(a)  This chapter shall apply to all properties within the unincorporated areas of Rockdale County. Signs that are not visible from a public right-of-way and are not intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way are not regulated. 
(b)  Any alteration or modification of a sign structure, with the exception of minor repair and regular maintenance, shall require a permit. A change in the copy of a sign shall not constitute an alteration. 
(c)  Businesses shall obtain a county business license before applying for a sign permit. Nonprofit organizations shall register with the county before applying for a sign permit. Applications shall not be processed until this requirement is fulfilled. 
(d)  The standards and requirements of overlay districts, as set forth in chapter 210 of Title 2 of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances, shall govern and supersede the standards and requirements of this chapter. 
(e)  No new sign shall be allowed or permitted on a nonconforming lot of record, for a nonconforming use, or on a nonconforming building or structure. 
(f)  Any sign allowed by this chapter to contain a commercial message may also contain a noncommercial message. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-6. - Permit application. 
(a)  Applications for sign permits shall be submitted by the sign owner or their agent upon official forms furnished by the county. 
(b)  It is the duty of the applicant to provide all the information listed below to process the application. 
(c)  Applications shall be complete and shall include at a minimum the following: 
(1)  The street address of the property where the sign will be located. In the absence of a street address, a method of location acceptable to the department shall be used; 
(2)  The name, address, phone number and email address of the business owner(s) requesting the sign; 
(3)  The name, address, phone number and email address of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the sign is to be located; 
(4)  Written consent of the property owner, or their agent, granting permission for the placement and/or maintenance of subject sign; 
(5)  The name, address, phone number and email address of the sign installation contractor. A legible copy of the valid business and professional license of the contractor; 
(6)  The type of sign(s) requested; 
(7)  The sign area of each sign and the aggregate sign area for the whole property, including existing and requested signs, as described in the computation section of this chapter; 
(8)  Construction details, including dimensions, materials and structure; 
(9)  For existing buildings: Drawings or photographs with dimensions of all existing signs on the lot, including signs of other tenants, if any; 
(10)  For new multi-tenant buildings, new planned centers, subdivisions and gasoline stations: A sign master plan, as defined in this section; 
(11)  For ground signs: A site plan drawn to scale, showing the proposed location of all sign(s) on the lot. The site plan shall include, at a minimum, a survey of the property which shows the buildable area of the property, gross acreage, the proposed sign location, street right-of-way lines, public or private easements, driveway locations and parking spaces; 
(12)  For wall signs: A set of building elevations, showing the proposed location of all signs and anchoring method; 
(13)  For signs 50 square feet or larger and/or for signs 15 feet tall or higher: Plans shall comply with the requirements of the International Building Code, Chapter 1, and further described in Appendix H, Section H105, of the International Building Code. The plans shall be certified and stamped by a Georgia registered professional engineer. 
(d)  Sign master plan. 
(1)  New multi-tenant buildings, planned centers, subdivisions and gasoline stations shall submit a sign master plan with the application for a land disturbance permit or a building permit, whichever comes first. 
(2)  Such master plan shall include all application materials as defined in this chapter, for the entirety of the property. A site plan shall illustrate the location of all ground signs, and building elevations shall show the allocation for wall signs for each unit in the development. 
(3)  All owners and tenants of individual units within the development shall comply with the approved plan. 
Any subsequent modification to the property impacting the sign master plan, including subdivision of tenant space, shall cause an update of the master plan to be reviewed by the director of [the] department for approval. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-7. - Sign permit fees. 
A sign permit shall not be issued until a complete application has been submitted and non-refundable fees have been paid in full, as established in the most recent fee schedule adopted by the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-8. - Permit approval, denial or revocation. 
(a)  Procedure. 
(1)  The director of [the] department or his/her designee shall take action to approve or deny a sign permit within 15 business days of receipt of a complete sign permit application. Any completed sign permit application for which no action has been taken after 15 business days or more shall be deemed to be approved. An application shall be deemed complete once all the material requested by the department is provided by the applicant. 
(2)  The director of [the] department or his/her designee shall deny permit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this article, incomplete applications, and applications containing any false material statements. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an application containing false material, or that a permit in violation of this article has been erroneously issued, the director of [the] department or his/her designee shall revoke the permit. 
(3)  Should the director of [the] department or his/her designee deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and delivered by hand to the applicant, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application, postmarked within 15 business days after receipt of the complete application. 
(4)  Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, not the date of the original submission. A permit shall not be denied or revoked except for due cause, being the violation of the provisions of this article, the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)  Appeal. A person whose permit application has been denied or whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the director of department or his/her designee to the board of adjustment pursuant to section 238-8 of Title 2 of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-9. - Permit expiration. 
A sign permit shall expire if the sign has not been erected, installed and completed within six months after the date of permit issuance. A six-month extension of the permit may be granted once, if requested in writing to the director of [the] department prior to the expiration date of the initial permit. After expiration of the permit, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the current fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-10. - Measurements and computation. 
The following principles shall control the computation of the sign area and the measurement of the sign height: 
(a)  Individual sign area. 
(1)  The area of a sign is computed as the surface of the smallest square, rectangle, circle, triangle or combination thereof that will encompass entirely the writing, representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, such as a cabinet. 
(2)  Individual sign areas shall be rounded to the nearest half square foot. 
(3)  Minor appendages to a particular shape, as determined by the director or his/her designee, may be excluded from the computation. Such appendage shall not occupy more than ten percent of the individual sign area. 
(b)  Double and multi-faced signs. The sign area of double and multi-faced signs is the sum of the area of all faces of the sign, excluding the area of the smallest face. 
(c)  Aggregate sign area. The aggregate sign area is the sum of the individual sign area of each sign in a particular sign category on a single parcel. 
(d)  Sign height. 
(1)  The height of a sign is the vertical distance between the normal ground level at the base of the sign structure to the highest point of the sign structure. For signs placed on a graded mound, the normal ground level shall be considered same as the grade of the nearest pavement. 
(2)  The height of a sign mounted flush to a building - such as a wall sign - or other structure used for a purpose different than signage is equal to the height of its face. 
(e)  Associated façade. The length of a façade shall be measured from the centerline of the party walls. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-11. - Construction and maintenance of signs. 
(a)  Materials. All signs, either permanent or temporary, shall be made of wood, metal, plastic or other durable and weatherproof material, and built and installed in a professional manner. Signs on lots used for residential purposes may be made of paper. 
(b)  Repair. All signs shall be maintained in good condition, so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. Neglected or dilapidated signs may exhibit any of the following: unintended rust or holes on surfaces, broken, missing, loose or bent parts, faded or flaking paint, non-operative or partially non-operative illumination or missing letters in sign copy. Neglected or dilapidated signs are deemed illegal. Refer to section 230-24, Enforcement and penalties for official removal procedures. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-12. - Illumination of signs. 
(a)  No sign shall give off light which glares, blinds or has any other potential adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. 
(b)  Signs located within any residential zoning district may be illuminated externally only. Light fixtures shall be aimed downward, with the exception of primary ground signs located at the entrance of subdivisions or multi-family properties. 
(c)  If the department finds an illuminated sign to cause glare, to impair the vision of a user of the road or to interfere in any manner with the safety of the public, the owner of the sign shall adjust the intensity of the fixture within 24 hours after notice from the director of department. Maximum brightness levels for illuminated signs shall not exceed 0.3 footcandles over ambient light conditions. Footcandles shall be measured at a height of five feet and viewing the display head-on (directly at a 90-degree angle) from the nearest adjacent property line or 100 feet, whichever is closest to the sign. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-13. - Electronic signs. 
(a)  Electronic signs shall be permitted on properties abutting an arterial or collector road (as defined by the Rockdale County Department of Transportation). 
(b)  No electronic sign shall include any illumination which is flashing, intermittent, scrolling or moving. For purposes of this chapter, sign faces which remain still for a minimum of ten seconds will not be considered intermittent. 
(c)  Electronic signs shall have automatic dimming capability to adjust the brightness of the fixture to the ambient light at all times of day and night. If the department finds an electronic sign to cause glare, to impair the vision of a user of the road or interferes in any manner with the safety of the public, the owner of the sign shall adjust the intensity of the fixture within 24 hours after notice from the director of department. 
(d)  The area of a digital message shall not exceed 30 percent of the permitted maximum individual sign area as provided in the sign table of this chapter. 
(e)  Each digital message shall remain fixed for at least ten seconds. When a message is changed, it shall be accomplished in two seconds or less. 
(f)  No electronic sign shall emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on the main traveled way by a person with normal hearing. 
(g)  Electronic signs shall contain a default design that will freeze the sign in a fixed position if a malfunction occurs. 
Maximum brightness levels for electronic or digital LED signs shall not exceed 5,000 nits during the daylight hours or 100 nits between sunset and sunrise, as those times are determined by the National Weather Service, or 0.3 footcandles over ambient light conditions, whichever is brighter. Nits shall be measured from the computer control system or directly from the sign's face. Footcandles shall be measured at a height of five feet and viewing the display head-on (directly at a 90-degree angle) from the nearest adjacent property line or 100 feet, whichever is closest to the sign. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-14. - Prohibited signs and sign devices. 
(a)  The following types of signs or advertising devices are prohibited in all zoning districts: 
(1)  Roof signs. 
(2)  Portable signs, except if allowed as a temporary sign, WES or free speech sign. 
(3)  Vehicle signs as described further in this chapter. 
(4)  Air or gas filled devices, balloons, inflatables, and banners, except if permitted as a temporary sign, as provided by this chapter. 
(5)  Animated signs, except if permitted as multiple message billboards and electronic signs as provided by this chapter, and except traditional barber poles. 
(6)  Signs made of cardboard, paper or other nondurable material except window signs or signs located in residential zoning districts. 
(7)  Signs placed within the public right-of-way, except publicly maintained signs. 
(8)  Signs erected by painting, nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any fence, tree, rock, post, curb, utility pole, natural feature, official street sign or marker, traffic control sign or device, or other structure except as provided in this chapter. 
(9)  Signs posing a hazard to people or building due to structural deficiencies. 
(10)  Signs simulating an official traffic control device, warning sign, or regulatory sign or which hide from view any traffic control device, signal or public service sign. 
(11)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing abilities. 
(12)  Signs interfering with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(13)  Signs obstructing any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation or preventing free passage from one part of a roof to another part thereof. 
(14)  Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-15. - Vehicle signs. 
(a)  Vehicles, trailers or other non-motorized vehicles with the explicit purpose and intent of promotion are prohibited. Vehicle signs or advertising devices attached to any vehicle or trailer parked so as to be visible from a public right-of-way for the main purpose of providing advertisement of products, services or events or directing people to a business or activity, except for a common carrier or other vehicle as described in subsection (b) of this section, are prohibited. 
(b)  Any vehicle or common carrier with a sign attached to its operational structure may park in a legal parking space associated to the business. The vehicle shall be used regularly for transportation relating to the activity advertised and shall display a valid license plate. 
(c)  Permissible vehicle signs include: paint, magnets, decals and vinyl wrap. Banners, A-frame and other temporary fixtures are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-16. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Permit. 
(1)  Applications for a temporary sign permit shall be submitted by the sign owner or their agent upon official forms furnished by the department. 
(2)  Temporary signs or devices shall be permitted only by issuance of a temporary sign permit. The temporary sign may be displayed for a maximum of 60 consecutive days and then shall be removed. A subsequent temporary sign permit may be issued for the same premises no earlier than 90 consecutive days after expiration of the permit, and no more than three times per calendar year. 
(3)  No more than two temporary signs shall be permitted at once for a same premises. 
(4)  The fee for one temporary sign for a special event will be waived, provided a special event permit is secured with the department. Such sign shall be removed within 24 hours of the conclusion of the event. 
(b)  Types. Types of temporary signs permitted are limited to banners, self-supported signs, promotional banner-flags, air or gas filled devices as detailed in Table 16-1. 
Table 16-1. Temporary Signs 

 
(c)  Support. 
(1)  Banners shall be individually attached to a building façade and shall not extend above the façade or roofline. No banner shall be attached to a light pole, freestanding pole, utility pole or similar structure. 
(2)  Freestanding signs shall be supported by an integrated frame, and completely independent from any additional structure. 
(3)  Promotional banner-flags shall be displayed on purpose-built, professionally fabricated pole, anchored to the ground with a spike, with brackets or with another stabilizing device; 
(4)  Air filled devices shall be securely attached to the ground and shall not be placed on the roof of a building. 
(d)  Specifications. Temporary signs shall be built and installed in a professional manner, with durable and weatherproof materials. All temporary signs must be maintained in good condition. 
(e)  Location. Signs shall be located at least ten feet from the right-of-way, on private property with the explicit consent of the owner. At intersections, the setback shall be 15 feet. 
(f)  Illumination. Illumination of temporary signs shall conform to the regulations set forth by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-17. - Signs exempt from permitting. 
(a)  Signs exempt from permitting shall abide by all other applicable dimensional and maintenance requirements included in this chapter. Signs exempt from permitting are subject to enforcement and penalties as set forth in section 230-24, Enforcement and penalties unless otherwise stated. 
(b)  All signs exempt from permitting shall be made of a durable, weatherproof material if they are installed outdoor. 
(c)  All freestanding signs exempt from permitting must be placed outside the right-of-way, on private property with the permission of the owner of the property. 
(d)  The following types of signs are exempt from obtaining a sign permit: 
(1)  Signs with the sole purpose of displaying street numbers; 
(2)  Signs not visible from public thoroughfares; 
(3)  Signs inside a building or totally enclosed area, including window signs. The latter shall meet the dimensional requirements set forth in the sign table as further described in this chapter; 
(4)  Flags, as further described in this chapter; 
(5)  Weekend signs (WES): 
a.  WES shall be allowed in all zoning districts from 3:00 p.m. on Friday to 7:00 a.m. on Monday. 
b.  The sign owner is responsible for removing the signs. Failure to remove WES shall constitute a litter violation, enforceable under the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances section 78-45. 
c.  Dimensions. Maximum sign area: four square feet per side. Maximum height: four feet. 
d.  WES shall be mounted on independent frames or stakes, and shall not be affixed in any manner to trees, natural objects, utility poles, other signs, or other sign structures. 
e.  There shall be no more than two WES per lot. 
(6)  Free speech signs, providing they meet the dimensional requirements set forth in tables 20-1 and 20-2 of this chapter. 
a.  Function and severance. In the event that a court adjudges any part of the definition of a free speech sign a violation of the Georgia or United States Constitutions or any other provision of law, it is the specific intent of the Board of Commissioners of Rockdale County that the definition a free speech sign referencing a limitation to noncommercial speech or commercial speech that pertains to a commercial enterprise located on the property be omitted from the chapter and the remainder of the chapter stay in effect to regulate signs on property within the county. This severance section is in addition to the legislative intent of severance expressed elsewhere in this chapter. 
(7)  Pennants and/or streamers, in nonresidential zoning districts, on a strand not to exceed the width of the lot at the public road. 
(8)  Balloons less than 18 inches in diameter, provided they are removed within 72 hours after being installed. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-18. - Flags. 
(a)  Flags shall be displayed on purpose-built, professionally fabricated flagpoles, which may be vertical or mast-arm flagpoles. No permit is necessary for the erection of a flagpole. 
(b)  In nonresidential districts, flagpoles shall not exceed the allowed height for a structure or building in the applicable zoning district, or 50 feet, whichever is higher. In residential districts, flagpoles shall not exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the existing primary structure on the lot, whichever is less. 
(c)  The maximum dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height. The hoist side of the flag shall not exceed 20 percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. In addition, flags are subject to the following limitations: 
Table 18-1. Flag Dimensions 

 
(d)  Each lot is allowed a maximum of two flagpoles and a maximum of three flags per flagpole. 
(e)  A vertical flagpole shall be set back from all property boundaries by a distance which is at least equal to the height of the flagpole. 
(f)  Flags and flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be in compliance with the building code. Flagpoles with broken halyards shall not be used and flags which are torn or frayed shall not be displayed. 
(g)  Flags not meeting the definition of a flag contained herein shall conform to the remainder of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-19. - Signs for specific uses. 
(a)  Gasoline stations. In addition to signs otherwise allowed in this chapter, gasoline service stations with pump islands may have signage subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  One pump island canopy sign per public street frontage, each sign not to exceed six square feet; 
(2)  Two signs affixed to each pump, each sign not to exceed two square feet. All other portable signs shall be prohibited, including signs installed on poles and A-frame signs; 
(3)  Commercial logos and colors may be displayed on pump and valance; 
(4)  If a separate drive-through carwash building is on site, one wall sign on carwash building, not to exceed six square feet; 
(5)  The property owner shall provide a sign master plan. 
(b)  Places of worship. Refer to UDO subsection 218-13(ccc) Standards of use and development. 
(c)  Signage during construction. Two additional signs shall be allowed during construction of a building on residential or non-residential property. The signs shall not be internally illuminated. 
(1)  Duration. The signs shall be allowed beginning with the issuance of a land disturbance permit and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or installation of a permanent sign at a subdivision entrance, whichever comes first. 
(2)  Size. The signs shall not exceed 12 square feet and six feet in height for residential property, and 32 square feet and six feet in height for nonresidential property. 
(3)  Location. Construction signs shall be posted within the buildable area of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-20. - Sign table. 
(a)  Signs shall be permitted and regulated in accordance with the sign table in this chapter, unless otherwise regulated, prohibited or exempted as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Location. All signs shall be entirely located a minimum of ten feet from the public right-of-way, on private property with the explicit consent of the owner. At intersections, the setback shall be 15 feet. 
(c)  Non-residential subdivisions may be considered as planned center or as a collection of individual buildings for signage planning purposes. A subdivision with common parking area between two buildings or more will be automatically considered a planned center. If the subdivision is treated as a planned center, all the buildings and tenants shall share primary ground signs. If the subdivision is treated as a collection of individual buildings, each building may obtain primary ground signs, but the subdivision shall not have a shared "entrance" sign. The initial property owner shall present a master plan reflecting the preferred option. 
(d)  Properties located within an overlay district are regulated under chapter 210 of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances. 
Table 20-1: Sign table for nonresidential districts 

 
  
Table 20-2: Sign table for residential zoning districts 

 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-21. - Billboards. 
Billboards shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions: 
(a)  Billboards shall be governed by the Georgia Advertising Act (O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq.). 
(b)  Billboards are permitted on lots abutting the interstate in nonresidential zoning districts. 
(c)  Billboards shall not be placed within 500 feet in any direction of a residential zoning district, place of worship, school, designated park or cemetery, unless the sign is not visible from those locations at any time. 
(d)  No billboard shall be located closer than 500 feet from another billboard on the same side of the interstate, unless the signs are separated by buildings or other obstructions so that only one sign face located within the 500 foot zone is visible from the interstate at any time. 
(e)  Billboards shall be completely independent of any building or other structure, excluding their own structure. 
(f)  All portions of billboards shall be erected within the buildable area of the lot. 
(g)  Maximum dimensions: 672 square feet in sign area per face (maximum two faces), 14 feet in height, and 48 feet in length. Maximum height including structure: 48 feet. 
(h)  Billboards may be illuminated indirectly from a light source pointing downwards. 
(i)  Multiple message billboards shall be subject to the additional following restrictions: 
(1)  Each sign shall remain fixed for at least ten seconds. If the message is changed mechanically, the transition shall be accomplished within three seconds. If the message is changed electronically, the transition shall be accomplished within two seconds; 
(2)  No such sign shall be located closer than 5,000 feet to another multiple message billboard on the same side of the interstate; 
(3)  Any such sign shall contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one position if a malfunction occurs; 
(4)  No multiple message sign shall give off light, which glares, blinds, or has any other adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from illuminated multiple message sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways, these signs shall comply with the requirements of section 230-13; 
(5)  Multiple message sign shall not emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on the main traveled way by a person with normal hearing; and 
(6)  No multiple message sign shall include any illumination which is flashing, intermittent, or moving when the sign is in a fixed position. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-22. - Variances. 
(a)  Where a literal application of this chapter would result in an unusual hardship, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, a variance may be granted by the board of adjustments pursuant to section 238-9. In reaching a decision, the board of adjustments shall consider the following criteria, at a minimum: 
(1)  Exceptional physical conditions of the property where the sign is to be located as a result of its size, shape, or topography, which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area; 
(2)  Without a variance, the applicant would be deprived of rights that are commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated; 
(3)  Granting the variance would not confer on the applicant any significant privileges which are denied to others similarly situated; 
(4)  The exceptional circumstances are not the result of action by the applicant; 
(5)  The requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to allow the applicant to enjoy the rights commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated; 
(6)  Granting the variance would not result in allowing a sign that interferes with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(b)  The board of adjustments shall have the authority to grant variances from the dimensional standards of this chapter, in accordance with the standards and procedures as set forth in section 238-9. 
(c)  The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to 50 percent of any dimensional standard, with the following exceptions: No variance shall be granted from maximum aggregate sign area and maximum billboard sign areas. 
(d)  No variance shall be granted from non-dimensional requirements, such as illumination, material, or number of signs. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012; Ord. No. 0-2014-04, § 1, 4-8-2014) 
Sec. 230-23. - Nonconforming and obsolete signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs. 
(1)  Findings. Rockdale County finds that nonconforming signs may adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. Such signs may adversely affect the aesthetic characteristics of Rockdale County and may adversely affect public safety due to the visual impact of these signs on motorists and pedestrians. Furthermore, nonconforming signs frustrate the purpose of adoption of this chapter as expressed in article 1. 
(2)  Continuation of nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign that is permanently affixed to the ground or to a building may continue to be used, except that the nonconforming sign: 
a.  Shall not be enlarged or altered except in conformance with this chapter, but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe condition; 
b.  Shall not be expanded, modified or replaced by another non-conforming sign; 
c.  Shall not be allowed to be increased in height, size or relocated on the property, but may be decreased in height or size; 
d.  Shall be removed if the property on which the sign is located becomes vacant, or has been unoccupied for a period of at least six months. An intent to abandon is not required as the basis for removal under this subsection; 
e.  Shall be removed if there is a change in ownership of the property or the business; and 
f.  Shall not be repaired or restored after having been damaged to the extent of more than percent of its value immediately prior to the event causing the damage or destruction. 
g.  To the extent any portion of this chapter conflicts with O.C.G.A. § 32-6-83 or Ga. Const. Art. 3 § 6, ¶ 4(a) in application, this section shall be deemed to provide affected parties the minimum protections provided by O.C.G.A. § 32-6-83 or Ga. Const. Art. 3 § 6, ¶ 4(a), as amended from time to time. In no event is it the county's intent to obligate itself to pay any compensation related to the removal of any nonconforming sign. 
h.  The owner of the real property shall be responsible for assuming the burden of proof and present sufficient facts and evidence to demonstrate the nonconforming status of the sign in question. 
(b)  Discontinuation of business. If a sign advertised an activity, product, business, service or other use which has ceased or the sign user has vacated the premises, the sign shall be considered obsolete and it shall be removed or the sign text shall be covered up in such a way as to render the text unreadable. The owner of the property on which the sign is located shall be responsible for removal (or covering) of the sign within 60 days of discontinuation of the business or service. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-24. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The sign provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the director of department or his/her designee. 
(b)  Removal of signs. The director of department or his/her designee may inspect signs regulated by this chapter at any time necessary to ensure compliance with the requirements of this chapter. In case any sign is installed, erected or constructed in violation of any of the terms of this chapter, is unsafe, is abandoned, or is obsolete, the director of department shall notify by certified mail or written notice served personally, the owner or lessee thereof to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign. If such order is not completed within ten working days from the time of notice being received, the director of department or his/her designee may have the sign removed at the expense of the owner. If the identity of the sign owner cannot be determined, the real property owner will be responsible for correction of the deficiencies or removal of the delinquent sign. 
(c)  The director of department or his/her designee may issue a citation for violation of this article by any person, including, if applicable, the owner, manager or tenant of the lot on which a sign is located; for a sign erected, altered, maintained, converted, or used in violation of this article; or in violation of any other applicable ordinance, including, but not limited to, building or electrical codes. 
(d)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $25.00 and no more than $1,000.00, or by confinement for a total time not to exceed 180 days, or both. Each day in which a sign is in violation of this chapter shall be a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(e)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter may result in the loss of business license pursuant to section 22-39. 
(f)  The county may seek affirmative equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to cause the removal or repair of any sign in violation of this article. 
(g)  The director of department or his/her designee may remove any sign or structure illegally placed upon a public right-of-way without any notice and may dispose of said sign or structure. Such removal and disposal of illegally placed signs shall not preclude the prosecution of any person for illegally placing such signs in the public right-of-way. 
(h)  A violation of any provision of this article will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the county for the erection of a sign. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Sec. 230-25. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, or word of this article is declared and adjudged to be invalidated or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect as if such portion so declared or adjudged unconstitutional were not originally part of this chapter, even if the surviving parts of the ordinance result in greater restrictions after any unconstitutional provisions are stricken. The board of commissioners declares that it would have enacted the remaining parts of this chapter if it had known that such portion thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. The board of commissioners declares its intent that should this article be declared invalid in part or in whole, signs are to be subject to regulations applicable to structures contained in other ordinances, including the zoning resolution. 
(Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
Chapter 234 - NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS 

Sec. 234-1. - Statement of intent and purpose. 
Within the districts established by Title 2, or in other UDO provisions or amendments, there exist lots, uses of land, uses of land and buildings, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of buildings and structures that were lawful before the UDO was adopted or amended, but that would be prohibited under the terms of the UDO or future amendment. Such nonconforming situations are hereby declared to be incompatible with authorized and permitted uses and regulations within the district(s) involved. It is the intent of the county to require the cessation of certain of these nonconformities, and to allow others to continue, on a limited basis, until they are otherwise removed or cease. It is further the county's intent that nonconformities not be used as grounds for adding other buildings, structures, or uses of land prohibited by the UDO, and that no such building, structure, or use of land shall be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of non-conformity. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 234-2. - Nonconforming use of land. 
The nonconforming use of land may be continued, but no such nonconforming use of land which has been discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months shall be reestablished unless such cessation is a direct result of governmental action impeding access to the property. Such nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2013-11, § I, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 234-3. - Nonconforming lot of record. 
A legal nonconforming lot of record in a residential district may be used for one single-family residence. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 234-4. - Nonconforming use of land and buildings in combination and nonconforming use of land and structures in combination. 
The following regulations apply to the nonconforming use of land and building(s) in combination and the nonconforming use of land and structure(s) in combination: 
(a)  Such uses of land and buildings or land and structures may be continued, but no such use which has been discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months shall be reestablished unless such cessation is a direct result of governmental action impeding access to the property. 
(b)  Such uses of land and buildings or land and structures, or any such building or structure, shall not be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
(c)  A nonconforming use of a building may be extended into those interior parts of a building which were manifestly designed for such use prior to the enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2013-11, § II, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 234-5. - Nonconforming characteristics of buildings and structures. 
No building or structure with nonconforming characteristics which is occupied by a conforming use shall be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 234-6. - Nonconforming uses requiring special use permit. 
No nonconforming use, building or structure requiring a special use permit under the terms of Title 2, including any use, building or structure that was authorized as of right prior to the adoption of this chapter but would require a special use permit upon the adoption of the UDO, shall be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner except after application for and approval of the now-required special use permit. Normal repair and maintenance of buildings and structures is authorized without the need for a special use permit. No such use, building, or structure that has been discontinued for a continuous period of 12 months shall be reestablished unless such cessation is a direct result of governmental action impeding access to the property. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2013-11, § III, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 234-7. - Reconstruction. 
Any building or structure constituting a nonconforming use of land and building(s), nonconforming use of land and structure(s), or building or structure with nonconforming characteristics that has been damaged by fire or other cause, may be reconstructed to its previous nonconforming characteristics and used as it was prior to damage if said reconstruction is completed within one year of the date of the damage, except that if said building or structure has been declared by the director to have been damaged to an extent exceeding 60 percent of its fair market value at the time of destruction, then any repair, reconstruction or new construction shall conform to all of the requirements of the district in which said building or structure is located. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 234-8. - Buildings and structures. 
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the director. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 234-9. - Buildings and structures where construction has begun. 
To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this Title shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building or structure for which a development or building permit was lawfully applied for or issued, or a preliminary or final subdivision plat was lawfully approved, prior to the effective date of the UDO or amendment thereto, provided: 
(1)  Such permit or approval has not by its own terms expired prior to such effective date. 
(2)  Actual building construction is commenced prior to the expiration of such permit or approval. 
(3)  Actual building construction is carried on pursuant to said permit or approval and limited to and in strict accordance with said permit or approval. 
(4)  No renewals or extensions of said permit or approval shall be authorized. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 234-10. - Prior authorization. 
Variances, rezonings, and special use permits lawfully authorized and granted prior to the effective date of this Title 2 shall continue to be utilized provided the terms and conditions of said authorization are followed. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a nonconforming use or structure to prove to the director of the department of planning and development or his/her designee that such use was lawfully established and existed on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2013-11, § IV, 11-12-2013) 
Sec. 234-11. - Reversions and changes. 
(a)  Any nonconforming use, use of land or building in combination, use of land and structure in combination, nonconforming lot of record, or nonconforming characteristic ("Nonconforming situations") that is changed to a conforming state shall not be permitted to revert to a nonconforming situation. 
(b)  No nonconforming situation shall be changed to another nonconforming situation. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 234-12. - Area extensions prohibited. 
A nonconforming use, or building or structure in combination with a use, or building or structure with nonconforming characteristics, shall not be extended or enlarged beyond the area of use or beyond the conforming size, height, or other dimensions or characteristics of the building or structure as it existed on the date of adoption of the UDO or amendments applicable thereto. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 234-13. - Sign provisions. 
Nonconforming situations relating to signs shall be governed by chapter 230 of this Code of Rockdale County, Georgia, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2012-11, § 15, 11-27-2012) 
Chapter 238 - PROCEDURES 

Sec. 238-1. - Administrative bodies. 
The provisions of the UDO shall be administered by the department, in association with the Conyers-Rockdale County Planning Commission (planning commission), the board of adjustment and the board of commissioners of Rockdale County (board of commissioners). 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-2. - Board of commissioners. 
(a)  Duties. The specific duties of the board of commissioners with respect to the UDO shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Recommendations. Receiving from the department and from the planning commission recommendations concerning the comprehensive plan, amendments to the comprehensive plan, amendments of provisions of the UDO, special use permits or any other matters relating to planning and zoning within the county. 
(2)  Public meetings. Conducting public hearings and meetings for the purpose of receiving information and public comment and taking final action on amendments to the comprehensive plan, text of the UDO, official zoning map, special use permit, and other actions pursuant to the UDO. The board of commissioners may conduct public hearings and may solicit additional advice, information or comments prior to rendering its decision. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-3. - Planning commission. 
(a)  Authority. The planning commission shall have the authority granted by section 2-135 of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances and by the provisions of the UDO and shall work within the framework of a joint resolution adopted by the City of Conyers and Rockdale County (Ord. No. 1978-11, as amended by Ord. No. 1978-13). 
(b)  Purpose and duties. The purpose and duties of the planning commission shall include, but not be limited to, conducting public hearings, requesting and receiving studies and reports from staff, and reviewing and making recommendations to the board of commissioners concerning matters brought before them. Carrying out this purpose shall include, but not be limited to the following duties: 
(1)  To review and make recommendations regarding proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan, UDO, official zoning map, and applications for special use permits according to the standards of subsection 238-6(c) of this chapter. 
(2)  To review preliminary and final plats according to the standards of the UDO. 
(3)  To advise the city and county governments regarding environmental policy, comprehensive planning, community development, housing, transportation, land use issues and capital improvements.. 
(4)  To work with the department, other county departments, boards and authorities, when appropriate to the purposes of the planning commission, the board of commissioners in carrying out their various functions by making recommendations to achieve the desired benefits on behalf of present and future Rockdale County residents, businesses and property owners. 
(c)  Finances. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the governing authorities of the city and the county. 
(d)  Appointment and terms. 
(1)  Composition. The planning commission shall be composed of seven members. Three of the members of the planning commission shall be residents of the unincorporated area of the county and shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. Three members of the planning commission shall be residents of the City of Conyers and be appointed by the city council. The seventh member of the planning commission shall be appointed by the county commissioners one term and then by the Conyers City Council the following term. 
(2)  Terms. In alternate years, the city council or Rockdale County Board of Commissioners shall appoint two members, one of which shall be for a four-year term and the other for a three-year term. The seventh member shall be appointed as in subsection (d)(1), above, and shall serve a three-year term. No member shall be eligible for more than two consecutive terms. 
(3)  Qualifications. When possible, the chair and at least two other members of the planning commission shall be professionally qualified in the fields of planning, architecture, landscape architecture, civil engineering, real estate, building construction or related fields. 
(4)  Compensation. All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses as set forth in a resolution adopted by the city and county, incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(5)  Vacancies. All appointees shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. If a member appointed by the board of commissioners moves to reside outside of the county, or if a member appointed by the city council moves to reside outside of the city limits, such member shall be deemed to have resigned from the planning commission. 
(6)  Other offices. Members of the planning commission shall hold no other elected or appointed office or other county- or city-compensated position. 
(7)  Expiration of term. Appointments shall expire on July 1 in the last year of the term. 
(8)  Removal from office. A member of the planning commission may be removed from office prior to the expiration of his/her appointed term by a majority vote of the body that appointed him or her, namely the board of commissioners or city council, as appropriate. A member also may be automatically removed pursuant to subsection (h)(3). 
(e)  Planning commission officers. 
(1)  Chair. In July of each year the planning commission shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The chair's term shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. 
(2)  Duties of chair. The chair shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the planning commission and decide all points of order and procedure. The chair may appoint committees necessary to assist and advise the planning commission in its work. 
(3)  V ice-chair. The planning commission shall elect a vice-chair in July of each year. The vice-chair's term shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. 
(4)  Duties of the vice-chair. The vice-chair shall serve as acting chair in the absence of the chair and, when acting in such capacity, shall have the same powers and duties as the chair. 
(5)  Secretary. A designated person from the department shall serve as the secretary of the planning commission. The secretary shall have responsibility for assisting the chair with scheduling and preparing an agenda for meetings; providing copies of staff reports to members of the planning commission; preparing public notice of hearings and other meetings; and making, publishing and preserving public records of the attendance, proceedings, reports and actions of the planning commission; attendance to the correspondence of the planning commission; and other duties assigned by the chair, subject to the budgetary limitations of the department. 
(f)  Committees. The chair may appoint, with the concurrence of the planning commission, various standing and temporary committees to further the purposes of the planning commission. Such committees may include ex-officio members of the staff of various city or county departments (excluding the staff of the city council and board of commissioners), residents and business owners of the city or county and other individuals whose background and knowledge may be of benefit to the planning commission in its deliberations. 
(g)  Meetings of the planning commission. 
(1)  Regular meetings. Unless there is no business to be conducted, the planning commission shall hold regularly scheduled meetings each month. The planning commission shall establish and make available to the public the time, place, and dates of its regular meetings. Except as otherwise authorized by the Georgia Open Meetings Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq., all meetings shall be open to the public. Public notice of all meetings shall be as required by said Georgia Open Meetings Act. Each member shall be notified of each regular meeting at least five days preceding the meeting through a written agenda prepared and distributed by the secretary. 
(2)  Special called meetings. The chair, secretary, or a majority of the planning commission may call a special meeting at any time provided that written notice is posted for at least 24 hours at the place of regular meetings and written or oral notice is given at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to the official legal organ of the county. The secretary shall prepare and cause to be delivered a written notice stating the specific purpose of the special called meeting to each planning commission member at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. No business other than the specific stated purpose shall occur at the special called meeting. 
(3)  Cancellation of meetings. In the event there is a lack of business to be discussed and/or voted upon at a future meeting, the meeting may be cancelled. In such a case, the secretary shall notify each member at least 24 hours prior to such scheduled meeting and shall place an appropriate public notice at the county courthouse or annex building stating the date of the canceled meeting at least 24 hours in advance of the scheduled meeting. 
(4)  Agenda and minutes. 
a.  The chair and secretary shall determine the meeting agenda. All matters to be considered and/or acted upon by the planning commission shall appear on the agenda. The agenda shall be available prior to each meeting and posted at the meeting site for the public. 
b.  Not more than two business days following the adjournment of a meeting of the planning commission, the secretary shall ensure that a written summary of the subjects acted on by the planning commission and a list of those members present is available for public inspection in the offices of the department. 
c.  Meeting minutes shall include and indicate all important facts, a report of all actions taken, a listing of those members present and those absent, a record of the vote of each member on each action taken on each matter and a brief summary of any explanation or commentary that is relevant to the decisions made on matters before the planning commission. 
d.  Copies of the approved minutes for each meeting of the planning commission shall be available to the public immediately following the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission. 
(5)  Procedures. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. Such rules shall be subject to approval of the board of commissioners. Robert's Rules of Order shall govern any procedural question not otherwise covered by section 238-3 or said rules of procedure. 
(6)  Order of business at meetings. The order of business at meetings shall be as follows: 
a.  Roll call and determination of a quorum. 
b.  Approval of minutes of previous meetings. 
c.  Approval of the agenda. 
d.  Old or unfinished business. 
e.  New business. 
f.  Reports. 
g.  Public comment. 
h.  Adjournment. 
(7)  Agenda changes. The chair may change the order of the agenda on matters appearing on the agenda during the meeting if, in his or her judgment, time and purpose may be served. 
(h)  Quorum and voting. 
(1)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of four members of the planning commission. A majority vote of those present constituting a quorum shall be sufficient to decide all matters that come before the planning commission except where a greater number is required by Roberts Rules of Order. 
(2)  Voting. 
a.  A planning commission member, who is part of a quorum of the planning commission during the consideration of any matter but not participating in the discussion or vote on a specific matter because of a conflict of interest, shall be considered present for quorum purposes but abstaining from voting on that specific matter. No planning commission member who is present, may abstain from voting except in the case of having a conflict of interest with respect to the matter under consideration as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq. 
b.  A majority vote of those members present of the planning commission is required for approval of all motions. A motion that fails by a majority vote shall not be deemed as approval of the opposite position. 
c.  The planning commission may add conditions to any proposed amendment to the comprehensive plan, amendment to the official zoning map or any special use permit it deems necessary so as to mitigate impacts of the proposal upon surrounding properties consistent with the purposes of the county's resolutions, ordinances, regulations, policies and procedures. 
(3)  Attendance. If any member of the planning commission is absent without cause for three consecutive regular meetings of the commission, that member shall be automatically removed from membership, and a replacement shall be appointed in the same manner as the initial appointment as described in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-4. - Amendments. 
(a)  Initiation of amendments. 
(1)  Persons entitled to propose amendments. Amendments to the official zoning map or to the future land use map of the comprehensive plan may be initiated by: 
• The owner(s) of the subject property or the authorized agent(s) of the owner(s) of the property, or 
• The board of commissioners pursuant to a proposed ordinance introduced by one or more members of the board of commissioners. 
• Staff through a proposed ordinance. 
Amendments to the text of the comprehensive plan and amendments to Title 2 of the UDO may only be initiated by: 
• The board of commissioners pursuant to a proposed ordinance introduced by one or more members of the board of commissioners, or 
• Official action of the planning commission, or 
• Staff through a proposed ordinance. 
Once an amendment to the future land use map, official zoning map, text of the UDO, or text of the comprehensive plan is initiated, no application for a land disturbance permit or land development or building permit, variance or appeal for property subject to such amendment shall be accepted until final action is taken on the proposed amendment. No amendments to the text of the comprehensive plan or Title 2 of the UDO, the official zoning map or the comprehensive plan land use maps shall become effective unless it has been submitted to the planning commission for public hearing and recommendation pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Application schedule. 
a.  Amendments to the official zoning map, to the text of the UDO and to the comprehensive plan must be submitted at least 60 days prior to the date on which final action is to be considered by the board of commissioners. 
b.  Review and consideration of text, zoning and comprehensive plan amendments will be scheduled before the planning commission and board of commissioners in accordance with a schedule prepared annually by the department of planning and development. 
c.  An application for an amendment to the comprehensive plan land use maps or the official zoning maps affecting all or a portion of the same property shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months measured from the date of final decision by the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners may waive or reduce this 12-month time interval by resolution, provided that if the application was denied by the board of commissioners, the time interval between the date of said denial and any subsequent application or amendment affecting the same property shall be no less than six months. This 12-month time interval shall not apply to amendments initiated by the board of commissioners, provided that if such a proposed amendment to the official zoning map or comprehensive plan land use map was denied by the board of commissioners, the time interval between the date of said denial and any subsequent application or amendment shall be no less than six months. 
d.  Following an application for a text, zoning or land use amendment, the department of planning and development shall present an ordinance to the board of commissioners for consideration of a first reading. If the application is initiated by a property owner, the board of commissioners shall refer the application to the planning commission for review and recommendation. If the application is initiated by the board of commissioners pursuant to a proposed ordinance introduced by one or more members of the board of commissioners, or official action of the planning commission, or staff through a proposed ordinance, the first reading of the application may be approved by the board of commissioners for referral to the planning commission for review and recommendation or the first reading of the application may be denied, terminating the application process. 
(b)  Content of applications. 
(1)  Amendments. Applications to amend the official zoning map or the comprehensive plan shall be submitted on a form available from the department and shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
a.  An application fee as established by the board of commissioners. 
b.  The name, address, telephone number, fax number, and email address (if applicable) of the owner, and the same information from the applicant, if different. 
c.  The street address and a valid legal description of the property to be reclassified. 
d.  The applicant's interest in the property, if the applicant is not the owner. 
e.  An electronic/digital version of a property survey, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district, location of the tract, dimensions along all property lines, acreage of the tract and the street names and right-of-way dimensions of abutting streets. The plat shall be prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid. The preparer's signature and seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
f.  A narrative description of the intent of the proposed amendment and the intended timing and phasing of development. 
g.  The current and proposed zoning and land use classification, existing and proposed uses of the property proposed to be reclassified and all zoning and land uses of properties abutting the subject property. 
h.  A written statement addressing how the proposed amendment to the official zoning map or comprehensive plan would impact the capacities of public facilities including, but not limited to, transportation facilities, sewage facilities, water supply, parks, drainage, schools, solid waste and emergency medical facilities. 
i.  A written statement addressing how the proposed amendment to the official zoning map or comprehensive plan would impact the natural environment, especially existing trees, water bodies and water quality. 
j.  A written statement addressing how the proposed amendment to the official zoning map or comprehensive plan would result in an orderly and logical development pattern. 
k.  If the application requests a change in the official zoning map, the applicant shall provide a written statement addressing the standards governing the exercise of zoning as listed in subsection (g)(1) of this section. If the application requests a change in the future land use map, the applicant shall provide a written statement addressing the standards for review of comprehensive plan amendments as listed in subsection (g)(2) of this section. 
l.  Any such other information or documentation as the department may reasonably deem necessary or appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of the particular application consistent with required review standards. 
m.  If the proposed amendment to the official zoning map would meet the thresholds of a development of regional impact (DRI) as described in section 238-5, the applicant shall prepare and submit to the department the necessary documentation required by such section. 
(c)  Withdrawal of applications. An application for an amendment to the official zoning map or comprehensive plan that is filed prior to the deadline for filing such amendment may be withdrawn with full refund of fees prior to the application deadline upon a written request by the applicant. An application may be withdrawn upon a written request by the applicant prior to the submittal for publication of the required legal advertising in the legal organ of the county; however, there shall be no refund of application fees after the application deadline has passed. 
(d)  Procedures for review of applications. 
(1)  Pre-application conference. At least ten business days prior to submitting an application for an amendment to the comprehensive plan or official zoning map, the applicant should schedule a pre-application conference with the department. The purpose of this meeting is to acquaint the applicant with the requirements of the UDO and the views and concerns of the county. Within ten business days of such a request, the department shall schedule a pre-application conference with the applicant and other relevant county departments. 
(2)  Application submission. Within five business days after the established deadline for applications for an amendment to the official zoning map or the comprehensive plan, the department shall determine whether the application is complete. If the department determines the application is not complete, the director shall send a written statement to the applicant (by first-class mail) specifying the application's deficiencies. The application shall be returned to the applicant with a refund of fees paid, and the department shall take no further action on the application until it is re-submitted for a subsequent application cycle. No application that has been determined as complete shall be amended later than the required deadline for advertising in the legal organ of the county prior to the scheduled hearing before the planning commission, except as provided for in this code section. 
(3)  Application review. When the department determines an application for an amendment to the official zoning map or the comprehensive plan is complete, the department shall distribute copies of the application for review and comment to representatives from county agencies and departments including planning, zoning, transportation, stormwater, general engineering, GIS, water/sewer, environmental health, 911, county arborist/urban forester, fire marshal, board of education and any other public agencies having jurisdiction over the proposed action that are invited by the department. 
(4)  Site review. Prior to issuing its report and recommendation regarding the subject amendment, the department shall conduct a site review of the property and surrounding area and consult with and/or review comments from the representatives of the appropriate county agencies and departments regarding the impact of the proposed amendment upon public facilities and services. 
(5)  Staff analysis and standards of review. 
a.  The department shall prepare an analysis of each proposed amendment and shall present its findings and recommendations in written form to the planning commission. Copies of the written report and recommendations of the staff shall be made available to the public at the planning commission public hearing. 
b.  In determining whether to recommend approval or denial of an application to amend the official zoning map, the department shall consider and apply the standards in subsection (g)(1) of this section. 
c.  In determining whether to recommend approval or denial of an application to amend the comprehensive plan, the department shall consider and apply the standards in subsection (g)(2) of this section. 
d.  Recommended amendments. The department's report may recommend amendments to the applicant's request that would reduce the land area for which the application is made, recommend a change in the district requested to a less intensive or lower density than requested, or recommend conditions of approval, as provided in section 238-15 of this chapter. 
(6)  Public hearing. Upon notification of the completed application for an amendment to the official zoning map or an amendment to the comprehensive plan, the planning commission shall place it on the agenda of a regular meeting for a public hearing in accordance with the requirements of the UDO. 
(7)  Public notices. The public notices and public hearings held by the planning commission and board of commissioners concerning the application shall be in accordance with the requirements of the UDO. 
(8)  Developments of regional impact (DRI). If the proposed amendment to the official zoning map would meet the thresholds of a dri, as described in section 238-5 of this chapter, the county shall follow the procedures outlined in said section 238-5 prior to taking any action to further such proposed amendment in the development process. 
(e)  Notice of public hearings. 
(1)  Legal notice. Due notice of public hearings, pursuant to this section, shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. The legal advertisement shall be published at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of each required public hearing. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. If the proposal is to amend the official zoning map or future land use map and is initiated by a party other than the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners, it shall also contain the location of the property, current land use category and zoning district of the property, and the proposed land use and zoning district of the subject property. Notices for variance applications shall include reference to the section of this UDO from which the applicant is seeking a variance. 
(2)  Signs posted. For an application to amend the official zoning map or future land use map, or a special use permit, or a variance from the requirements of this UDO, the department shall post a sign or signs at least 15 days prior to each public hearing required by this section. Sign(s) shall be double-faced and a minimum of 24 inches x 36 inches in size. Signs shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the public right-of-way fronting the property or on the property for which an application has been submitted. Faces of sign(s) shall be placed approximately perpendicular to the centerline of the principal abutting street. The sign shall state the date, time and place of the public hearing, the name of the applicant, the purpose of the application, the street address of the property, the current land use category and zoning district of the property, the proposed land use category and zoning district of the property, and the phone number of the department. A sign shall not be required for amendments to the text of the UDO or comprehensive plan, nor for amendments or ordinances initiated by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Letters to adjoining property owners. For an application to amend the future land use map, other than an amendment initiated by the board of commissioners, the department shall send notification of the requested application by regular mail to all adjacent property owners as shown by the county tax records at the time of filing. For an application to amend the official zoning map or for a special use permit, other than an amendment initiated by the board of commissioners, the department shall send notification of the requested application by regular mail to all adjacent property owners as shown by the county tax records at the time of filing. For an application for a variance from the requirements of this UDO, the department shall send notification of the requested variance by regular mail to all adjacent property owners as shown on the county tax records at the time of filing. All such notifications shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the first required public hearing and shall include a description of the application, and the date, time and place of all scheduled public hearings. 
(4)  When a proposed zoning amendment, variance or special use permit relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, a public hearing shall be held by the planning commission on the proposed action. The hearing required by this subsection shall be at held at least six months and not more than nine months prior to the date of final action on the zoning decision and shall be in addition to other public hearings required under this subsection. The department shall publish a notice of the time, location and date of such hearing that shall include a prominent statement that the proposed action relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency. Such notice shall be given by the following: 
a.  Posting a sign as provided in subsection (2) of this subsection displaying such notice; and 
b.  At least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing, the department shall publish such notice in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. Such notice shall be at least six column inches in size and shall not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper. 
(f)  Rules of procedure for public hearings. 
(1)  Public hearing procedures for the planning commission. For each matter concerning the amendment of the comprehensive plan, the official zoning map, text of the UDO or for any matter concerning the issuance of a special use permit or other matter on the agenda that requires a public hearing and a vote of the planning commission, the following procedure shall be followed: 
a.  Rules of procedure and presentation, as well as standards governing the exercise of the power of zoning, as applicable, shall be in writing and shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
b.  The chair shall announce each matter to be heard and state that a public hearing is to be held on such matter. 
c.  The chair shall request a report from the staff regarding its findings and recommendations. 
d.  The chair shall provide an opportunity for the applicant and any who support the applicant's petition to speak. The chair shall provide equal opportunity for those who wish to speak in opposition to the applicant's petition. The chair may limit the presentation of those for and against a petition to a reasonable length of time, but not less than ten minutes per side. If desired, the applicant may reserve a portion of his/her allotted time for rebuttal and summary comments to be made following presentation of those opposed to the petition. 
e.  Prior to speaking, each speaker shall identify himself/herself and state his or her current address. Each speaker shall limit remarks to data, evidence and opinions relevant to the proposed petition. Speakers shall address all remarks to the chair. 
f.  Following the allotted time for proponents and opponents, the chair shall close the public hearing with respect to the subject matter and seek a motion to act upon the petition as provided in subsection (h) of this section. 
(2)  Public hearing procedures for the board of commissioners. For each matter concerning the amendment of the comprehensive plan, the official zoning map, text of the UDO or for any matter concerning the issuance of a special use permit or other matter on the agenda that requires a public hearing and a vote of the board of commissioners, the following procedure shall be followed: 
a.  Rules of procedure and presentation, as well as standards governing the exercise of the power of zoning, as applicable, shall be in writing and shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
b.  The chair shall announce each matter to be heard and state that a public hearing is to be held on such matter. 
c.  The chair shall request a report from the staff regarding its findings and recommendations. 
d.  The chair shall provide an opportunity for the applicant and any who support the applicant's petition to speak. The chair shall provide equal opportunity for those who wish to speak in opposition to the applicant's petition. The chair may limit the presentation of those for and against a petition to a reasonable length of time, but not less than ten minutes per side. If desired, the applicant may reserve a portion of his/her allotted time for rebuttal and summary comments to be made following presentation of those opposed to the petition. 
e.  Prior to speaking, each speaker shall identify himself/herself and state his or her current address. Each speaker shall limit remarks to data, evidence and opinions relevant to the proposed petition. Speakers shall address all remarks to the chair. 
f.  Following the allotted time for proponents and opponents, the chair shall close the public hearing with respect to the subject matter. 
(3)  Continuance of a public hearing. All items on an advertised agenda for a public hearing shall be heard on the scheduled date, except in the case of a public hearing of the board of commissioners, if a majority of the members of the board of commissioners present at the public hearing determine that specific circumstances surrounding the matter warrant the continuance of the hearing on the matter to a specific future date and time. In such instances, the department shall provide public notice of the new time, date, and location of the continued hearing consistent with the notices provided in subsections (e)(1), (e)(2), and (e)(3) of this section. 
(g)  Application review standards. 
(1)  Standards governing the exercise of zoning power. In reviewing the application of a proposed amendment to the official zoning map, the board of commissioners, the planning commission and the department shall consider the following standards: 
a.  Whether a proposed rezoning will permit a use that is suitable, in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
b.  Whether a proposed rezoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
c.  Whether the property to be affected by a proposed rezoning has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
d.  Whether the proposed rezoning will result in a use that will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools. 
e.  Whether the proposed rezoning is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan. 
f.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property that give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed rezoning. 
g.  Whether, and the extent to which, the proposed amendment would result in significant adverse impacts on the natural environment. 
h.  The feasibility of serving the property with public wastewater treatment service and the impacts of such on the wastewater system; and, if an alternative wastewater treatment method is proposed, whether such wastewater treatment method is authorized in Rockdale County and will have a detrimental impact on the environment. 
(2)  Standards for review of comprehensive plan amendments. When considering an application to amend the future land use map, the board of commissioners, the planning commission and the department shall consider: 
a.  Whether a proposed future land use map amendment would result in a future land use classification that is more consistent with the text and policies of the comprehensive plan than the current classification of the property on the future land use map. 
b.  Whether the proposed amendment would result in a land use that is more compatible with the current and future land use of adjacent and nearby property. 
c.  Whether the proposed amendment would result in more efficient use of publicly financed community facilities and infrastructure. 
d.  The extent to which the proposed amendment would increase adverse impacts on the natural environment; especially water quality, greenspace preservation and air quality. 
e.  Whether the proposed amendment would reduce dependence on the automobile. 
f.  The extent to which the proposed amendment would increase adverse impacts on historic or cultural resources. 
g.  If an amendment would affect only a single parcel, whether it should be made part of an area-wide review of future land use that includes review of future land use for the subject parcel and other surrounding property. 
h.  The degree to which the proposed amendment would have adverse impacts on land in adjacent municipalities and local governments. 
i.  Whether the proposed amendment would result in any negative impacts on the public water supply and wastewater collection and treatment systems or would conflict with adopted long-term water and sewer plans. 
(h)  Action by planning commission. In making a recommendation on the application for an amendment to the comprehensive plan or to the official zoning map, the planning commission shall review and consider the application and materials of record, the recommendations of the department and the applicable standards in subsection (g) of this section. 
(1)  Recommendation. Within a reasonable time of the conclusion of the public hearing regarding a proposed amendment, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to the board of commissioners to: 
a.  Approve the proposed amendment as requested by the applicant. 
b.  Approve an amendment to include a lesser geographic area or a less intense zoning district or land use category. 
c.  Approve the proposed amendment with conditions. 
d.  Deny the proposed amendment. 
(2)  No recommendation. A motion that fails by majority vote shall not be deemed as approval of the opposite position, and a new motion must be made to approve the opposite position. If the planning commission fails to make a decision on a recommendation regarding an application following at least three motions, it shall be deemed to have given a recommendation of "no recommendation" on the proposed amendment. 
(i)  Action by the board of commissioners. 
(1)  Public hearing. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the department and planning commission, the board of commissioners shall place the application on a public hearing agenda of the board of commissioners for a public hearing or hearings, in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Considerations by the board of commissioners. In making a decision on the application for an amendment to the comprehensive plan or the official zoning map, the board of commissioners shall review and consider the application and materials of record, the recommendation of the department, the planning commission, and the applicable standards in subsection (g) of this section. The director shall prepare a proposed ordinance for action by the board of commissioners to effect the proposed amendment. 
(3)  Actions by board of commissioners. At the first regularly scheduled board of commissioners' meeting of the following month subsequent to the board of commissioners' public hearing, the board of commissioners shall take one of the following actions regarding the proposed amendment: 
a.  Approve the proposed amendment, as requested by the applicant. 
b.  Approve the proposed amendment with conditions; 
c.  Approve an amendment to include a lesser geographic area or a less intense zoning district or land use category. 
d.  Deny the proposed amendment. 
e.  Refer the matter back to the planning commission for reconsideration at its next regularly scheduled or called meeting; if such referral includes a public hearing, the matter shall be re-advertised in accordance with subsections (e)(1) and (e)(2) of this section. 
f.  Defer final action until the next regularly scheduled or special called meeting. 
(4)  Notification and final record of action. Within ten business days following action by the board of commissioners, written notification shall be mailed to the applicant and property owner, if different. Thereupon the department shall record the map amendment on the official zoning map or future land use map, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2012-01, §§ 1—13, 2-28-2012; Ord. No. 0-2013-16, § 1, 12-10-2013) 
Sec. 238-5. - Developments of regional impact (DRI). 
(a)  Application. When an application for rezoning, special use, variance, preliminary plat review or permit includes any proposed development of a use and intensity that meets the definition of a DRI in the most recently published standards of the GRTA, it shall be deemed to be a DRI. The application for such rezoning, conditional use, variance, preliminary plat review or permit shall include the information required for review of a DRI in accordance with the most recently published procedures of the Georgia Regional Transportation Authority (GRTA) and the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC). 
(b)  Procedures. The applicant shall provide all documentation and attend all meetings necessary to meet the most recently published standards and procedures for review of DRI applications required by GRTA and the ARC. 
(c)  Recommendation from the ARC and GRTA. No required public hearings or final action shall occur on such a rezoning, conditional use, variance, preliminary plat review or permit application by the board of commissioners until a recommendation is received from the ARC and GRTA regarding the DRI. 
(d)  Certified copy of resolution. After the board of commissioners takes final action on the application, the department shall transmit to ARC and the Georgia Department of Community Affairs a certified copy of the ordinance recording the action, including a record of the total number of members of the board of commissioners that voted for and against approval of the application. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-6. - Special use permits. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for uses that are generally compatible with the use characteristics of a zoning district but that require individual review of their location, design, intensity, configuration and public facility impact to determine the appropriateness of the use of any particular site in the district and compatibility with adjacent uses. A special use may not be approved in a given zoning district unless it is listed as a special use for the subject district in the use table in section 218 of the UDO. 
(b)  Authority. The board of commissioners may, in accordance with the procedures, standards and limitations of the UDO, take final action on applications for special use permits for those uses listed in each of the zoning districts in the use table in section 218 of the UDO. 
(c)  Application procedures. 
(1)  Special use permit applications may be initiated upon application by the owner(s) of the subject property or the authorized agent of the owner(s). 
(2)  Applications for special use permits shall be made on forms published and provided by the department and shall be filed with the department. 
(3)  Each applicant shall complete all questions and requested materials contained within the required application form and shall provide all of the following information: 
a.  Survey plat of subject property, prepared within the last ten years by a professional engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor registered in the State of Georgia. Said survey plat shall: 
1.  Indicate the complete boundaries of the subject property and all buildings and structures existing thereon. 
2.  Include a notation as to whether or not any portion of the subject property is within the boundaries of the 100-year floodplain. 
3.  Include a notation as to the total acreage or square footage of the subject property. 
4.  Name, mailing address and phone number of all owners of the property which is the subject of the application for special use permit; 
5.  Signed and notarized affidavit of all owners of the subject property authorizing the filing of the application for special use permit, and where applicable, the signed and notarized affidavit of the owner(s) of the subject property authorizing an applicant or agent to act on their behalf in the filing of the application for special use permit. The application also shall contain the mailing address, email address, fax number and phone number of any applicant or agent who is authorized to represent the owner(s) of the subject property; 
6.  Written legal description of property. 
7.  Statement of current zoning classification of property, the proposed use of the property. 
8.  A written, documented analysis of the impact of the proposed special use permit with respect to each of the criteria contained in subsection (m) of this section and, where applicable to the use proposed, also the applicable supplemental regulations contained in chapter 218, article III of the UDO. 
9.  Complete and detailed site plan of the proposed use prepared, signed and sealed by an architect, landscape architect or engineer licensed in the State of Georgia showing the following: 
A.  All buildings and structures proposed to be constructed and their location on the property; 
B.  Height of proposed building(s); 
C.  Proposed use of each portion of each building; 
D.  All driveways, parking areas, and loading areas; 
E.  Location of all trash and garbage disposal facilities; 
F.  Setback and buffer zones required in the district in which such use is proposed to be located; 
G.  Existing uses and current zoning of adjacent properties; 
H.  Landscaping plan for parking areas; 
I.  Method of wastewater treatment for the proposed use; 
J.  All other information necessary to demonstrate compliance with subsection (m) of this section and chapter 218, article III, as applicable. 
(4)  Application fees. Application fees shall be as established by ordinance by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Staff analysis, findings of fact, and recommendations. 
(1)  Applications shall be filed on forms provided by the department and shall not be considered an authorized application unless complete in all respects. 
(2)  The department shall conduct a site inspection and shall prepare an analysis of each application for special use permit and shall present its findings and recommendations in written form to the planning commission. 
(3)  Staff recommendations on each application for special use permit shall be based on the criteria contained in subsection (m) of this section and in addition, where applicable to the use proposed, to the applicable supplemental regulations contained in chapter 218, article III. 
(e)  [Initiation of ordinance.] Applications for a special use permit may only be initiated by the owner(s) of the subject property or the authorized agent(s) of the owner(s) of the property. Once an application for a special use permit is initiated, no application for a land disturbance permit or land development or building permit, variance or appeal for property subject to such amendment shall be accepted until final action is taken on the proposed amendment. Following an application for a special use permit, the department of planning and development shall present an ordinance to the board of commissioners for consideration of a first reading. The board of commissioners shall refer the application to the planning commission for review and recommendation. 
(f)  Notice of applications filed. The department shall provide to the board of commissioners, no later than 21 days following the monthly closing date for receipt of applications, a list of all applications for special use permit. The listing of applications shall be reasonably made available to the public. 
(g)  Public hearings required. Before deciding on any special use permit pursuant to the requirements set forth in this section, the board of commissioners shall provide for public notice and a public hearing thereon. No application for a special use permit shall be decided by the board of commissioners unless it has been submitted to the planning commission for public hearing and recommendation pursuant to the requirements of this section. 
(h)  Notice of public hearings. Notice of public hearing on any proposed application for a special use permit shall be provided as is required in subsection 238-4(e) of this chapter and shall, in addition to the information required in subsection 238-4(e), indicate the special use requested for the subject property. 
(i)  Withdrawal of application. An application for a special use permit that is filed prior to the deadline for filing such amendment may be withdrawn with full refund of fees prior to the application deadline upon a written request by the applicant. An application may be withdrawn upon a written request by the applicant prior to the submittal for publication of the required legal advertising in the legal organ of the county; however, there shall be no refund of application fees after the department has accepted an application. 
(j)  Action by the planning commission. 
(1)  The secretary shall provide the members of the planning commission complete information on each proposed application for special use permit which the commission considers including a copy of the application and all supporting materials, all communications and other writings either in support of or in opposition to the application, and the written report and recommendation of the department applying the required criteria in subsection (m) and supplemental regulations of chapter 218, article III, where applicable, to each application. 
(2)  After public notice as required in subsection (h) of this section, the planning commission, shall conduct a public hearing in a manner consistent with subsection 238-4(f) of this chapter. Prior to initiating a motion regarding its recommendation to the board of commissioners the planning commission shall review and consider each of the criteria contained in subsection (m) of this section, and the supplemental regulations contained in section 218, article III, where applicable to the use proposed use. 
(3)  The planning commission recommendation on each application shall be based on a determination as to whether or not the applicant has met the criteria contained in subsection (m), the supplemental regulations contained in section 218, article III, where applicable to the use proposed use, and the requirements of the comprehensive plan and zoning district in which such use is proposed to be located. 
(4)  The planning commission may recommend the imposition of conditions based upon the facts in a particular case in accordance with section 238-15. 
(5)  The planning commission may recommend approval of the special use permit application, approval of the application with conditions, approval of the special use permit for a lesser area, extent or intensity, or denial of the application. Failure to achieve a majority vote following at least three motions on such decision shall result in no recommendation to the board of commissioners on the matter. 
(k)  Action by the board of commissioners. 
(1)  The board of commissioners, after conducting the public hearing with public notice required by this section, shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Vote to approve the application. 
b.  Vote to approve the application with conditions. 
c.  Vote to approve the special use permit for a lesser area, extent or intensity. 
d.  Vote to deny the application. 
e.  Vote to defer the application to its next regular meeting or special called meeting. 
f.  Vote to refer the matter back to the planning commission for reconsideration at their next regularly scheduled meeting or special called meeting. If such referral includes a public hearing, the matter shall be re-advertised in accordance with subsections (e)(1), (e)(2), and (e)(3) of section 238-4. 
(2)  The decision of the board of commissioners on each application for special use permit shall be based on a discretionary determination as to whether or not the applicant has met the criteria contained in subsection (m) of this section, the use standards contained in chapter 218, article III where applicable to the use proposed, the consistency of the application with the comprehensive plan, the requirements of the zoning district in which such use is proposed to be located, and any additional conditions deemed necessary to ensure the compatibility of the conditional use with the surrounding properties. 
(3)  The board of commissioners may impose conditions based upon the facts in a particular case in accordance with section 238-15. 
(l)  Time limits of special use permits. 
(1)  The board of commissioners shall specify limits, if any, of the duration of each such special use permit which is approved. 
(2)  Subject to any limit in duration, the special use permit shall become an integral part of the zoning applied to the subject property and shall be extended to all subsequent owners and interpreted and continually enforced by the department in the same manner as any other provision of the UDO, subject to the limitations provided in subsections (o) and (q) of this section. 
(m)  Special use permit criteria to be applied. The following criteria shall be applied by the department, the planning commission, and the board of commissioners in evaluating and deciding any application for a special use permit. No application for a special use permit shall be granted by the board of commissioners unless satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made concerning each of the following criteria, all of which are applicable to each application: 
(1)  Whether or not the proposed plan is consistent with all of the requirements of the zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located, including required parking, loading, setbacks and transitional buffers. 
(2)  Compatibility of the proposed use with land uses on adjacent properties and other properties within the same zoning district, including the compatibility of the size, scale and massing of proposed buildings in relation to the size, scale and massing of adjacent and nearby lots and buildings. 
(3)  Adequacy of the ingress and egress to the subject property, and to all proposed buildings, structures, and uses thereon, including the traffic impact of the proposed use on the capacity and safety of public streets providing access to the subject site. 
(4)  Consistency with the county's wastewater treatment system, including the feasibility and impacts of serving the property with public wastewater treatment service and, if an alternative wastewater treatment method is proposed, whether such wastewater treatment method will have a detrimental impact on the environment. 
(5)  Adequacy of other public facilities and services, including stormwater management, schools, parks, sidewalks, and utilities, to serve the proposed use. 
(6)  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjacent or nearby properties by reason of noise, smoke, odor, dust, or vibration, or by the character and volume of traffic generated by the proposed use. 
(7)  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of the manner of operation or the hours of operation of the proposed use. 
(8)  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any environmentally sensitive areas or natural resources. 
(n)  Development of an approved special use. The issuance of a special use permit shall only constitute approval of the proposed use, and development of the use shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other permits and approvals required. 
(o)  Expiration of a special use permit. Unless a building permit or other required approvals is secured within 12 months, and construction subsequently undertaken pursuant to such building permit, the special use permit shall expire automatically unless the permit is extended upon application to the board of commissioners in accordance with subsection (p) of this section. 
(p)  Time extension of a special use permit. The time limitations imposed on special use permits by subsection (e)(l) and expiration date established pursuant to subsection (o) of this section may be extended by the board of commissioners not more than once, and not for more than 12 months, upon written request by the applicant and approval of the board of commissioners. 
(q)  Limitations on approvals for special use permits. A special use permit shall expire automatically and cease to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of 12 months. 
(r)  Modifications to a special use permit. Changes to an approved special use permit, other than time extensions provided under subsection (p) of this section, shall be subject to the same application, review and approval process as a new application, including the payment of relevant fees. 
(s)  Appeal of a special use permit decision. Any person, persons or entities jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the board of commissioners regarding a special use permit application may take an appeal to the superior court of the county. The appeal shall be limited to the proceedings and record of the board of commissioners. Any appeal must be filed within 30 days of the decision of the board of commissioners, and upon failure of such appeal, the decision of the board of commissioners shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2012-01, §§ 14—16, 2-28-2012) 
Sec. 238-7. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)  Powers and duties. The board of adjustment shall have the following powers described below and as provided in section 2-133: 
(1)  Appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any final order, requirement or decision made by an administrative official based on or made in the enforcement of the UDO. A failure to act shall not be construed to be an order, requirement or decision within the meaning of this paragraph. In exercising its powers, the board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of the UDO, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit other than a special use permit, provided that all requirements imposed by all other applicable laws are met. See also section 238-8. 
(2)  Variances. To authorize upon application in specific cases, specific variances from the required minimum development standards of property applicable to zoning districts, as provided in Title 2 of the UDO. See also sections 238-9 and 238-10 of this chapter. 
(3)  Flood damage protection. To hear and decide appeals and variance requests from the requirements for flood damage prevention. See section 238-10. 
(4)  Stream buffers and other variances and appeals. To hear and decide variance requests from the requirements for stream buffers set forth in section 310-105 and to hear and decide other variance requests or appeals specifically set forth elsewhere in the UDO. 
(b)  Appointment and terms of board of adjustment. 
(1)  Terms. The board of adjustment shall be composed of seven members who shall be appointed by the board of commissioners and shall serve staggered, four-year terms established by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Composition. The board of commissioners shall appoint the seven members of the board of adjustment. 
(3)  Vacancies All appointees shall continue to serve until their successor is appointed. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointments. If a member moves to reside outside of Rockdale County, such member shall be deemed to have resigned from the board of adjustment. 
(4)  Other offices. Members of the board of adjustment shall hold no other elected office or other county compensated position. 
(5)  Term limits. No member of the board of adjustment shall be eligible for more than two consecutive terms. 
(6)  Removal. A member of the board of adjustment may be removed from office prior to the expiration of his/her appointed term by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. Cause for removal from office shall include, but not be limited to: failure to attend regularly scheduled meetings, as provided in subsection (d) of this section; failure to disclose a conflict of interest, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; and failure to complete required training, as provided in subsection 238-16(g). 
(c)  Board of adjustment officers. 
(1)  Officers. The board of adjustment shall elect a chair and vice-chair annually in the month of February. 
(2)  Duties of chair. The chair shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the board of adjustment and decide all points of order and procedure. The chair may appoint committees necessary to assist and advise it in its work. 
(3)  Acting chair. The vice-chair shall be acting chair in the absence of the chair. 
(4)  Secretary. A designated person from the department shall serve as the secretary of the board of adjustment. The secretary shall have responsibility for assisting the chair with scheduling and preparing the agenda for meetings; providing copies of staff reports to members of the board of adjustment; preparing public notice of hearings and other meetings; and making, publishing and preserving public records of the attendance, proceedings, reports and actions of the board of adjustment; and other duties assigned by the chair. 
(d)  Meetings of the board of adjustment. 
(1)  Regular meetings. 
a.  Unless there is no business to be conducted, regular meetings, including public hearings on matters listed in subsection (a), shall be held on the first Monday of each month at a time so designated by the board of adjustment. If the first Monday of the month is a holiday, the hearing will be scheduled for the second Monday of the month. Meetings shall be held at the Rockdale County Administration & Services Building located at 901 Main Street, Conyers, Georgia. 
b.  All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all meetings shall comply with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, et seq., the Georgia Open Meetings Act. 
c.  Each member shall be notified of each regular meeting at least five days preceding the meeting through a written agenda prepared and distributed by the secretary. 
(2)  Special called meetings. The chair, secretary or a majority of the board of adjustment may call a special meeting at any time that permits posting of a written notice for at least 24 hours in advance at the place of regular meetings and giving written or oral notice at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to the official legal organ of the county. The secretary shall prepare and cause to be delivered a written notice stating the specific purpose of the special called meeting to each member at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. No business other than the specific stated purpose shall occur at the special called meeting. 
(3)  Agenda and minutes. 
a.  The chair and secretary shall determine the meeting agenda. All matters to be considered and/or acted upon by the board of adjustment shall appear on the agenda. 
b.  Meeting minutes shall include and indicate all important facts, a report of all actions taken, a listing of those members present and those absent, a record of the vote of each member on each action taken on each matter and a record of any explanation or commentary that is relevant to the decisions made on matters before the board of adjustment. 
(4)  Order of business at meetings. All meetings shall be open to the public. The order of business at meetings shall be as follows: 
a.  Roll call and determination of a quorum. 
b.  Approval of the agenda. 
c.  Approval of minutes from previous meetings. 
d.  Unfinished business. 
e.  New business. 
f.  Reports. 
g.  Public comment. 
h.  Adjournment. 
(5)  Cancellation of meetings. In the event that there is a lack of business to be discussed and/or voted upon at a future meeting, the secretary shall post an appropriate public notice at the stating the date of the canceled meeting. Such notice shall be posted at least 24 hours in advance of the scheduled meeting. 
(6)  Continuance of hearing. All items on an advertised agenda for a public hearing shall be heard on the scheduled date unless a majority of the members of the board of adjustment present at the public hearing determine that specific circumstances surrounding the matter warrant the continuance of the hearing on the matter to a specific future date and time. In such instances, the department shall provide public notice of the new time, date, and location of the continued hearing consistent with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1, et seq., the Georgia Open Meetings Act. 
(e)  Quorum and voting. 
(1)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of three or more members of the board of adjustment. 
(2)  Voting. 
a.  Abstention. A board of adjustment member, who is part of a quorum of the board of adjustment during the consideration of any matter, but not participating in the discussion or voting on a specific matter because of a conflict of interest, shall be considered present for quorum purposes but abstaining from the voting on that specific matter. No member of the board of adjustment may abstain from voting, except in the case of having a conflict of interest with respect to the matter under consideration. 
b.  Majority vote. A majority vote of those members present of the board of adjustment is required for approval of all motions. A motion that fails by a majority vote shall not be deemed as approval of the opposite position, and a new motion must be made to approve the opposite position. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, §§ 13—16, 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 2019-01, §§ 1, 2, 3-26-2019) 
Sec. 238-8. - Appeals. 
(a)  Procedures for application for appeals to the board of adjustment. 
(1)  Eligibility for appeal. Appeals to the board of adjustment may be initiated by any aggrieved person, or by department, official, agency or board of the county affected by any decision, final order, requirement, determination or interpretation of any administrative official of the county with respect to the provisions of the UDO. These appeals shall be taken by filing with the secretary of the board of adjustment a written notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof, within 15 days after the action being appealed was taken. A failure to act shall not be construed to be an order, requirement or decision within the meaning of this paragraph. 
(2)  A person shall be considered aggrieved for purposes of this subsection if: 
a.  Said person or said person's property was the subject of the action being appealed; or 
b.  Said person has a substantial interest in the action being appealed that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
(3)  Transmission of records. The department shall transmit to the board of adjustment all papers constituting the record upon which the action being appealed was taken. The application shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee, as established from time to time by the board of commissioners, to defray the actual cost of processing the application. 
(b)  Appeal stays legal proceedings. An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed, unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after notice of appeal has been filed that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in that official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such a case, proceedings shall be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the Superior Court of Rockdale County on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(c)  Public hearings. The board of adjustment shall hear the appeal and matters referred to it within 45 days of receiving the complete and sufficient application for appeal and give notice to the appellant and official(s) subject to the appeal. The secretary shall issue proper public notification of the public hearing. The public notification shall indicate the place, date and time of the hearings and shall be posted and advertised per O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq., the Georgia Open Meetings Act. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by an agent, by an attorney or by written documentation. 
(d)  Decisions of the board. Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence and matters of record, the board of adjustment shall make a determination on each appeal. The board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time but, in no event, more than 45 days from the date of the initial hearing. An appeal may be sustained only upon an expressed finding by the board of adjustment that the administrative official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that the administrative official acted in an arbitrary manner. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-9. - Variances. 
(a)  Authority. Unless otherwise provided for in the UDO, the board of adjustment shall have authority to grant variances from the dimensional requirements of Title 2, in accordance with the standards and procedures as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of a variance is to provide a mechanism when, owing to special conditions, the strict application of Title 2 would impose on a landowner exceptional and undue hardship that can be mitigated without conferring on the applicant special privilege. 
(c)  Initiation. A written petition for a variance is to be initiated by the owner(s) of the subject property or the authorized agent(s) of the owner(s) of the property for which relief is sought. Applications shall be filed on forms provided by the department and shall not be considered accepted unless complete in every respect. Application fees shall be as established by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Application procedures. An application for a variance shall be filed with the department, accompanied by a non-refundable fee, as established from time to time by the board of commissioners, to defray the actual cost of processing the application. The application shall be in such form and shall contain at least such following information and documentation: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, fax number and email address of owner(s) and applicant, if not owner. 
(2)  Legal description, street address, lot number and subdivision name, if any, of the property that is the subject of the application. 
(3)  The size of the subject property. 
(4)  The purpose for the requested variance, and a statement of the intended development of the property if the variance is granted. 
(5)  The specific provision of Title 2 from which a variance is requested. 
(6)  A statement concerning each of the Standards for granting variances in subsection (h) of this section. 
(7)  A statement explaining how the proposed variance is consistent with the general spirit and intent of Title 2 of the UDO and the comprehensive plan. 
(e)  Staff report. The staff of the department shall conduct a site inspection and shall prepare an analysis of each application for variance applying the criteria and standards set forth in subsection (h) of this section. The staff report shall be presented in written form to the board of adjustment at least seven days prior to the scheduled hearing date. 
(f)  Public notice procedures. The public notice procedures for a variance application shall be in conformance with subsection 238-4(e)(1)—(4). 
(g)  Public hearing procedures. The public hearing procedures for a variance application shall be in conformance with subsection 238-4(f) of this chapter. However, all testimony before the board of adjustment shall be taken as if under oath, regardless of whether a formal oath or affirmation is administered. The chair, or in his/her absence, the vice chair, may administer oaths and compel attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
(h)  Standards for granting variances. 
(1)  Granting variances. The board of adjustment shall not grant a variance unless it has, in each case, make specific findings of fact based directly upon the particular evidence presented supporting written conclusions that the variance meets each of the following criteria: 
a.  Arises from a condition that is unique and peculiar to the land, structures and buildings involved. 
b.  Is necessary because the particular physical surroundings, the size, shape or topographical condition of the specific property involved would result in unnecessary hardship for the owner, lessee or occupants; as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the provisions of Title 2 of the UDO are literally enforced. 
c.  The condition requiring the requested relief is not ordinarily found in properties of the same zoning district as the subject property. 
d.  The condition is created by the regulations of Title 2 of the UDO and not by an action or actions of the property owner or the applicant. 
e.  The granting of the variance will not impair or injure other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the subject property is located, nor impair an adequate supply of light or air to adjacent property, substantially increase the congestion in the public streets, increase the danger of fire, create a hazard to air navigation, endanger the public safety or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood. 
f.  The variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structures. 
g.  The variance desired will not be opposed to the general spirit and intent of Title 2 of the UDO or the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  No variance shall be authorized to: 
a.  Allow a structure or use not authorized in the applicable zoning district or a density of development that is not authorized within such district. 
b.  Allow an increase in maximum height of building. 
c.  Allow any variance that conflicts with or changes any requirement enacted as a condition of zoning or of a special land use permit by the board of commissioners. 
d.  Reduce, waive or modify in any manner the minimum lot area established by the UDO in any zoning district. 
e.  Reduce, waive or modify in any manner the minimum lot area established by the board of commissioners through a special condition of approval. 
f.  Permit the expansion or enlargement of any nonconforming use of land, nonconforming use of land and buildings in combination, non-conforming use of land and structures in combination or nonconforming use requiring a special use permit. 
g.  Permit the re-establishment of any non-conforming use of land, nonconforming use of land and buildings in combination, nonconforming use of land and structures in combination, or nonconforming use requiring a special use permit where such use has lapsed. 
(3)  Ability to impose special conditions. The board of adjustment may attach reasonable conditions to a variance when necessary to prevent or minimize adverse impacts upon property or the environment. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-10. - Variance to the requirements of flood damage prevention. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Authority. The board of adjustment, shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements for flood damage prevention. 
(2)  Appeals. The board of adjustment shall hear and decide appeals, when it is alleged that there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the department in the enforcement or administration of the flood damage prevention regulations. 
(3)  Variances. Variances to the flood damage prevention regulations may be issued consistent with subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  Application procedures. 
(1)  Forms. A person desiring a variance from the flood damage prevention requirements shall apply for a variance on a form provided by the department. 
(2)  Fees. An application fee, as established by the board of commissioners, shall accompany the application. 
(3)  Application format. The application shall be in such form and contain such information and documentation as shall at least contain the following: 
a.  Name and address of applicant. 
b.  Legal description of the property that is the subject of the application. 
c.  Size of the subject property. 
d.  The purpose for the requested variance, and a statement of the intended development of the property if the variance is granted. 
e.  A statement of the hardship imposed on the applicant by the strict application of the UDO, and a statement of why the variance will not be materially detrimental or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the subject property is located. 
(4)  Review by director. Within a reasonable time, not to exceed ten days after receipt of any application or receipt of additional information pursuant to this section, the director shall examine the application and notify the applicant (by mail) of any apparent errors or omissions and request such additional information as may be necessary for the processing of the application. 
(5)  Review process. Within 30 working days after an application has been determined to be complete by the department, and not less than five days before the scheduled public hearing on the matter, the application shall be reviewed by the department and a recommendation submitted to the board of adjustment. 
(6)  Public hearing. Upon notification that an application for a variance is complete, the board of adjustment shall place the application on the agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting for a public hearing. In reviewing the application for variance approval, the board of adjustment shall use the standards in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. The board of adjustment may require the applicant to meet certain conditions before approval of the variance. 
(7)  Notice. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the approved lower elevation to which the structure is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lower floor elevation. 
(8)  Appeals. Appeals of all final decisions of the board of adjustment shall be as provided in section 238-13. 
(9)  Records. The department shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(c)  Standards for issuance of variance to the requirements of flood damage prevention. 
(1)  Variances shall be issued only upon a determination that the variance is the minimum variance necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(2)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(3)  Variances shall be issued only upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause. 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship. 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(4)  In addition to the findings in subsection (3), the board of adjustment shall consider the following: 
a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. 
b.  The danger to life and property resulting from flooding or erosion damage. 
c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. 
d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. 
e.  The necessity of a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility. 
f.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development. 
h.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area. 
i.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency purposes. 
j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site. 
k.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and streets and bridges. 
(d)  Ability to impose special conditions. Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of flood damage prevention requirements, the board of adjustment may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of the flood damage prevention requirements. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-11. - Burden of proof in appeals and variances. 
(a)  Requirements. The standards and requirements of the UDO and decisions made by public officials are presumed to be valid and just. It shall be the responsibility of an applicant seeking relief to assume the burden of proof and rebut this presumption by presenting sufficient facts and evidence to explain how the proposed appeal or variance is consistent with the general spirit and intent of the UDO and the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Review. It is the duty of the board of adjustment to review such facts and evidence in light of the intent of the UDO to balance the public health, safety and general welfare against the injury to a specific applicant that would result from the strict application of the provisions of the UDO on the applicant's property. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-12. - Effect of decisions of board of adjustment. 
(a)  Compliance with standards upon denial. If an application to the board of adjustment is initiated as a result of an existing violation of the UDO, and the application is denied, the violation shall be required to be corrected within 15 days of the denial or as specified by the board of adjustment if a greater time period is required. The maximum extension of time the board of adjustment may grant for correction shall not exceed 90 days. 
(b)  Successive applications. An application for a variance affecting all or a portion of the same property that was denied by the board of adjustment shall not be accepted sooner than 12 months after the date of final decision by the board of adjustment. However, the board of adjustment may reduce this time interval by majority vote, provided that if the application for a variance was denied by the board of adjustment, the time interval between the date of the initial denial and any subsequent application or amendment affecting the same property shall be no less than six months. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-13. - Appeals of decisions of the board of adjustment. 
Appeals of all final decisions of the board of adjustment under the provisions of this chapter shall be as follows: 
(a)  Review of decisions. Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the board of adjustment, or any officer, department, board or agency affected by such decision, may seek review of such decision by petitioning the Superior Court of Rockdale County for a writ of certiorari, setting forth plainly the alleged errors. Such petition shall be filed within 30 days after the final decision of the board of adjustment is rendered. 
(b)  Notice to the board. In any such petition filed, the board of adjustment shall be designated the respondent in certiorari and Rockdale County the defendant in certiorari. The secretary of the board of adjustment shall be authorized to acknowledge service of a copy of the petition and writ for the board of adjustment as respondent. Service upon the county as defendant shall be as otherwise provided by law. Within the time prescribed by law, the board of adjustment shall cause to be filed with the clerk of Rockdale County Superior Court a duly certified record of the proceedings had before the board of adjustment, including a transcript of the evidence heard before it, if any, and the decision of the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-14. - Administrative variances. 
(a)  Authority. Administrative variances shall be submitted to the director of the department of planning and development, who may grant the variance, grant the variance with conditions, or deny the variance with reasons clearly stated. In granting an administrative variance, the director may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to the location, construction, maintenance and operation of any use or building, in addition to those expressly set forth in this zoning ordinance, as may be deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent properties, the environment and the public interest. 
(b)  Limitations. Applications for administrative variances shall be considered on the following provisions exclusively: 
(1)  Dimensional standards of zoning districts: Reduction up to 50 percent on minimum lot width, minimum building setbacks, maximum impervious surfaces, and minimum lot depth (section 214-1). No administrative variance shall be granted in the CRS zoning district (subsection 206-5(j)(4)) or CSO zoning district (subsection 206-18(f)(18)). 
(2)  Distance between buildings: Reduction up to 50 percent of the minimum distance between buildings on the same lot (section 214-9). 
(3)  Supplemental use and development standards: Reduction up to 20 percent on minimum lot size, up to 50 percent on minimum setbacks and buffers, when required (section 218-13). 
(4)  Signs: Refer to chapter 230—Sign Regulations. 
(5)  Parking requirements: Reduction in the total number of off-street parking spaces up to 20 percent of the number required by the table of minimum parking requirements (subsection 222-3(f)). 
(6)  Parking requirements for front yards: Approval for up to 25% of required parking in a required front yard (as defined in Section 106-1, "Yard, front: A yard extending the full width of the lot or parcel and situated between the right-of-way line of the abutting street and the front yard line of the principal building or structure.") where it is otherwise prohibited or restricted. A ten-foot landscape buffer shall be provided between the public or private street right-of-way and the parking area. 
(7)  Transitional buffer width: Reduction up to 50 percent of required transitional buffer width (subsection 328-6(d)). 
(8)  Administrative variance due to public right-of-way: The department shall be authorized to approve an administrative variance, as follows, if necessary to allow reasonable use following a public road right-of-way donation or acquisition: 
a.  To reduce required minimum lot size by up to 50 percent. 
b.  To reduce required setbacks for a permitted or existing structure on a lot in the event of public road right-of-way donations or acquisition that would otherwise cause the lot to be nonconforming with respect to the minimum setback standards of this Title 2. 
c.  To reduce the number of parking spaces for any existing or permitted structure below the minimum required parking spaces applicable to the use. 
(9)  Fences, walls and hedges: Approval for up to 150 percent of the maximum height of a fence, wall or hedge. An application for an administrative variance affecting all or a portion of the same property that was denied by the board of adjustment shall not be accepted sooner than six months after the date of the final decision by the board of adjustment. 
(c)  Application procedures. 
(1)  Form. An application shall be submitted on a form provided by the department. 
(2)  Fees. A nonrefundable application fee shall accompany the application, as established from time to time by the board of commissioners, to defray the actual cost of processing the application. 
(3)  Documentation. The application shall be in such a form and contain such information and documentation as shall be prescribed by the department, but shall contain at least the following: 
a.  Name and address of the applicant. 
b.  Legal description of the subject property. 
c.  Size of the subject property. 
d.  A statement of the hardship imposed on the applicant by the UDO and a statement of why the variance will not be materially detrimental or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the subject property is located. 
e.  Written documentation that all abutting property owners have been notified. 
f.  A site plan may be required by the director, in which case said plan shall be drawn to scale, showing property lines with dimensions, and any improvements, structures and buildings. The director may require a plat prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid. The preparer's signature and seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
g.  Any other pertinent information as requested by the director. 
(4)  Within 15 business days after an application has been determined to be complete, the department shall either grant the variance, grant the variance with conditions, or deny the variance with reasons clearly stated in accordance with the standards set forth in subsection (e). 
(d)  Expiration. An administrative variance shall automatically expire one calendar year from the date of approval, unless the proposed use or development has begun. 
(e)  Standards for issuance of administrative variances. In deciding whether to grant an application for an administrative variance, the director shall consider all of the applicable standards provided in subsection 238-9(h) of Title 2. Approval of an administrative variance is not guaranteed and shall require demonstration of a hardship. 
(f)  Appeals of decisions to the board of adjustment. The final decision of the director made pursuant to the provisions of section 238-14 may be appealed to the board of adjustment pursuant to section 238-8. Decisions made by the board of adjustment shall be final. All appeals of decisions made by the board of adjustment shall be by petitioning the Superior Court of Rockdale County for a writ of certiorari, setting forth plainly the alleged errors, pursuant to section 238-13. 
(g)  Repeal of an administrative variance. Should the administrative variance cause negative impacts greater than anticipated at the time of approval, the board of adjustment shall have the right to repeal the administrative variance at the request of the director. The board of adjustment shall consider all of the applicable standards provided in subsection 238-9(h) of Title 2. 
(h)  Reporting to the board of adjustment. The department shall report to the board of adjustment all decisions on administrative variances at regular board meetings. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2012-05, § 1, 5-8-2012; Ord. No. 0-2015-05, § II, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 238-15. - Conditional approval and alterations to conditions. 
(a)  Conditions of approval. The planning commission and the department may recommend and the board of commissioners may impose reasonable conditions upon the approval of any amendment to the comprehensive plan, official zoning map or approval of a special use permit that it finds necessary to ensure compliance with the intent of the comprehensive plan or county ordinance. Such conditions may be used when necessary to prevent or minimize adverse impacts upon property or the environment. For example, conditions may include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Limitations or requirements on the size, intensity of use, bulk and location of any structure. 
(2)  Increased landscaping, buffer, screening or setback requirements from property lines or water bodies. 
(3)  Greenspace and open space conservation. 
(4)  Driveway curb cut limitations. 
(5)  Restrictions to land uses or activities that are permitted. 
(6)  Prohibited locations for buildings, structures, loading or parking areas. 
(7)  The provision of adequate ingress and egress. 
(8)  Making project improvements for streets, sidewalks, parks or other community facilities. 
(9)  Building height, massing or compatible architectural design features. 
(10)  Hours of operation. 
(11)  The duration of a special use. 
(12)  A requirement that development shall conform to a specific site plan. 
(13)  Other conditions that the board of commissioners finds are necessary as a condition of approval of an amendment to the comprehensive plan, official zoning map or special use permit. 
(b)  Such conditions, limitations or requirements shall be: 
(1)  Set forth in the motion approving the amendment or special use permit. 
(2)  Set forth in the local ordinance that officially recorded the amendment or special use permit. 
(3)  In effect for the period of time specified in the amendment. If no time period is stated, the conditions shall continue for the duration of the matter which it conditions and become an integral part of the comprehensive plan amendment, official zoning map amendment, or special use permit to which the conditions are attached and shall be: 
a.  Required of the property owner and all subsequent owners as a condition of their use of the property. 
b.  Interpreted and continually enforced by the department in the same manner as any other provision of the UDO. 
(c)  Alterations to conditions of approval. 
(1)  Alterations or repeal of conditions attached to any amendment to the comprehensive plan, official zoning map, or approval of a special use permit shall be made only by the board of commissioners following a duly advertised public hearing conducted in accordance with subsection 238-4(f) of this chapter. Notice shall be provided in accordance with subsection 238-4(e). 
(2)  Alterations or repeal of conditions attached to a variance granted by the board of adjustment shall be made only by the board of adjustment following a duly advertised public hearing conducted pursuant to procedures provided in subsection 238-9(g) of this chapter. Notice shall be provided in accordance with subsection 238-4(e). 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-16. - Orientation and continuing education training for planning commission and board of adjustment members. 
(a)  Training. Each planning commission and board of adjustment member shall, within 120 days after appointment, attend a minimum of four hours of orientation training concerning the duties of the planning commission or board of adjustment, as applicable, and the substance of the UDO pertaining to his/her responsibilities. Such training program shall be provided by the staff of the county or city. 
(b)  Continuing education. Each planning commission and board of adjustment member shall, within each period of two consecutive calendar years, starting at the date of the individual's appointment, attend no less than eight hours of continuing education in any of the subjects listed in subsection (e) of this section as provided by the American Planning Association (APA) or the Georgia Chapter of APA, or as otherwise approved by the director or city manager. Such training program shall be either through personal attendance or through audio or video teleconference. 
(c)  Written statements. Each of the individuals above shall certify his or her attendance by a written statement filed with the secretary of his or her respective planning commission or board of adjustment by December 31 of each calendar year. Each statement shall identify the date of each program attended, its subject matter, location, sponsors and the time spent in each program. 
(d)  Funding. The planning commission, board of adjustment or the legislative body of the city and county government in which the planning commission and board of adjustment have jurisdiction or representation, shall be responsible for providing training, as required in subsections (a) and (b) of this section or for providing funding to each planning commission and board of adjustment member so that each individual may obtain training, as required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section, from other sources approved by the director or city manager. 
(e)  Education subjects. The subjects for the education required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall include, but not be limited to, the following: land use planning; zoning; floodplains; transportation; community facilities; ethics; public utilities; parliamentary procedure; public hearing procedure; planning or administrative law; economic development; housing; public buildings; building construction; land subdivision; and powers and duties of the planning commission and board of adjustment. Other topics reasonably related to the duties of planning officials may be approved by the director prior to December 31 of the year for which the credit is sought. 
(f)  Documentation of training. The planning commission and board of adjustment shall keep in its official public records originals of all statements and the written documentation of attendance required in subsection (c) of this section filed with the secretary of each board pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this section for three years after the calendar year in which each statement and appurtenant written documentation is filed. 
(g)  Removal from position. Members of the planning commission or board of adjustment shall be subject to removal if they fail to: 
(1)  Complete the requisite number of hours of orientation training and continuing education within the time allotted in this section. 
(2)  File the statement required by this section. 
(3)  File the documentation required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-17. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  Disclosure of conflicts. A member of the board of commissioners or planning commission who: 
(1)  Has a property interest in any real property affected by a rezoning action that is under consideration by the planning commission or board of commissioners; 
(2)  Has a financial interest in any business entity that has a property interest in any real property affected by a rezoning that is under consideration by the planning commission or board of commissioners; or 
(3)  Has a member of the family having any interest described in subsections (1) or (2) of this subsection. 
Shall comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 36-67A-1., et seq., as amended. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 238-18. - Disclosure of campaign contributions. 
It is the duty of all applicants and opponents of rezoning actions who have made campaign contributions aggregating $250.00 or more to a member of the board of commissioners or planning commission within two years prior to the applicant's application for the rezoning action, to comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1, et seq., or as amended. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
TITLE 3 - DEVELOPMENT AND PERMITTING 
Chapter 302 - SUBDIVISION AND SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 302-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  This title is adopted in order to encourage appropriate development and subdivision of land in the county and for the following purposes: 
(1)  To ensure economically sound and stable land development. 
(2)  To ensure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land developments. 
(3)  To ensure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments. 
(4)  To ensure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes. 
(5)  To ensure that the land is developed in conformity with the elements of the comprehensive plan, whenever reasonably practical. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-2. - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Rockdale County Subdivision Regulations." 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 302-3—302-7. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEVELOPMENT DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 302-8. - Subdivision and site design. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of quality subdivision and site design is to create a functional and attractive development, to minimize adverse impacts, and to ensure a project that will be an asset to the community. To promote this purpose, any proposed subdivision and site plan shall conform to the following standards that are designed to result in a well-planned community without adding unnecessarily to development costs. 
(b)  Basis for proper planning and design. 
(1)  Site context. 
(2)  Geology and soil. 
(3)  Topography. 
(4)  Climate. 
(5)  Ecology and environment. 
(6)  Existing vegetation. 
(7)  Existing structures. 
(8)  Road networks. 
(9)  Visual features. 
(10)  Past and present use of site. 
(11)  Local and regional plans for Rockdale County and surrounding communities. 
(c)  Suitability of the land. Land physically unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding, poor drainage, topographic, geological, or other features that may endanger the health, life, or property, aggravate erosion, increase flood hazard, or necessitate excessive expenditures of public funds for supply and maintenance of services shall not be approved for subdivision or development unless adequate methods are implemented in the site design for solving these problems. 
(d)  Conformance to the comprehensive plan. All subdivision plats and site development plans shall conform to the maps, policies, and text of the comprehensive plan. 
(e)  Conformance to zoning. All subdivision plats and site development plans shall conform to the official zoning map of Rockdale County and Title 2 of the UDO. 
(f)  Conformance to the Federal Functional Classification Systems for Rockdale County. All streets and rights-of-way for streets shall conform in location, width, design, and construction standards of the latest Federal Functional Classification Systems for Rockdale County. 
(g)  Conformance to regulations of health department and state and federal agencies. All subdivision plats and site development plans shall conform to the regulations promulgated by the Rockdale County Board of Health, Environmental Health Section, the Rockdale Department of Water Resources, and the requirements of state and federal agencies, such as but not limited to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources and the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
(h)  Dedication or reservation of public lands. 
(1)  When public land uses or facilities of the Comprehensive plan or other plans adopted by Rockdale County or other public agencies of the State of Georgia are located in whole or in part in a subdivision or site development plan requiring a permit from Rockdale County, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the developer for acquisition within a reasonable length of time by the appropriate public agency. However, nothing in the UDO shall conflict with the requirements of the O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. (Georgia Development Impact Fee Act). 
(2)  Land dedicated for public rights-of-way or easements shall be suitable for their public purpose. No cross-slopes with a ratio steeper than 4:1 (horizontal: vertical) shall be permitted within rights-of-way or easements. 
(i)  Subdivision name. The name of the subdivision shall be reviewed and approved by the department in coordination with Rockdale County Department of Communications. Any proposed names shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision or development. 
(j)  Sewerage easements. A 20-foot permanent easement within a 40-foot construction easement shall be shown on the plans and dedicated to Rockdale County in a location acceptable to Rockdale Water Resources in all proposed subdivisions in which: 
(1)  Sanitary sewer is currently unavailable; and 
(2)  Rockdale County's wastewater master plan shows that the subdivision lies within an area projected to receive county sanitary sewer service in the future. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 11, 7-24-2007) 
Sec. 302-9. - Design of lots. 
(a)  Unbuildable lots prohibited. No preliminary plat shall be approved on which is shown a flag lot or other lot or parcel of land that would require a variance to be developed or used or that is otherwise unlawful or unbuildable, whether due to the presence of a floodplain, configuration, lack of public utilities, or other physical impediments. 
(b)  Lot design standards. All lots established in connection with the development of a subdivision shall comply with the following design standards unless the proposed subdivision is covered by approved variances or conditions of zoning that take precedence: 
(1)  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines, unless otherwise approved by the director. 
(2)  Each lot shall have direct abutting access to an approved street. 
(3)  Each lot shall abut a public street except those that front on an approved private residential street within a gated community, and shall contain at least 60 feet of street frontage, except for lots fronting on cul-de-sacs that shall abut a said public or private street with at least 30 feet of street frontage. All lots shall comply with section 214-1. 
(4)  Each lot intended for building development shall contain a building site with required buildable area that is outside the limits of floodways, easements, buffers, and building setback lines required by this UDO. 
(5)  Subdivisions shall be designed to minimize direct lot access to major thoroughfares. Reverse frontage lots shall be required for residential subdivisions along the state highway system or other arterials or collectors where internal access can be provided. An easement of at least ten feet in width, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery. Said easement shall provide outdoor screening with an evergreen hedge planted along the roadway within said easement. 
(6)  Lot remnants that constitute reserve strips shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
(7)  No lot shall be created that is of a lesser dimension than that required to meet the frontage, minimum setbacks and yards established in chapter 214 and chapter 206 unless a variance is granted by the board of adjustment. However, this provision shall not apply when a conforming lot is made nonconforming as a result of public acquisition. 
(8)  No lot shall be reduced in size less than the minimum lot area established in chapter 214 and chapter 206. 
(c)  Political boundaries. No lot line of a lot established in connection with the development of a subdivision shall cross a jurisdictional boundary line. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-23, § 9, 10-9-2007; Ord. No. 2009-15, § 3, 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 302-10. - Streets and driveways. 
(a)  Street names. The names of streets shall be reviewed and approved by the department in coordination with Rockdale County Department of Communications. Proposed street names shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing street. 
(b)  Connectivity. See also section 332-2. 
(1)  Where feasible, a proposed subdivision shall provide a street system that is interconnected with the existing or planned street system, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions. 
b.  Whenever a tract of land that is to be subdivided abuts a street stub or dead-end street, the design of the streets within the subdivision shall be arranged so that the abutting streets or rights-of-way are continued through the new subdivision and connected with other adjoining streets. 
c.  Whenever a dedicated or platted half-width street or alley adjoins the tract to be subdivided, the other half-width shall be platted and improved as required by this chapter. 
d.  Culs-de-sac are discouraged, except where streams, lakes, geological or topographical features make through-connections infeasible. 
e.  Culs-de-sac longer than 800 feet are prohibited. See subsection 332-4(e). 
f.  When culs-de-sac are necessary, the director may require that access easements be provided through one or more lots from the cul-de-sac to another nearby public street in order to ensure interconnected access for pedestrians, bicycles, and emergency vehicles to through-streets and multi-use trails. 
(2)  In order to ensure emergency access, every subdivision meeting the standards of section 302-23 shall have the minimum number of access points required by the table set forth in UDO subsection 332-2(d). If two or more public street entrances to a subdivision occur along the same existing street, the entrances shall have adequate sight distance, and be no less than 400 feet apart if on a local street, or 600 feet apart if on a street classified as collector or arterial street on the Conyers-Rockdale County Functional Classification System. 
(c)  Access management. 
(1)  Driveways shall meet access management standards in section 332-2. 
(2)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet are prohibited. 
(3)  An un-signalized driveway entrance onto a street classified as an arterial or collector shall provide a deceleration lane as required in subsection 332-3(d). 
(4)  Deceleration lanes also may be required by the director if considered necessary for traffic safety based on traffic volumes and sight distance. 
(d)  Private gates. 
(1)  Use of private gates across a private driveway that provides access to two or more lots shall be subject to approval of the director. All gates shall meet the minimum gate requirements of article VII of chapter 302. 
(2)  Gates placed across the entrance to a private development or a private driveway at the intersection with a public street shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet from the right-of-way of the public street in order to provide queuing space and not impede traffic on public streets. 
(e)  Private streets. Private streets for residential development are permitted for multifamily, condominium and approved residential gated communities. Private streets for non-residential development are subject to approval by the director. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2009-15, §§ 4, 5, 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 302-11. - Monumentation. 
(a)  Boundary monument. All subdivisions of residential property resulting in a total of three or more parcels and all subdivisions or site developments consisting of nonresidential property without regard to the number of resulting parcels shall have a boundary monument installed on its boundary with public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Construction. Each subdivision monument shall be embedded in concrete or similar permanent material, complete with brass cap with a unique identification stamped or engraved into the cap face. 
(c)  Map registration and accuracy. Georgia State Plan (West) coordinates for this boundary monument will be annotated on the final plat and also provided under separate cover to the GIS Manager, Rockdale County. The standard accuracy shall be in accordance with applicable American Land Title Act (ALTA) requirements for suburban surveys in all three planes (X, Y, and Z). 
(d)  Street corners. Solid steel rods at least ½ inch in diameter and 18 inches long or concrete posts at least 3.5 inches square and 18 inches long shall be set at all street corners. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify the location and shall be set flush or up to six inches above the finished grade. 
(e)  Lot corners. All other lot corners shall be marked with solid steel rods not less than ½ inch in diameter, and at least 24 inches long and shall be set flush or up to six inches above the finished grade. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-12. - Property numbering. 
(a)  The intent of this section is to establish a uniform system of property numbering for the county, to provide the method for instituting such a system, and for the enforcement thereof. 
(b)  A uniform system of numbering properties, as shown on the official county zoning maps, shall be on file in the office of planning and zoning. 
(c)  All legal lots of record within the county may be identified by reference to the property numbering system in this section. 
(d)  Any new structure built in the county shall conform to the provisions of this section before occupancy. 
(e)  The assignment of numbers shall be as follows: 
(1)  A separate number shall be allowed for each 20-foot interval along a road or street (except where dictated otherwise by street alignment) within each land lot (except in the 4th District). The grid in the 4th District shall be an extension of the grids in the 16th District. 
(2)  Lots located on one side of a public street shall be assigned only odd-numbers, and the lots located on the opposing side of the street shall be assigned only even numbers. This odd/even numbering pattern shall be maintained in a consistent manner along the full extent of each street and new streets shall be consistent with the pattern set by existing streets. 
(3)  The county shall be divided into four quadrants: N.E., S.E., S.W., and N.W., and the quadrant designation shall follow the street address for each property. The east-west base quadrant line shall be the centerline of the CSX Railroad. The north-south base quadrant line shall be the centerline of the following roads from north to south: Georgia Highway 20 from Walton County line to Milstead Avenue; to Main Street; to Center Street; to Green Street; to Oakland Avenue; to Parker Road; to Georgia Highway 138; to Ebenezer Road; to Troupe Smith Road; to Midway Road; to Oglesby Bridge Road; to Georgia 212 to the Newton County line. 
(4)  The numbers shall increase as distance from the City of Conyers and the base quadrant lines increases. 
(5)  In any structure that is occupied by more than one business or dwelling unit, each business or dwelling unit shall be assigned a separate number according to the location of each unit's primary vehicle access. 
(f)  The owner of any improved parcel of land in the county shall cause the official assigned street numbers required by this section for such parcel to be posted in a conspicuous place in front of the principal entrance for each primary structure located thereon. Such number shall be affixed or painted on or adjacent to the front entrance or may be affixed or painted on the mailbox for that entrance provided that such mailbox is clearly associated with the entrance to which it refers; and such street number shall be painted on the street curb at the closest point of such curb to the relevant entrance. This requirement shall not be applicable if no street curb exists. 
(g)  Numerals used for property numbering purposes shall be made of a durable material or shall be painted of a durable and weather-resistant paint and shall contrast in color with the background upon which they are placed or painted. Such numbers shall be posted or painted in numerals of no less than four inches in height with a minimum stoke width of 0.5 inch. All numerals required by this section shall be maintained in good condition at all times. All numerals shall be kept free of obstructions at all times so that they are clearly visible from the street right-of-way. 
(h)  Neighborhoods, subdivisions, or residential properties utilizing a cluster mailbox or utilizing a post office box and not having individual mailboxes to use as address identification shall post individual address identification signage as follows: 
(1)  Address signage shall be no more than ten feet from the driveway and no more than 25 feet from the road. 
(2)  For multiple residential properties that share a common single private drive, each owner shall display address numbers at the vehicular access point to the private drive and at the vehicular access point to each individual structure. 
(i)  The department shall issue to any property owner in the county upon request the number assigned to that property in accordance with the provisions of this section. The department shall assign additional numbers in the same manner whenever a property is subdivided or a new front entrance is opened. 
(j)  The department shall be responsible for recording and maintaining the numbering system on the zoning maps. In the performance of this responsibility, the department shall assign numbers guided by the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, §§ 12—14, 7-24-2007; Ord. No. 0-2017-23, §§ II, III, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 302-13. - Community mailboxes. 
(a)  Installation of the mailbox unit(s), as well as any associated shelters, lighting, parking, and other related amenities shall be the responsibility of the developer. 
(b)  Maintenance of the mailbox unit(s), as well as any associated shelters, lighting, parking, and other related amenities shall be the responsibility of the homeowners. The establishment of a homeowners' association is strongly encouraged in developments where individual mail delivery will be unavailable. 
(c)  Cluster mailbox units shall be prohibited within the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Cluster mailbox units, and any associated structures, shall not adversely impact sight distance to any driveway or road intersection, as determined by the Rockdale County Department of Transportation. Whenever feasible, the mailbox unit should be located within an amenity center, if one is proposed for the development. 
(e)  Cluster mailbox unit(s) shall be located in area(s) that will best allow for vehicle stacking or parking without creating pedestrian safety or vehicle safety issues, as determined by the Rockdale County Department of Transportation. 
(f)  A paved area with adequate ingress/egress, designed to meet the requirements of the Rockdale County Department of Transportation, shall be provided to allow vehicles to pull off the county roadway safely while retrieving mail. 
(g)  All access to cluster mailbox unit(s) shall comply with current Americans with Disabilities Act and the Georgia Accessibility Code. Any sidewalks required by other provisions of this ordinance shall be incorporated into the mailbox area(s). 
(h)  The mailbox unit(s) must be installed according to the manufacturer's standards. 
(i)  The mailbox unit(s) and shelter, if any, shall be exempt from the normal setback requirements; however, shelters or other structures must be submitted to the building official for review and must meet all applicable building codes. 
(j)  Any required cluster mailbox station and related improvements shall be installed and approved prior to the recording of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 0-2017-23, § I, 9-19-2017) 
Secs. 302-14—302-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISION AND SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURES 

Sec. 302-20. - Application and authority. 
(a)  Permitting authority. 
(1)  No person shall proceed with any disturbance of the land, including clearing, grubbing, or grading activities on a proposed structure, development or subdivision before obtaining a land disturbance permit from the department, with the following exception: agricultural activity consistent with the general farming use permitted in the A-R zoning districts, provided that there is no subdivision of land and no structure is to be constructed. 
(2)  No building or development permit of any kind shall be issued for any lot or lot of record not created by subdivision in accordance with the provisions of the Rockdale County Subdivision Regulations. 
(3)  Nonconforming lots shall be exempt from subsection (a)(2), provided that new development of said lots shall be in accordance with the UDO, except as to deficient lot dimensions on said lots and that said lots shall not be further divided in any manner except in accordance with chapter 302. 
(b)  Platting authority. No plat of a land subdivision shall be filed or recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court unless it receives final plat approval from the planning commission pursuant to the requirements of this UDO, except as otherwise authorized in O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d). The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision not exempted by O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d) without the approval of the planning commission is a violation of section 302-20 of this UDO and is punishable as provided by chapter 110 of the UDO. 
(c)  Prohibitions. No lot or plat shall be created by subdivision except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter 302. No lot shall be created based solely on a metes and bounds legal description. All lots shall be conforming lots, except where otherwise specifically authorized. 
(d)  Use of plat. The transfer of, sale of, or agreement to sell land by use of a plat that has not been given final approval by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court is prohibited and shall constitute a violation of this chapter in accordance with UDO chapter 110. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from penalties provided in chapter 110. 
(e)  Opening and improving public streets. Rockdale County shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street or lay any utility lines in any street unless the street corresponds to the location approved in the preliminary plat or site development plan prepared consistent with this chapter and meets other requirements of the UDO. 
(f)  Erection of buildings. No buildings except model homes approved by the director, and developments with approved private streets shall be erected on any lot in Rockdale County unless the street giving access thereto has been accepted or opened as a public street in accordance with this chapter and has met other requirements of the UDO. Model homes approved by the director pursuant to this subsection shall not be issued a certificate of occupancy until a final plat providing for approved access to a public street has been approved and recorded. 
(g)  Refusal of building permit. No building permit shall be issued in connection with any lot or parcel or building site created by subdivision in violation of this chapter. 
(h)  Transfer or conveyance. Transfer or conveyance of any lot, building site, or other parcel created by subdivision in violation of this chapter shall be illegal and shall be subject to enforcement action as provided in chapter 110(k) of the UDO. 
(i)  The process for receiving a land disturbance permit pursuant to this Title 3 shall be subject to the following procedures, reviews, and approvals: 
(1)  Application on the form furnished by the department and payment of fees. 
(2)  Preliminary plat, as provided in section 302-23, or site development plan as provided in section 302-24, as applicable. 
(3)  Natural resources plan, as provided in subsection 302-23(c). 
(4)  Buffer plan and the protection and replacement plan, as provided in section 302-63. 
(5)  Traffic impact study and traffic calming plan, if required. 
(6)  DRI review, if applicable, as provided in section 302-21. 
(7)  The erosion and sedimentation control plan and supporting documentation required in chapter 306. 
(8)  Stormwater management concept plan, permit application, and stormwater management plan, as provided in chapter 310. 
(9)  The applicable civil design and construction drawings prepared in conformance with the specifications and standards of article IV of this chapter. 
(10)  Payment of all land disturbance permit fees established by the board of commissioners. 
(11)  Additional requirements as specified by each type of permit, as stated below. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-21. - Developments of regional impact. 
(a)  DRI review threshold. When an applicant desires a building permit, land disturbance permit, site development plan, or preliminary plat review that meets the standards of a development of regional impact (DRI) as provided in Georgia Department of Community Affairs regulation 110-12-3, and the use has not had prior review in accordance with section 238-5 of the UDO, then the department shall initiate and the applicant for such permit or preliminary plat review shall participate in a review by the Atlanta Regional Commission as provided in section 238-5 of the UDO. 
(b)  Notification of applicant. The applicant will be notified by Rockdale County in the pre-application conference or else shall be informed in writing by Rockdale County within five days of receipt of the completed application concerning the required DRI procedures, and additional information requirements, if any. 
(c)  Suspension of land development processing during review. No action shall occur on such application by Rockdale County until a recommendation is received from the Atlanta Regional Commission regarding the DRI. The schedule for review and action on the application shall be adjusted accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-22. - Subdivisions not requiring preliminary plat. 
(a)  Applicability. For the purpose of this ordinance, each of the types of activities described below shall be considered subdivisions, but are exempt from the procedures and required site improvement provisions of this ordinance and may be approved by the director. 
(1)  The combination, recombination, or reconfiguration of two or more buildable lots of record, where the total number of lots is not increased. 
(2)  The division of land into four or fewer lots where no new streets or other public improvements, or access easements are planned or required. 
(3)  The conveyance of land to a public entity as defined in chapter 106. 
(b)  Standards. The following standards apply to subdivisions meeting the standards of subsection (a): 
(1)  The subdivision or lot meets all requirements of this UDO, and the applicant demonstrates that approval of the subdivision or lot will not create nonconformity to the requirements of this UDO on any other portion of the original property from which the lot was subdivided. 
(2)  All new lots fronts on an existing public street with a minimum frontage of 60 feet. 
(3)  No extension of utilities or construction of public streets are required or provided. 
(4)  The lots shall comply with the requirements of the water provider and Environmental Health Department, or Rockdale Water Resources, as appropriate. If existing utilities are being modified, the Environmental Health Department or Rockdale Water Resources, as appropriate, shall certify approval of wastewater treatment service prior to approval of the final plat by the director. 
(5)  All slope and utility easements and additional street right-of-way, as determined by the director on the basis of the latest Federal Functional Classification Systems for Rockdale County shall be provided at no cost to Rockdale County. 
(c)  Procedures. Subdivisions not requiring a plat shall be platted in accordance with the final plat standards of this UDO, and shall be submitted with an application and appropriate non-refundable fees to the director for review and approval. Upon approval, the director shall authorize and the planning commission shall approve the recording of the final plat with the clerk of Superior Court of Rockdale County and grant the issuance of building permits pursuant to the codes and ordinances of Rockdale County. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 23, 5-22-2007) 
Sec. 302-23. - Subdivisions requiring preliminary plat. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all subdivisions of property for non-residential use, all multi-phase subdivisions, and subdivisions of property for residential use other than those meeting the standards of section 302-22. 
(b)  Process. All subdivisions not meeting the standards of section 302-22 shall be subject to the application, review, and approval procedures of this section, consisting of the preparation and approval of a preliminary plat, construction plans, and final plat. 
(c)  Preliminary plat. 
(1)  Application. 
a.  Prior to any land disturbance activities or selling any lots, the developer shall submit a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision to the department for review and approval. When multi-phase subdivisions receive prior approval as a whole in the concept plan stage, preliminary plat applications may be submitted individually for each phase. The application for approval of a preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the required fee and the following additional documents, as appropriate: 
1.  A natural resources plan, shall be required by the department. The natural resources plan shall include a map drawn at one inch = 100 feet that indicates the presence of streams, lakes, floodplain, wetlands, areas of vegetation, steep slopes, shallow or exposed rock, or other site resources or site hazards and the appropriate protection or mitigation measures that will be taken in development of the site. 
2.  A traffic impact study for developments that exceed the thresholds published by GRTA, or 200 lots, whichever is less, prepared in accordance with the standards and requirements of GRTA, or the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
3.  Traffic calming plan, in accordance with the Rockdale County Traffic Calming Ordinance. 
b.  The preliminary plat for a subdivision shall be in substantial conformity with the concept plan. 
c.  The preliminary plat shall be prepared in accordance with this chapter and consist of the elements as described in section 302-61. After approval of the preliminary plat, the developer shall also provide copies of the preliminary plat to all utility companies serving the area. 
(2)  Preliminary plat review procedures and standards. 
a.  Preliminary plats prepared pursuant to this section shall be reviewed with respect to their consistency with the Rockdale County Comprehensive plan and conformity with each of the standards and requirements of this section and all other applicable sections of the UDO and state and federal regulations as they may be applicable. 
b.  The applicant shall be responsible for compliance with all federal, state, and local codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the noted and written comments of the department and related agencies reviewing the preliminary plat. 
c.  Within 15 working days from receipt of the preliminary plat, the director shall coordinate the internal review of said preliminary plat with staff representing the disciplines of planning, zoning, transportation, stormwater, general engineering, GIS, water/sewer, environmental health, the Rockdale County Department of Communications, county arborist/urban forester, and the fire marshal and other departments, as applicable. 
d.  Review of natural resources plan, traffic impact study, and traffic calming plan. 
1.  Concurrent with review of the preliminary plat the director shall review the natural resources plan, traffic impact study, and traffic calming plan, if required. Such review shall assess the conformity with each of the standards and requirements of this chapter, chapter 332 and chapter 222. 
2.  If the natural resources plan, traffic impact study, or traffic calming plan is disapproved, the applicant shall revise and resubmit such document so that it meets the standards of this section and addresses the reasons for disapproval in a manner that is satisfactory to the director. 
3.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall be contingent on the director's approval of the natural resources plan, tree protection and landscape plan, traffic impact study, and traffic calming plan, if applicable. 
e.  The director shall indicate on a review copy of the drawings or in a memorandum all comments related to compliance of the preliminary plat with this ordinance, principles of good engineering and design, conditions of zoning approval, and regulations of other county departments and state agencies as appropriate. The director shall have final staff authority to determine the applicability of any and all comments of staff, and review agencies under these regulations or conditions of zoning approval. 
f.  When the director has determined that the preliminary plat is in compliance with this UDO and approval has been received from all affected county departments and outside agencies having jurisdiction, the director shall deliver the preliminary plat to the planning commission for their review. Not less than seven days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the preliminary plat will be reviewed, the director shall notify the applicant of the time and place of the planning commission meeting by first class mail. 
(3)  Action on application. 
a.  No more than 60 days following submission of the preliminary plat, the planning commission shall either approve or disapprove the preliminary plat unless the applicant consents to waive this requirement and consent to an extension. Otherwise, if the planning commission fails to take action within 60 days after the date of submission of the preliminary plat, then the preliminary plat shall be deemed to be approved. 
b.  If approved, the chair of the planning commission shall sign such preliminary plat and certify approval on two copies of the preliminary plat. One copy shall be returned to the applicant and the other copy retained and made a part of the department's records. 
c.  If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the director shall notify the developer in writing, within seven days of the planning commission meeting at which it was reviewed, stating the reasons for disapproval. 
(4)  Resubmission. If the preliminary plat application is disapproved, the applicant shall resubmit the preliminary plat and completed application form correcting all deficiencies, along with the appropriate resubmission fee. Failure to resubmit within 180 days shall require the applicant to submit a new preliminary plat. 
(5)  Effect of preliminary plat approval. 
a.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout of the subdivision to be used as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. 
b.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall entitle the applicant to prepare and submit construction plans for site development and improvement as provided in article IV of this chapter 302 and to meet all other provisions of the UDO. 
c.  The approval of the preliminary plat shall expire if a land disturbance permit for any required improvements has not been issued or a final plat has not been submitted for recording within 12 months of the date of approval of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-24. - Site development plans. 
(a)  Applicability. Site developments consist of proposed developments of a single parcel of land, having a single phase, other than a one- or two-family dwelling or a residential accessory structure, that do not require subdivision of property into separate lots or units for sale. 
(b)  Process. Site development plans shall be subject to the application, review and approval procedures of this section, consisting of the preparation and approval of a site development plan and construction plans for site development and public improvements. 
(c)  Site development plan application. 
(1)  Prior to undertaking disturbance of land or construction requiring a building permit, the developer shall submit to the department a site development plan and an application on a form provided by the department. The application for approval of a site development plan shall be accompanied by the required fee and the following information: 
a.  A natural resources plan, if the site is larger than one acre and has not been developed previously for commercial use or is a recorded lot in a commercial subdivision. The natural resources plan shall include a map drawn at one inch = 100 feet that indicates the presence of streams, lakes, floodplain, wetlands, prime vegetation, endangered species, steep slopes, shallow or exposed rock or other site resources or site hazards and the appropriate protection or mitigation measures that will be taken in development of the site. 
b.  A traffic impact study for developments that exceed the thresholds published by GRTA, or have trip generation greater than 2,000 daily trips, whichever is less, prepared in accordance with the standards and requirements of GRTA, or the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
(2)  The site development plan shall provide all elements required in section 302-62. 
(d)  Site development plan review. 
(1)  If the application is certified as complete, the director shall review the site development plan with respect to its consistency with the Rockdale County Comprehensive plan and conformity with each of the standards and requirements of this section and all other applicable sections of the UDO. 
(2)  Concurrent with review of the site development plan, the director shall review the natural resources plan and traffic impact study, if required. Such review shall assess the conformity with each of the standards and requirements of this chapter, chapter 332 and chapter 222. 
(3)  If the natural resources plan or traffic impact study is disapproved, the applicant shall revise and resubmit such document so that it meets the standards of this section and addresses the reasons for disapproval in a manner that is satisfactory to the director. 
(4)  The director shall coordinate the internal review of all site development plans and related documents with staff members representing the disciplines of planning, zoning, transportation, stormwater, general engineering, GIS, water/sewer, environmental health, the Rockdale County Department of Communications, county arborist/urban forester and the fire marshal. The director shall have final staff authority to determine the applicability of any and all comments of staff and review agencies under these regulations or conditions of zoning approval. 
(5)  Approval of the site development plan shall be contingent on the director's approval of the natural resources plan and traffic impact study, if applicable. 
(6)  The director shall indicate on a review copy of the drawings or in a memorandum, all comments related to compliance of the site development plan with the comprehensive plan, this UDO, principles of good engineering and design, conditions of zoning approval and regulations of other county departments and state agencies as appropriate. 
(7)  The director shall have no more than 60 days either to approve or disapprove the site development plan. If the director disapproves of the application, the director shall notify the applicant in writing, stating the reasons. If approved, such action shall be noted on two copies of the site development plan. One copy shall be returned to the applicant, and the other copy shall be retained and made a part of the department's records. 
(8)  The applicant shall be responsible for compliance with all federal, state and local codes, regulations and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the noted and written comments of the department and related agencies reviewing the site development plan. 
(e)  Resubmission. If the site development plan is not approved, the applicant shall resubmit ten copies of the site development plan and completed application form correcting all deficiencies, along with the appropriate resubmission fee. Failure to resubmit the site development plan within 180 days shall void the application and require the applicant to submit a new application for site development plan approval with appropriate fees. 
(f)  Effect of approval. 
(1)  Approval of the site development plan shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout of the development to be used as a guide to the preparation of construction plans. 
(2)  The approval of the site development plan shall expire if a land disturbance permit for any required improvements has not been issued within 12 months of the date of approval of the site development plan. 
(3)  Approval of the site development plan shall entitle the applicant to prepare and submit construction plans for site improvements required in this section in conformity with article IV of this chapter and other provisions of the UDO (g), Land disturbance permits. 
Following approval of construction plans for site developments and required improvements, a land disturbance permit to construct the required improvements for a site development may be issued at the applicant's request. See also section 302-46. 
(h)  Development conformance for site developments. 
(1)  After completion of the construction of any required improvements for all or part of the area shown on the approved site development plan and before seeking a building permit, the developer shall submit all required certificates, including certification for stormwater management facilities, and guarantees and sureties for required improvements not yet completed, as provided in section 302-28, to the department for approval. The applicant also shall provide copies of the site development plan to all utility companies serving the area. 
(2)  All improvements and utility installations that are required for approval that are to be dedicated under the rules and regulations of the county shall be completed in accordance with the appropriate specifications, unless the applicant provides guarantees and sureties for required improvements not yet completed in accordance with the performance and maintenance agreement, as provided in section 302-28. 
(3)  The director shall certify by signature on the original of the site development plan that all of the requirements of this UDO, and the conditions of zoning approval, if any, have been met, and that all other affected departments and agencies have inspected and approved the construction of improvements pursuant to the approved site development plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-25. - Approval of development conformance for subdivisions. 
(a)  Approval of development conformance. Approval of development conformance shall be a prerequisite to the approval of a final plat or issuance of a certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy for any part of a project included in a land disturbance permit, except for single-family and two-family residential structures. The approval shall reflect certification that all site work and construction has been accomplished according to the terms of approved plans and permits, except when performance bonds have been authorized, and that all facilities intended for maintenance, supervision and/or dedication to the public are in compliance with appropriate standards, regulations, codes and ordinances. Such approval shall be revoked in cases of fraud or whenever unauthorized changes are made to the site without the benefit of required permits. 
(b)  As-built drawings. Upon completion of the development activity as authorized by the land disturbance permit, and prior to final development inspection of public and private improvements, the developer shall submit to the department for review and approval a complete set of drawings prepared by a registered land surveyor in the state of Georgia showing "as-built" conditions. As-built drawings of water and sewer systems shall be provided to Rockdale Water Resources. See chapter 98. 
(c)  Certification. 
(1)  Upon completion of the project, the owner may request a certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy from the director. The certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy shall be in a form as provided by the director. 
(2)  Following final inspection and approval of all as-built drawings, the director shall approve the certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-26. - Final plat approval. 
(a)  Final plat required for subdivisions. 
(1)  After completion of the construction of any required improvements for all or part of the area shown on the approved preliminary plat and before selling any lots, the applicant shall submit a final plat meeting the specifications of section 302-66. The final plat application shall be submitted to the department for approval together with the required certificates, including certification for stormwater management facilities and guarantees and sureties for required improvements not yet completed. The applicant also shall provide copies of the approved final plat to all utility companies serving the area. 
(2)  The final plat shall be in substantial conformity with the approved preliminary plat. 
(3)  All improvements and installations to the subdivision that are required for approval of the final plat and that are to be dedicated shall be completed in accordance with the appropriate specifications, unless the applicant provides guarantees and sureties for required improvements not yet completed in accordance with approved performance guarantees agreement, as provided in section 302-28. 
(4)  The following certifications shall accompany the final plat application: 
a.  A statement from the director of the Rockdale Water Resources and/or the Environmental Health Section of the Rockdale Health Department, as appropriate, approving the water supply and wastewater disposal systems, and a statement from the Rockdale County Fire Department approving the provision of fire hydrants. No final plat shall be approved except that the applicant has shown compliance with all of the requirements of chapter 98 regarding public utilities. 
b.  A statement from the department that all improvements have been made as required by this chapter. 
c.  The appropriate final plat review and filing fees as established by the board of commissioners. 
(5)  After final plat approval by the director, the applicant shall prepare appropriate documents and as-built plans for work done on dedicated public lands and prepare a metes and bounds description of dedicated streets, other public spaces and utilities for acceptance by the county. See section 302-65. 
(b)  Final plat approval. 
(1)  The final plat shall not be approved by the director until after a final inspection, as required in section 302-37, certification by the director that all requirements of these and other applicable regulations have been met, preparation of as-built drawings, dedication of public land and improvements, and approval of an executed performance guarantee and maintenance agreement and security, if required, consistent with section 302-28. 
(2)  The director shall certify by signature on the original of the plat that all of the requirements of this UDO, and the conditions of zoning approval, if any, have been met, and that all other affected departments and agencies have approved the plat. 
(3)  After the final plat has been approved, the director shall authorize recording with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Rockdale County. The applicant shall provide the department with an appropriate number of copies of the recorded plat, as determined by the director. The final plat shall indicate rights-of-way and other lands within the subdivision that are required to be dedicated to the county. 
(4)  Periodically, but no less than once each month, the director shall submit a listing of all approved final plats to the board of commissioners for ratification. The board of commissioners shall ratify final plats and accept rights-of-way and improvements dedicated to the county by consent action taken during a regularly scheduled meeting. 
(5)  Ratification of the final plat by the board of commissioners shall not be deemed acceptance of any dedications of land or improvements to the public. See subsection (d) of this section 302-26. 
(c)  Plat recording and usage. 
(1)  No plat of a subdivision shall be accepted for recording in the plat books or deed books in the office of the clerk of superior court, except a final plat on which is inscribed the approval of the director. 
(2)  The transfer of, sale, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to or exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the board of commissioners and recorded in the office of the clerk of Superior Court of Rockdale County is prohibited, and the description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from penalties. 
(d)  Dedication of rights-of-way and other public lands. 
(1)  If dedication of right-of-way or other land to the county is required by the UDO, acceptance by the county shall be contingent on the developer submitting, and the county approving, a metes and bounds description of the required right-of-way and transferring title to such land by deed to the county prior to issuance of a certificate or completion and related building permits. The metes and bounds description shall be consistent with the right-of-way survey data and public lands survey data shown on the final plat approved by the director. 
(2)  Refusal to accept dedications. Whenever a plat or site development proposes dedication of land to public use, the director may, at his/her option, require an independent environmental review to be conducted of such property. Such environmental review shall consider, among other things, whether the proposed land to be dedicated contains wetlands, subsidence, exposed rock, hazardous wastes, human burials or any other natural features that diminish the suitability of the property for its dedication, public use, public facilities, and maintenance. If the director finds that the proposed dedicated land is not suitable in whole or in part, the director may disapprove the plat or site development plan, shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for such determination and shall recommend that the board of commissioners not accept dedication of unsuitable land. 
(e)  Structure location plan. 
(1)  The department shall require that a structure location plan be approved prior to issuance of a land development or building permit for all lots. 
(2)  The structure location plan shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements outlined in section 302-68. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-27. - Procedures for revising final plats. 
(a)  When it becomes necessary or desirable to revise a recorded final plat, the developer shall prepare a letter to the director documenting the reason for and extent of the revision and reproducible drawing(s) that contain the subject revisions along with a review fee determined by the board of commissioners. The revised plat shall contain a new signature block, be dated with the current date, be drawn at an appropriate scale and contain notation(s) indicating the nature and location of the revision(s). The subdivision name, date and book and page number of the original recording shall be noted on the new plat; and the new plat drawings shall be designated as "revised final plat." 
(b)  All revisions shall be bound by the protective covenants, if any, recorded on the original final plat, and a statement to that effect shall be noted on the revised final plat. 
(c)  If necessary, corresponding revisions to construction drawings, as-built drawings, engineering data and reports also shall be prepared, labeled appropriately, submitted, reviewed and certified by the director, and filed in the department along with a review fee determined by the board of commissioners. 
(d)  The director shall forward the revised final plat and any related documentation to the appropriate departments or agencies that would be involved in checking the accuracy of the revision. Upon receipt of approval from such other departments or agencies, the director shall certify the revised final plat and submit it to the board of commissioners for ratification, as provided in subsection 302-26(b)(4) and (5). 
(e)  The approved revised final plat shall be recorded by the clerk of superior court and returned to the developer. 
(f)  Any revised plat that does not receive approval shall be returned to the developer with written notification stating the reasons for denial. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-28. - Guarantees and sureties. 
(a)  Application. Guarantees and sureties shall be required for any development involving the division of land into multiple ownerships with lots or units where the actual sale of such lots or units may commence prior to the fulfillment of all requirements of this Title and all conditions of approvals and permits. 
(b)  Improvements. All guarantees and sureties shall be conditioned upon the faithful completion and performance by the developer of all work required for completion of all amenities, improvements and installations that are part of a subdivision of land in order to fulfill requirements of this Title for an approved portion of the development, when such installations are to be completed within a specified period of time. Such delay in installation is subject to approval by the director because of unusual weather, site conditions or construction phasing situations where it is in the ultimate interests of the county and the purchaser of the subject lots or units that installation and construction be delayed. 
(c)  Guarantees and sureties. With the director's approval, guarantees and sureties may be allowed for the following types of improvements: 
(1)  Stormwater management facilities, subject to subsection (e) of this section. 
(2)  Sidewalks, trails or walking paths. 
(3)  Street surface course. 
a.  The street base required under section 332-7 shall be in place, as well as the binder course, if applicable. 
b.  Streets shall be so designed to divert stormwater runoff into storm drainage systems. 
(4)  Landscaping and tree planting. 
a.  Final landscaping and planting grass, sod, mulch and ground cover in common areas and within rights-of-way. Under no circumstances shall this be construed as allowing erosion and sedimentation control measures required by chapter 306 to be bonded for future installation. 
b.  Planting and irrigation of trees and shrubbery in common areas and within rights-of-way. 
(5)  Recreational facilities. 
(6)  Guaranties and sureties shall not be allowed for erosion and sedimentation control facilities, improvements or management practices. 
(d)  Performance guarantee. 
(1)  In the pre-construction conference, the director shall have the authority to require the applicant to establish a performance guarantee or post a performance bond in a form acceptable to the county in order to guarantee timely installation of required project improvements; such as, but not limited to, streets, utilities, stormwater management facilities, sidewalks and landscaping within the subject development that are consistent with this Title. Said performance guarantee shall be in an amount equal to 125 percent of the estimated construction cost and be for a term not to exceed 24 months, with one 12-month extension, subject to approval by the director. 
(2)  The developer shall provide the department with a certified copy of a properly executed improvement agreement covering all of the work to be done to complete all improvements. This agreement shall include the following: 
a.  A condition requiring that all improvements, whether required by this Title or constructed at the developer's option, shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and provisions of this title. 
b.  A condition requiring that all required improvements shall be constructed satisfactorily within the period stipulated. 
c.  The projected total cost for each improvement. Cost for construction shall be determined by either of the following: 
1.  An estimate prepared and provided by the applicant's engineer and approved by the director. 
2.  A copy of an executed construction contract with a bona fide and qualified contractor. 
d.  Specification of the public improvements to be made and dedicated including a timetable for making such improvements. 
e.  A condition requiring that, upon failure of the applicant to make required improvements (or to cause them to be made) according to the schedule for making those improvements, the county shall utilize the surety provided in connection with the agreement to complete the improvements. 
f.  A condition providing for the amount and type of surety necessary to ensure performance for the construction of improvements. 
g.  A condition allowing that, upon the applicant's request, the amount of the surety may be reduced once during the life (term) of the agreement, subsequent to the completion, inspection and acceptance of the improvements by the county. 
(3)  If the developer intends to perform the work personally, the contract must be drawn with the county in an amount acceptable to the department in an amount and timeframe acceptable to the department to adequately cover the cost of the work to be performed. 
(4)  The developer shall place funds in escrow with the county in an amount equal to 125 percent of the total contract amount. 
(5)  It shall be the responsibility of the developer to petition the county for release of the guarantees and sureties and to warrant that all improvements subject to the guarantee or surety have been completed to fulfill all the requirements of this title. 
(e)  Required stormwater performance surety. 
(1)  Upon approval of the stormwater management plan, but before the issuance of a land disturbance permit, the applicant shall be required to post a performance bond, cash escrow, certified check or other acceptable form of performance security for construction of the proposed stormwater system. 
a.  Amount of surety. The amount of surety shall be 125 percent of the total estimated construction costs of the facilities required by the stormwater management plan. 
b.  Release of bond. The performance bond or other surety shall not be released until compliance with the requirements listed below has been achieved. 
1.  Final inspection. The department shall perform a final inspection of the facilities and determine that they have been constructed in compliance with the stormwater management plan. 
2.  Execution. The department shall determine that all provisions of the stormwater management plan have been executed faithfully. 
(2)  Partial release. A provision may be made for partial release of the amount of the bond, pro rata, upon completion and acceptance of various stages of development as specifically delineated, described and scheduled in the stormwater management plan. The applicant shall notify the department upon completion of each stage that is ready for inspection. 
(f)  Approval of permit. The board of commissioners may approve issuance of the development permit and waive or reduce any performance bond requirement after consideration of such factors as proof of financial ability of the developer or the record of performance or compliance by the developer since the last violation, or any other factors the board of commissioners considers relevant to the protection of the public from potential erosion or sedimentation violations. 
(g)  Type of surety. 
(1)  Subject to the approval of the county attorney the following types of surety arrangements may be used to secure the developer's obligations in the agreements required in the section: 
a.  Cashier's check. 
b.  Certified check. 
c.  Developer/lender/county agreement. 
d.  Interest-bearing certificate of deposit. 
e.  Clear, irrevocable letters of credit. 
f.  Surety bond. 
(h)  Subsequent phases. Guarantees and sureties for any subsequent phase of construction of a subdivision or development project must include all streets within the subdivision or development project that provide access to the subsequent phase, unless alternate access for construction traffic is provided and approved by the director. 
(i)  Maintenance of improvements. Prior to approval of a certificate of completion or a certificate of occupancy, a maintenance agreement and bond shall be provided to ensure the continued function and good condition of public improvements being constructed as part of a subdivision to fulfill the requirements of this title for a specified time until such bonds are released by the county. The developer shall be responsible for maintenance of all such public improvements for two years from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion, as applicable. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be equal to ten percent of the actual cost of construction of the public improvements shown on the as-built surveys. The cost of construction shall be determined by copies of contractor agreements or actual invoices paid, or as otherwise determined by the director. 
(j)  Release of guarantees and sureties. 
(1)  It shall be the responsibility of the developer to petition the county for release of surety. During the two-year period, the department will inspect the improvements randomly, listing any defects. The owner shall have 30 days to correct any specified deficiencies. Failure to perform said corrections shall result in the forfeiture of the surety. 
(2)  An organization shall be identified or established, with the approval of the county attorney, for the purpose of owning and maintaining common facilities not proposed for dedication to the county. If covenants or conservation easements are used, they shall be approved by the county attorney and recorded with the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 15, 7-24-2007) 
Secs. 302-29—302-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 302-34. - Construction plans. 
(a)  Authority. 
(1)  Following approval of the preliminary plat or site development plan, the applicant shall submit an application for approval of construction plans to the department for all site development and improvements. 
(2)  No permit for development or construction activity requiring a preliminary plat, site development plan, or construction plans shall be issued prior to approval of construction plans. 
(b)  Application. 
(1)  The applicant for construction plans approval shall submit an application, accompanied by the appropriate fees, and the required number of construction plans and related documentation, including, but not limited to following elements: 
a.  Stormwater management plan—See chapter 310. 
b.  Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan—See subsection 306-5(c). 
c.  Buffer plan and tree protection and replacement plan—See section 302-63. 
d.  Grading plan—See section 302-64. 
e.  Streets, sidewalks and bicycle improvements plan—See section 302-65. 
f.  Water supply plan—See chapter 98, article II. 
g.  Wastewater system plan—See chapter 98, article III. 
(2)  All construction drawings and other engineering data, except the, buffer plan and landscape plan, shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a professional engineer currently registered in the State of Georgia, in accordance with the provisions of Georgia law. 
(3)  The buffer plan and tree protection and replacement plan shall be prepared, signed, and sealed by a professional engineer (PE) or registered landscape architect licensed in the State of Georgia, in accordance with the provisions of Georgia Law. 
(4)  Multi-phase developments may submit construction plans in phases, provided they are consistent with the approved concept plan and/or preliminary plat for the entire project. 
(5)  After receiving an application for approval of construction plans, the director shall determine whether the application is complete or insufficient. If the application is determined to be incomplete or insufficient, the director shall notify the applicant in writing and shall require that the application for construction plans approval be resubmitted, along with appropriate resubmission fees, prior to further review. 
(c)  Review of construction plans. 
(1)  The director shall review construction plans prepared pursuant to this section, with respect to their consistency with the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan, the preliminary plat or site development plan and the conformity of the construction plans with each of the standards and requirements of this section and all other applicable sections of the UDO. The applicant shall be responsible for compliance with all state and federal codes and regulations and generally accepted engineering principles and practices. 
(2)  Within 20 working days of receipt of the completed application for construction plans approval, the director shall prepare a written report documenting approval or disapproval of the construction plans. This report shall document any conditions of approval, if approved, or reasons for disapproval, if disapproved. If said report is not issued within 20 working days, the construction plans shall be deemed approved. The applicant shall be responsible for meeting all zoning requirements and comments of the director. 
(3)  If the construction plans are disapproved, the applicant shall resubmit revised construction plans that meet the standards of this section and other applicable provisions of the UDO and address the reasons for disapproval in a manner that is satisfactory to the director. If said applicant fails to resubmit revised construction plans within 180 days after disapproval, the preliminary plat or site development plan shall be void; and a new preliminary plat or site development plan, as applicable, shall be submitted by the applicant, along with appropriate resubmission fees. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 16, 7-24-2007) 
Sec. 302-35. - Effect of construction plan approval. 
(a)  Responsibility for quality and design. The approval of plans or completion of inspections by the county and authorization for work continuation shall not imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture or any other profession from the professional corporation or individual who prepared or supervised and signed or sealed the plans. 
(b)  Pre-construction conference. Approval of construction plans shall entitle the applicant to schedule a pre-construction conference with the department and to obtain land disturbance permits for construction of site improvements required in this section and other requirements of the UDO. See also section 302-46. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-36. - Initiation of development activities. 
(a)  Issuance of a building permit for any principal building or associated accessory structures shall first require issuance of a land disturbance permit for the building site, unless otherwise approved by the director. 
(b)  Once the affected departments and agencies having jurisdiction have certified compliance, the director shall certify by signature on the certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy that all of the requirements of this UDO and the conditions of zoning have been met. The certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy shall not be deemed approved until the director has signed it. Where use of septic tanks or private wells is proposed, the final approval of the health department shall be required prior to the approval of the certification of completion or certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  The developer shall initiate required erosion control measures as required in chapter 306 and the approved construction plans and in sequence with the requirements of chapter 306 as the project progresses. 
(d)  The developer shall install temporary fencing, flags or other appropriate markings to designate areas required to be undisturbed, as conditions of zoning or by requirements of other regulations; including, but not limited to, tree protection, wetlands, riparian buffers and zoning buffers or other natural resource areas identified in the natural resource protection plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-37. - Development inspections. 
(a)  Authority. The department has the power to enter property to make inspections of land, land uses, structures, buildings, signs and any construction or land disturbance activity related to the execution of its responsibilities pursuant to the UDO to determine if they conform to the requirements of the UDO and the Rockdale County Building Codes and Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Scheduling by developer or contractor. The developer or contractor must notify the department at least 24 hours prior to commencement of each phase of development activity. The department shall inspect and approve each phase prior to continuation of further activity or proceeding with new phases, specifically: 
(1)  Pre-clearing. Prior to land disturbance, the department will inspect and approve the areas required to be undisturbed, such as riparian buffers and zoning buffers, to ensure that they are clearly designated by survey stakes, flags, ribbon or other appropriate markings. Pre-clearing inspection shall include phase 1 soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. Inspection of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures will be conducted on a continuing basis. 
(2)  Clearing and grubbing. 
(3)  Grading and drainage. Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades drawn on the approved grading plan. Installation of slope stakes shall be required. Upon completion of roadway grading, the water certificate shall be submitted to the water provider certifying that the centerline of the road and the offset centerline of the water line are within six inches of that shown on the approved plans or red-lined plan submittal. Inspection and approval shall be required prior to trenching or continuation with sub-base preparation. Bury inspection shall be conducted prior to burial of any underground drainage structure. 
(4)  Installation of storm drainage pipe, detention or other stormwater facilities. 
(5)  Installation of potable water supply lines and meters. 
(6)  Installation of sanitary sewer and appurtenances. This notification shall be made simultaneously with official notification by the developer or contractor to Rockdale Water Resources and is for informational purposes only to the department. 
(7)  Curbing of roadways. Inspection shall be requested before the forms have been set (if used). Roadway width will be spot checked by a string line between curb stakes. 
(8)  Sub-base or sub-grade of streets. After compaction, the sub-grade will be string-lined for depth and crown. The sub-grade shall be roll tested with an 18-ton tandem dump truck and shall pass with no movement to the satisfaction of the department. 
(9)  Street base. The base will be string-lined for depth and crown and shall pass with no movement to the satisfaction of the department. 
(10)  Paving. 
a.  A department inspector shall be on site during the paving process to check consistency, depth and workmanship, as applicable. For asphalt paving, the temperature of the material will be monitored, and the street will be cored (one core per 500 feet with a minimum of one core per street, including graded aggregate base and/or asphalt base and wearing surface) after completion to check thickness and density. Satisfactory test results of the cores shall be delivered to the department prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or certificate of completeness. 
b.  Paving after hours is prohibited except with the approval of the director. 
(11)  Failure to notify. If the contractor fails to make the proper notification to the department, he/she shall be responsible for the expense of any operation or laboratory testing required by the director to ascertain compliance with the specifications. 
(c)  Final development inspection. 
(1)  Following submission and review of the as-built surveys, the department shall conduct a final development inspection of the project. 
(2)  The owner shall be responsible for correcting any deficiencies identified in the final development inspection prior to approval of a final plat or certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  The completion of inspections by the county and authorization for work continuation shall not transfer responsibility from the owner for the quality of the work performed or materials used, or imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for project design or engineering from the professional, corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-38. - Stop work order. 
(a)  The director is authorized to issue a stop work order when a violation of a permit occurs. If the violation has not ceased within 30 minutes of the issuance of the stop work order, the director shall take any or all of the following actions: 
(1)  Immediately revoke the permit. 
(2)  Issue a citation in magistrate court with the violator then subject to arrest. 
(3)  Institute a civil action for injunctive relief. 
(4)  Take other enforcement steps authorized in UDO chapter 110. 
(b)  Other enforcement and penalties are provided in UDO chapter 110. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 302-39—302-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT PERMITS 

Sec. 302-44. - Land disturbance permits. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the county without first obtaining a land disturbance permit from the department to perform such activity, unless the activity is otherwise exempt from the soil erosion and sedimentation control provisions in chapter 306 of this UDO. 
(2)  A land disturbance permit shall be issued to authorize all activities associated with development activity; including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading and the construction of such improvements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks, or other structures permanently placed on or in the property except for buildings, signs or other structures requiring the issuance of a building permit. 
(b)  Payment of ad valorem taxes. A land disturbance permit shall not be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the Rockdale County Tax Commissioner certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-45. - Process for approval of land disturbance permit. 
(a)  Procedures. 
(1)  Application requirements. An application for a land disturbance permit shall be submitted to the department and shall include: 
a.  Application on the form furnished by the department. 
b.  The applicable civil design and construction drawings prepared in conformance with the specifications and standards of article IV of this chapter. 
c.  Preliminary plat or site plan requesting or reflecting project approval by the department, if applicable. 
d.  The erosion and sedimentation control plan and supporting documentation required in chapter 306. 
e.  Stormwater management concept plan, permit application, and stormwater management plan as provided in chapter 310. 
f.  Payment of all land disturbance permit fees established by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  Other agency approval. The applicant may be required by the department to secure development approval from other agencies if they are affected by the development. Development approval may be required from but not limited to: 
a.  Fire department. 
b.  Rockdale Water Resources. 
c.  Rockdale County Health Department. 
d.  Georgia Department of Transportation. 
e.  Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
f.  U. S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
g.  U. S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
(3)  Comments on applications. Upon receipt of comments from other county departments, the department shall indicate on a copy of the construction drawings, or in writing, all comments related to compliance with this chapter, conditions of zoning approval, and other regulations under the purview of the county, as appropriate. 
(4)  Forwarding of comments. The department shall forward to the applicant the county's review comments. 
(5)  Compliance. The applicant shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the comments of the department. The owner also shall be responsible for obtaining necessary approvals and permits from all other agencies affected by the project prior to issuance of the permit. 
(6)  Disapproval. 
a.  If a land disturbance permit is disapproved, the director shall notify the applicant within 15 days of the date the application was submitted and provide notes or comments to indicate deficiencies. 
b.  No development activity may take place on the subject parcel until the permit application is resubmitted to address deficiencies and approved by the department. 
c.  Resubmission of the land disturbance permit shall require payment of a resubmission fee. 
(7)  Conditions of approval. Minor changes, revision notes or additions to the plans may be made by the department; if required for approval, notes shall be conditions of permit approval. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-46. - Issuance of land disturbance permit. 
(a)  Issuance of land disturbance permit. 
(1)  Following satisfaction of all comments from the county and receipt of applicable performance sureties, as well as approvals from all affected agencies, the department shall schedule a pre-construction conference with the owner and other appropriate parties determined by the department to discuss the terms of the permit. At the pre-construction conference the department may issue the owner a land disturbance permit authorizing commencement of land disturbance and other activities specified on the approved construction plans, specifications and documents. 
(2)  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with the terms of the permit. 
(b)  Distribution of copies. Two copies of the approved plan shall be returned to the applicant; one of which shall be retained on site by the construction crew performing the activity. The applicant may request additional copies of the approved plan, provided that he/she supplies the unsigned additional copies. 
(c)  Permits for phased developments. If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate development permit shall be required for each phase. 
(d)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The land disturbance permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the county as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan or is in violation of any provision of this UDO. A holder of a land disturbance permit shall notify any successor in title as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the development permit. 
(e)  Effect of plan approval. 
(1)  Approval of a land disturbance permit by the department shall not imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering architecture, landscape architecture, or any other profession, from the professional, corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
(2)  Approval of a land development or grading permit shall not be interpreted to relieve any owner of the responsibility of maintaining full compliance with all codes, ordinances and other regulations of the county. 
(f)  Issuance of permits in error. Any development permit issued in error or in contradiction to the provisions of this chapter shall be considered to have been null and void upon its issuance. 
(g)  Liability. 
(1)  Liability not imposed. The approval of an erosion and sediment control plan or other plans under the provisions of this article, the issuance of a land disturbance permit, or the compliance with the provisions of the UDO shall not relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property, otherwise imposed by law or impose any liability upon the county or the soil and water conservation commission district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  Presumption of violation not created. The fact that any activity for which a land disturbance permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  Violation of state requirements not permitted. No provision of this chapter shall permit any person to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any water of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-47. - Expiration of permit. 
(a)  Expiration. A land disturbance permit shall expire if the development activity described in the permit is not begun within 180 days from the date of issuance. 
(b)  Renewal. Any land disturbance permit that has expired may be renewed by the department within 180 days of expiration with payment of appropriate fees. If a land disturbance permit has been expired for more than 180 days, the applicant shall be required to apply for a new development permit under the development regulations applicable at the time of the new permit application. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-48. - Flood area permit. 
(a)  When permit required. If development or construction is proposed within or affecting an area of special flood hazard, a flood area permit application shall be included with and reviewed along with a grading permit or land disturbance permit application. 
(b)  Application for permit. Application for a flood area permit shall be made to the department on forms furnished by them prior to any development activities and may include, but are not limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed lowest floor, including basement, of all buildings. 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential building will be floodproofed. 
(3)  Certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the non-residential floodproofed building will meet the floodproofing criteria in chapter 320. 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development and the manner in which the applicant will comply with stream buffers required in article IV of chapter 310. 
(5)  Obtain and record the actual certified elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all new or substantially improved structures, as provided by a registered surveyor. 
(c)  Certification of lowest floor elevation. The applicant shall provide an affidavit signed by a registered land surveyor that shall certify the lowest floor elevation level, and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(d)  Distribution. Copies of the approved site development permit and plans shall be distributed as follows: 
(1)  Two copies of each to be retained in the department, one filed and one for the inspector. 
(2)  Two copies to be provided to the applicant. 
(e)  Approved plans. A copy of approved plans and permits shall be kept on the construction site at all times until final inspection has been made and approved. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-49. - Building permits. 
(a)  Applicability. It shall be unlawful to commence the removal or disturbance of any natural resources; the excavation or filling of any lot for any construction of any building or structure, including accessory buildings or structures and supplemental uses or structures; or to commence the moving or alteration of any building or structure until the director has issued a building permit for such work. In applying to the director for a building or demolition permit, the applicant shall file two copies of a dimensioned sketch or to-scale plan signed by the owner or an authorized agent indicating: 
(1)  The shape, size and location of the lot to built upon. 
(2)  The uses, shapes, sizes, heights and locations of the buildings or structures to be erected, demolished, altered or moved, and of any building already on the lot. 
(3)  The number of dwelling units the building is to accommodate. 
(4)  The locations of buildings on adjoining lots within 50 feet of the property line and any other information concerning the lot or adjoining property. 
(5)  Location of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
(6)  Landscaping, buffer and tree protection compliance, if applicable. 
(7)  Any other information that may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this UDO will be observed. 
(b)  Procedures. Building permits must be filed using an application available from the department and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee. Along with the application, building plans must be reviewed and approved by the director prior to issuing any permit for any structure. 
(c)  Standards of review. 
(1)  The building plan filed with the building permit shall be consistent with the land disturbance permit. 
(2)  The director shall further determine that either: 
a.  All public improvements and installations to the development that are to be dedicated and are required for approval of the certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy under this chapter have been completed in accordance with the appropriate specifications; and 
b.  All of the stormwater management facilities, soil erosion and sedimentation control measures, water and sewer utilities, street base and curbing construction required for approval of the certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy have been properly installed and completed and, for those required public improvements not yet completed, within areas to be dedicated (grassing, pavement topping, required landscaping, sidewalks, etc.), a performance bond shall have been filed by the developer in accordance with the development performance and maintenance agreement as provided in section 302-28. 
(d)  Applicable codes. Building permits for all structures or interior finishes shall be issued after meeting the applicable requirements of this UDO, the fire prevention codes and the various health, water, sewer and building codes of the county. 
(e)  Sewage disposal. For any structure for which on-site sewage disposal will be provided, a permit issued by the health department shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit. For sites connected to public sewer, approval by Rockdale Water Resources will be required before issuance of a building permit. These requirements shall apply to new construction as well as changes in use or renovations that alter the type or intensity of existing sewer disposal. 
(f)  Single-family and two-family dwellings. 
(1)  A building permit for a single- or two-family residence may be issued after the recording of a final plat or after the lot upon which the building is to be located has otherwise become a buildable lot of record. 
(2)  The approval of a structure location plan may be required prior to issuance of the building permit as noted and conditioned on the final plat. For such lots a certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until conformance to the structure location plan has been field verified or shown on a certified foundation survey prepared by a registered land surveyor. See section 302-66. 
(g)  Issuance on conforming lots. 
(1)  Building permits shall be issued only on conforming lots or nonconforming lots authorized in subsection 302-20(a)(3), except under special circumstances limited to and as specifically described below: 
a.  In single-family detached and duplex residential subdivisions, building permits for no more than two model home buildings on specific individual lots may be issued after approval of construction drawings and after the approval of the fire marshal, the health department and subject to all limitations or requirements as may be established by the director. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the model home until the final plat, including the model building lots, has been approved and recorded. 
b.  In non-residential subdivisions, the director may issue building permits on the basis of an approved preliminary plat and after a land disturbance permit has been approved reflecting the site development plan and construction drawings for specific buildings and associated site improvements. Issuance of any building permits shall be conditioned on the following: 
1.  Approval by the director shall be required prior to issuance of any building permit, which may include approval of an acceptable access, fire hydrant location and water pressure. 
2.  Approval of the health department for on-site sewage disposal or by Rockdale Water Resources for a building to be served by public sewer shall be required prior to issuance of any building permit. 
3.  Construction of the required public improvements shall not proceed concurrently with construction of the buildings without approval of the director and subject to development sureties as described in section 302-28. 
4.  No certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy shall be approved for any structure within the subdivision prior to recording of the final plat. 
(h)  Expiration of building permit. 
(1)  Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by the permit has commenced within 180 days of the date of issue and continues to progress, or if the work authorized by the permit is suspended for a period of 180 days. 
(2)  After a building permit expires, no further work, construction or use shall be permitted on the premises prior to resubmission. Resubmission of a building permit application shall require a resubmission fee, re-review and approval of a building permit for continuation of the work. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-50. - Driveway permits. 
(a)  Application for permit. Any person seeking to construct or reconstruct any curb cut or driveway on any county-maintained public road in the unincorporated areas of the county shall submit a permit application to the director accompanied by a non-refundable fee, as determined from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Application contents. Any person seeking a driveway permit shall submit an original and one copy of an application as specified to the director. The application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the owner of the property on which the driveway is proposed to be located. 
(2)  Except for one- and two-family residences, a set of detailed plans for the proposed driveway or curb cut. 
(3)  Except for one- and two-family residences, estimated cost of the alteration. 
(4)  Approval from Georgia Department of Transportation, if applicable. 
(5)  Payment of the applicable fee. 
(6)  All other information deemed necessary by the director for the reasonable review of the proposed driveway connection. 
(c)  Procedure for review of driveway permit applications. 
(1)  Within 20 working days after the application has been submitted, the director shall review the application and determine if it is complete. 
(2)  If the director determines that the application is not complete, he shall send the applicant a written statement specifying the deficiencies and shall take no further action until the deficiencies are remedied. 
(3)  Within 30 working days after the official submittal of the complete application, the director shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the application based upon the standards set forth in this chapter. Notification of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant and filed with the department. 
(4)  Appeals from decisions of the director shall be made to the board of adjustment pursuant to UDO section 238-8. 
(d)  Issuance of driveway permit. Following approval of an application, the director shall issue a driveway permit that shall take effect on the date issued. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-51. - Swimming pool permit. 
Issuance of a building permit for a swimming pool as an accessory use, whether to be issued at the same time as or subsequent to the permitting or construction of the principal use, shall first require conformance with this chapter, all other applicable ordinances and the safety standards of the Rockdale County Health Department. Permits shall be valid for a period of 60 days and may be renewed once for a 30-day period. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-52. - Moved-in house. 
(a)  Inspections. 
(1)  Preliminary inspection. No building permit or application for a moved-in house shall be approved until a complete inspection of the structure is made by the department. An application for moved-in house inspection shall be completed on forms provided by the department prior to the inspection being made. The department inspection shall determine the compliance or the feasibility of compliance to all existing development codes and ordinances adopted by the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. Depending upon the size, age, condition or design of the structure, the director may require an inspection and report from a structural engineer to evaluate the suitability of the structure for moving. The engineering inspection and report shall be paid by the applicant for the moved-in house. 
(2)  Inspection fee. The applicable inspection fee shall be paid to the department prior to the inspection being made. 
(3)  Performance bond required of the owner of structure. To ensure that the structure will meet all of the Rockdale County's building construction codes and that the renovation of the move-in structure is completed and ready for occupancy within six months from the date the building permit is issued, the owner of the move-in structure shall provide a $10,000.00 performance bond or bank escrow letter of surety from a bank approved by Rockdale County, made payable to the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. 
(b)  Building permit. A building permit shall be obtained from the department for a moved-in house. 
(c)  Owner certification. All applications for a move-in permit shall be accompanied by a sworn affidavit that said applicant is the owner of the move-in structure and said owner shall obtain a certificate of occupancy to verify completion of all work, and that the structure is ready for habitation. 
(d)  Route approval. 
(1)  Structures that will be placed in Rockdale County. Prior to the issuance of a permit from a move-in structure, the applicant must first submit and receive approval from the Rockdale County Sheriff's Office regarding the proposed route. The applicant shall provide information concerning the name and address of the moving company; owner of the structure to be moved; destination of the structure; type and size of structure; map of the proposed route; and insurance company. Said approval and information must be on forms furnished by the department and shall be submitted to the department. Routes must comply with chapter 110 of the Code of Ordinances of Rockdale County. Structures to be moved shall not exceed 30 feet in width. Required police escort must be pre-arranged with the Rockdale County Sheriff's Office three days prior to moving the structure within Rockdale County. 
(2)  Structures not to be located in Rockdale County. Prior to moving a pre-existing structure through Rockdale County, routes must be established by the Rockdale County Sheriff's Office on forms provided by the department. The applicant shall provide information concerning the name and address of the moving company; owner of the structure to be moved; destination of the structure; type and size of the structure; map of the proposed route; and insurance company. Structure to be moved shall not exceed 30 feet in width. Required police escort must be pre-arranged with the Rockdale County Sheriff's Office three days prior to moving the structure through Rockdale County. Move-through structures will be allowed only on state routes. 
(e)  Bonds required of moving companies. 
(1)  Personal injury and property damage insurance bond. Any firm or individual moving structures into or through Rockdale County shall be required to retain insurance with a minimum $25,000.00 for property damage and $300,000.00 for personal injury. A copy of the insurance bond shall be provided to the department. 
(2)  Performance bond. A performance bond or surety bond in the amount of $10,000.00 must be maintained by the moving company to enable Rockdale County to repair public and private property in the event that the moving company's insurance company fails to pay for necessary repairs. 
No application for a building permit shall be approved until a performance bond or irrevocable bank escrow letter of surety shall first be posted with the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners in the amount of $10,000.00 as referred to in subsection (e)(2) above. 
(f)  Time of completion. All permits for move-in structures must be completed and in compliance with all codes and ordinances of Rockdale County within six months from the date of granting the building permit. In the event said structure is not in compliance and/or is not completed within the specific time limit, the director shall notify, in writing, the surety bonding company giving specific causes of noncompliance or completion. 
Upon notification, the surety bonding company has 30 days to correct said causes of noncompliance or noncompletion. In the even of failure of the surety bonding company to correct causes of noncompliance or noncompletion, said bond shall be forfeited and a notice to move said structure shall be issued to the owner immediately. Failure to move or demolish said structure within ten days of this notice shall be deemed a violation of this section and shall be punishable in the magistrate court of Rockdale County. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2008-10, § 2(Exh. A), 7-22-2008) 
Sec. 302-53. - Certificate of completion or certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Applicability. It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building, premises or structure that is hereafter created, erected, changed converted or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure, until a certificate of completion (for non-occupied site or structures) or certificate of occupancy (for occupied structure) is issued by the director. 
(b)  Permanent electric power. Permanent electric power may not be supplied to any structure until a certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion, as applicable, shall have been issued and the power company contacted by the director. 
(c)  Temporary certificates. A temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of completion may be issued for a period not to exceed 180 days during alterations or partial occupancy of a building or structure pending its completion. A temporary certificate may include conditions and safeguards necessary to protect the safety of the occupants and the public. 
(d)  Activities requiring a certificate. Certification shall be required for all of the following: 
(1)  A new building or structure. 
(2)  An addition to an existing building or structure or alteration of the interior of an existing building or structure. 
(3)  A building or structure or premises in which there is a change of use. 
(e)  The director shall issue a certificate of completion or a certificate of occupancy if the building is found to conform to the provisions of the building permit and this UDO and accurately reflect the statements made in the application for the building permit. 
(f)  A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the department and copies shall be furnished, for a fee, on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 302-54—302-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SPECIFICATIONS OF STANDARD DEVELOPMENT DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 302-61. - Preliminary plats. 
(a)  Format. 
(1)  A plan drawn to a designated scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet certified by a design professional licensed by the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Maximum sheet size of 24 inches x 36 inches unless otherwise approved by the director. If presented on more than one sheet, sheets shall be numbered consecutively and there shall be an index sheet referenced to match lines on each sheet that shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. 
(b)  Content. Preliminary plats required in section 302-23 shall contain the following elements, as applicable: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of owner of record, the applicant, the developer, and the person who prepared the plat. 
(2)  Names, addresses and tax parcel ID numbers of current owners of abutting property. 
(3)  Street address and land lot, district, and tax parcel ID number of the subject property. 
(4)  Proposed name of the subdivision, approved zoning and acreage. 
(5)  Graphic scale and north arrow, with north, to the extent feasible, oriented to the top of the plat and on all supporting graphics. 
(6)  Date of drawing and revisions for each sheet. 
(7)  Seal and signature of professional person preparing the plan. 
(8)  Certificate of preliminary plat approval in a format provided by the department. 
(9)  A vicinity map showing location of the subdivision, existing streets, streams and rivers, county and municipal boundaries in the vicinity. 
(10)  A survey of the subject property prepared by a registered surveyor with bearings and distances of the perimeter property lines, and referred distance to a known street intersection or land lot corner. 
(11)  Statement that ad valorem taxes are paid. 
(12)  Location, character and amount of proposed development, by type of use. 
(13)  Development density and lot sizes for each dwelling unit type, if applicable. 
(14)  Lot lines with dimensions and bearings. 
(15)  Lot numbers. 
(16)  Centerline location, pavement width and right-of-way lines of existing streets on and abutting the property. 
(17)  Existing utilities, pipe sizes and easements on subject property and adjacent to the tract. 
(18)  Banks of streams, lakes and other existing water bodies. 
(19)  Topographic contour lines: Two feet contour intervals. Indicate method of deriving contours. 
(20)  Delineation of floodplain designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, United States Geological Survey, or Rockdale County; the delineation of any jurisdictional wetlands as defined by Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(21)  Approximate location and extent of any significant historic or archaeological feature, grave, object or structure marking a place of burial, if known, and a statement indicating how the proposed development will preserve the feature and provide access to it during and after construction. 
(22)  For all existing structures provide location, floor area, height, lowest floor elevation and whether they will be retained or demolished. 
(23)  Existing and proposed covenants and deed restrictions. 
(24)  Table of proposed lot areas in square feet, setbacks, yards and buildable areas in square feet. 
(25)  For proposed buildings give building use, location, square footage, density, building height in stories and feet and lowest floor elevation. 
(26)  For all off-street parking areas, show number of spaces by type, width, depth, angle of standard stalls, width and types of aisles, curb cuts, curbing, drainage, landscaping and irrigation. 
(27)  Show off-street loading areas, with location, number and dimensions of all berths, aisles and driveways. 
(28)  Survey limits and area in square feet or tenths of acres for all areas to be held in joint ownership, common ownership or control and the proposed method of control and management of these areas. 
(29)  Indication that the property is served by public water and/or sewer or private water and/or septic field. 
(30)  Location of existing and proposed easements with use and width. 
(31)  Conceptual plans for drainage, with approximate location and estimated size of all proposed stormwater management facilities and a statement as to the type of facility proposed. 
(32)  Location and width of required buffers at external site boundaries and internal zoning district boundaries, if applicable. 
(33)  Location and approximate extent (in acres) of open space and recreation facilities, if applicable. 
(34)  Location, where applicable, of proposed trails, recreation areas, parks, schools, libraries, churches and other public or community uses, facilities or structures on the site. 
(35)  Applicable standards of the Conyers/Rockdale County Functional Classification System. 
(36)  Site data and construction details. 
a.  Contour changes, dikes or any created water bodies or proposed changes to water courses. 
b.  Bulkheads and bridges;. 
c.  Proposed layout of internal streets, with proposed street names, rights-of-way, centerlines, and pavement widths. 
d.  Notes indicating location, type, and dimensions of curb and gutter. 
e.  Location and width of sidewalks, bicycle lanes, landscape areas and any other required or proposed improvements to the public right(s)-of-way. 
f.  Plans for all underground utilities; including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer, storm sewers, and water lines, showing connections to existing systems, or proposals for developing new water supply, storm drainage, sewage disposal systems. 
g.  List of regulatory approvals or permits other than those issued by the county. 
h.  Any other information deemed necessary by the director or the service provider for the reasonable review of the development. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-62. - Site development plans. 
(a)  Format. 
(1)  A plan drawn to a designated scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet certified by a design professional licensed by the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Maximum sheet size of 24 inches x 36 inches unless otherwise approved by the director. If presented on more than one sheet, sheets shall be numbered consecutively and there shall be an index sheet referenced to match lines on each sheet that shall clearly indicate where the several sheets join. 
(b)  Content. Site development plans required in section 302-24 shall contain the following elements: 
(1)  Name, address, and phone number of owner of record, the developer, the applicant, and the person who prepared the plan. 
(2)  Names and addresses of current owners of abutting property, including tax parcel ID number. 
(3)  Approved zoning, acreage in tenths of an acre. 
(4)  Street address, land lot, district, and parcel ID number of subject property. 
(5)  Graphic scale and north arrow, with north, to the extent feasible, oriented to the top of the plan and on all supporting graphics. 
(6)  Date of drawing and revisions for each sheet. 
(7)  Seal and signature of professional person preparing the plan. 
(8)  Certificate of site development plan approval in a format provided by the department. 
(9)  Statement that ad valorem taxes are paid. 
(10)  A vicinity map showing location of the property, existing streets, streams and rivers, county and municipal boundaries in the vicinity. 
(11)  A survey of the subject property prepared by a registered surveyor with bearings and distances of the perimeter property lines, and referred distance to a known street intersection or land lot corner. 
(12)  Survey with metes and bounds description of parcels to be dedicated for public use. 
a.  For all streets and rights-of-way, provide curve data, length of tangents, radii, arcs, chords and control angles for all centerlines and rights-of-way, and centerline curves on streets. 
b.  Acreage of tract to the nearest tenth of an acre. 
(13)  Location, character and amount of proposed development, by type of use. 
(14)  Development density (units per acre or square feet per acre) for each type of development. 
(15)  Centerline location, pavement width and right-of-way lines of existing streets on and abutting the property. 
(16)  Utilities, pipe sizes and easements on and adjacent to the tract. 
(17)  Banks of streams, lakes and other water bodies. 
(18)  Topographic contour lines: Two feet contour intervals. Indicate method of deriving contours. 
(19)  Delineation of floodplain designated by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, United States Geological Survey, or Rockdale County; the delineation of any jurisdictional wetlands as defined by Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(20)  Approximate location and extent of any significant historic or archaeological feature, grave, object or structure marking a place of burial, if known, and a statement indicating how the proposed development will preserve the feature and provide access to it during and after construction. 
(21)  For all existing structures provide location, floor area, height, lowest floor elevation and whether they will be retained or demolished. 
(22)  Existing and proposed covenants and deed restrictions. 
(23)  Proposed lot area in acres, setbacks, yards and buildable area in acres. 
(24)  For proposed buildings, give building use, location, square footage, density, building height in stories and feet and lowest floor elevation. 
(25)  For all off-street parking areas, show number of spaces by type, width, depth, angle of standard stalls, width and types of aisles, curb cuts, curbing, drainage, landscaping and irrigation. 
(26)  Show off-street loading areas, with location, number and dimensions of all berths, aisles and driveways. 
(27)  Survey limits and area in square feet or tenths of acres for all areas to be held in joint ownership, common ownership or control and the proposed method of control and management of these areas. 
(28)  Indication that the property is served by public water and/or sewer or private water and/or septic field. 
(29)  Location of existing and proposed easements, with use and width. 
(30)  Conceptual plans for drainage, with approximate location and estimated size of all proposed stormwater management facilities and a statement as to the type of facility proposed. 
(31)  Location and width of required buffers at external site boundaries and internal zoning district boundaries, if applicable. 
(32)  Location and approximate extent (in acres) of open space and recreation facilities. 
(33)  Location of proposed trails, recreation areas, parks, schools, libraries, churches and other public or community uses, facilities or structures on the site. 
(34)  Applicable standards of the Conyers/Rockdale County Functional Classification System. 
(35)  Site data and construction details. 
a.  Contour changes, dikes or any created water bodies or proposed changes to water courses. 
b.  Bulkheads and bridges. 
c.  Proposed layout of internal streets with proposed street names, rights-of-way, centerlines, pavement widths. 
d.  Notes indicating the location, type and dimensions of curb and gutter. 
e.  Plans for all underground utilities including, but not limited to, sanitary sewer, storm sewers, and water lines, showing connections to existing systems, or proposals for developing new water supply, storm drainage, sewage disposal systems. 
f.  List of regulatory approvals or permits other than those issued by the county. 
g.  Any other information deemed necessary by the director or the service provider for the reasonable review of the development. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-63. - Buffer plan and tree protection and replacement plan. 
(a)  Scope. All applications for a land disturbance permit pursuant to article V of this chapter shall require submission, review and approval of a buffer plan demonstrating compliance with chapter 328, article I, buffers and screening, and a tree protection and replacement plan demonstrating compliance with chapter 328, article II, tree protection and replacement. With the approval of the director, these two plans may be consolidated as one plan if the information can be clearly shown. 
(b)  Buffer plan. 
(1)  Format. Scale at one inch = 20 to 50 feet, as needed to clearly show the location, type and arrangement of proposed planting and screening required. 
(2)  Content. The buffer plan shall be consistent with the preliminary plat and provide the following information: 
a.  The name of the development and its acreage (or square footage if less than an acre). 
b.  Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the property owner and subdivider or developer. 
c.  Name, address, telephone number of the applicant. 
d.  Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the individual or company responsible for the design. The name, registration number and seal of the professional under whom the plan was prepared shall be stamped on the plan and signed. 
e.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing and revision dates, as appropriate. 
f.  The location and size of all underground or aboveground utilities on the site, including the limits of any public or private utility easements and stormwater detention areas. 
g.  The location of all existing and proposed parking areas, loading areas, dumpsters, outdoor storage, no access easements, and other site features for which outdoor screening is required in chapter 328 or section 226-3. 
h.  The outline of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
i.  The boundaries of all required transitional buffers, indicating where there are undisturbed buffers, non-vegetative screening, outdoor screening, and required stream buffers. 
j.  For each natural undisturbed buffer and stream buffer, the buffer plan must provide: 
1.  A plan showing the location, size, spacing, common names, and botanical names of existing trees and plant materials to be retained that contribute to meeting the minimum requirements of chapter 328. 
2.  Methods to be employed to protect the critical root zones of the trees in the buffer from disturbance during construction, including fencing details, erosion control, and signage 
k.  For all other buffers and outdoor screening areas required in article I of chapter 328, the buffer plan shall include: 
1.  The location, size, common names and botanical names of all existing plant materials to be retained. 
2.  Plans and cross-sections indicating the location, height, materials, and construction of non-vegetative screening such as berms, walls, fences or other means of providing an effective visual screen. 
3.  The location, height, spacing and common and botanical names of supplemental plantings and other landscape materials. 
(c)  Tree protection and replacement plan. The tree protection and replacement plan shall demonstrate how the applicant will meet the requirements of chapter 328, article II, tree protection and replacement. 
(1)  The tree protection and replacement plan shall be approved by the county arborist/urban forester prior to any grading, bulldozing or other removal of existing vegetation that may affect the health of existing tree coverage. 
(2)  Tree protection and replacement plan procedures. 
a.  The tree protection and replacement plan for a site development shall be consistent with the preliminary plat or site development plan for the project. 
b.  Combination of the tree protection and replacement plan and the site landscaping plan is allowed with approval of the director. 
c.  For subdivisions, the tree protection and replacement plan shall be drawn on a copy of the preliminary subdivision plat, to which the information required by this subsection will be added. 
(3)  The tree protection and replacement plan shall include the following elements: 
a.  The name of the development and its acreage (or square footage if less than an acre). 
b.  Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the property owner and subdivider or developer. 
c.  Name, address, telephone number of the applicant. 
d.  Name, address, telephone and fax numbers of the individual or company responsible for the design. The name, registration number and seal of the professional under whom the plan was prepared shall be stamped on the plan and signed. 
e.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing and revision dates, as appropriate. 
f.  For site development projects, the tree protection and replacement plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch = 20 feet to 50 feet, as needed to clearly show illustrate the proposed plantings. Multiple sheets keyed to an index sheet may be used. 
g.  The outline of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
h.  The location and size of all underground or above-ground utilities on the site, including the limits of any public or private utility easements and stormwater detention areas. Off-site easements that may be affected by tree plantings also must be shown. 
i.  The location of all existing and proposed parking areas, sidewalks and other paved or impervious surfaces. 
j.  The location and dimensions of landscaped areas in parking lots, along with the planting plan for each. 
k.  The location of curb stops installed to prevent vehicle overhang, where required to protect planting areas and vegetation. 
l.  The limits of all disturbed areas. 
m.  The boundaries of all natural buffers, greenways and other areas required to remain undisturbed. 
n.  The boundaries of each landscape area, planting and staking specifications, and the botanical name and location of all materials to be planted or maintained on the site. 
o.  The extent of the development site or disturbed area, the gross area of the site, the total buildable area of the site, and the undisturbed area and acreage to which the tree conservation requirements apply. 
p.  Tree plan. 
1.  Limits of tree protection and planting areas, showing existing trees to be retained and new trees to be planted, specifying type and size. In heavily wooded areas that will not be disturbed, the plan may show only the boundaries of each stand of trees and a list of trees in each stand that are submitted for credit by number and size. 
2.  Locations of all trees to be planted on the site and calculations showing compliance with the tree unit requirements of chapter 328. 
3.  Planting schedule, if applicable. Showing the type (common and botanical names), size, quantity of trees to be planted, and required planting comments and detail. 
4.  Plans for alternative compliance, if applicable as provided in section 328-27. 
q.  Exceptional trees. 
1.  Each specimen tree that will remain on the development site and be protected during construction, including its size in DBH and its common name; and all other trees or tree stands that are submitted for credit as part of the tree conservation requirement. 
2.  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a specimen tree that would affect it adversely, with drawings or descriptions as to how the grade, drainage and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
r.  Methods of tree protection for all tree protection areas; including, but not limited to, tree fencing, erosion control, retaining walls, tunneling for utilities, aeration, transplanting, staking, and signage. 
s.  Irrigation. 
1.  The tree protection and replacement plan is to include a note indicating the type of irrigation to be used, sufficient to supply at least five gallons/tree/week. 
2.  If hand watering is the type to be used, the plan must show the location of water faucets or quick couplers that will be used for this purpose. 
3.  If an irrigation system is provided, a separate irrigation plan is to be submitted showing the location of lines and heads, the spray radius for each head, all valves (control, master shut off, drainage, etc.), timer, at least one WaterSense flow controller, and rain sensor shut-off locations. 
t.  Additional information. Provide additional information that the county arborist/urban forester requires for a full understanding of conditions on the site and the elements of the proposed tree preservation and landscape plan or during construction activities. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § I, 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 2019-10, § 1, 3-26-2019) 
Sec. 302-64. - Grading plan. 
The grading plans shall be prepared on a map scale consistent with the preliminary plan, shall be in conformity with requirements of the flood area permit in section 302-48, the soil erosion and sedimentation control requirements in section 306-4 and shall provide the following information. 
(a)  Existing and proposed contour lines. Grading plans shall show existing and proposed contour lines as required in chapter 306 of this UDO. 
(b)  Disturbed and undisturbed areas. Grading plans shall outline the areas which are to be disturbed and areas required to remain undisturbed (i.e., tree protection areas, buffer, etc.) and shall indicate protective fencing or staking to be placed surrounding such areas. Show areas where earth or fill materials are to be temporarily stored. 
(c)  Floodplain. Grading plan shall show any area of special flood hazard, the 100-year floodplain. Grading in and around these areas shall be in conformity with chapter 320, "Floodplain Management and Flood Damage Prevention" and a flood area permit, if required in section 302-48. 
(d)  Roads and drainage. Grading for roads and improved ditches shall be shown on the grading plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-65. - Street, sidewalk and bicycle improvements plan. 
(a)  Plans, profiles, and sections required. Plans must include centerline profiles of all proposed streets. Profiles shall be drawn on standard plan and profile sheets with plan section showing street layout, pavement and right-of-way width, curvature and required drainage facilities. 
(b)  Underground utilities. Where sanitary sewer or stormwater sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade, size, location and bedding class of pipe, and the location and invert elevations of manholes shall be indicated on the road profile. 
(c)  Street profiles. Centerline profiles of new streets shall include elevations at 50 feet intervals for such distance as may be adequate to provide continuity consistent with the standards required by chapter 332 for street improvements, but no less than 200 feet. 
(d)  Elevations. All plan elevations shall be coordinated and sited into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey or Georgia Department of Transportation benchmarks where feasible. 
(e)  Striping and signage plan. A street striping and signage plan, showing improvements in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition as published by the Federal Highway Administration, shall be prepared for any street newly constructed or widened to three or more lanes. 
(f)  Bicycle improvements. 
(1)  Bicycle improvements, where applicable, are to be designed in accordance with subsection 332-9(h), and construction drawings prepared in the street, sidewalk and bicycle improvements plan. All of the following improvements shall be located and designed where required by this UDO or applicable conditions of rezoning or permit approval: 
a.  Multi-purpose trails. 
b.  On-street bicycle lanes. 
c.  Ramps and bollards at intersections with public streets. 
d.  Bicycle signage and pavement markings. 
e.  Bicycle parking spaces. 
(2)  Bicycle improvement plan. Where bicycle improvements or multi-purpose trails are required or provided, a bicycle plan shall be submitted, reviewed and approved consisting of the following elements: 
a.  A site plan at a scale of one inch = 50 feet showing the location of on-street and off-street bike lanes or paths with respect to rights-of-ways, easements, streets, sidewalks, trails, streams, parking areas and buildings on the site. 
b.  The typical cross-section of the bicycle facilities showing the typical cross-slopes, paving or surfacing and sub-base, drainage, and horizontal and vertical clearance standards. 
c.  A profile sheet or other indication of the grade of bicycle lanes or paths. 
d.  Typical construction details of the paving or surfacing, drainage, signage, pavement marking, bollards, ramps, and intersections with public streets. 
e.  Location and construction of any proposed amenities such as restrooms, rest areas, shelters, benches, lighting, refuse collection, water fountains, bicycle parking fixtures, and landscaping. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-66. - Final plat specifications. 
(a)  Final plat format. The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in permanent ink on high-quality reproducible material. Sheet sizes shall be 17 inches x 22 inches. Where more than one sheet is required, all sheets shall be numbered consecutively and shall include a notation of the total number of sheets, i.e., sheet 12 of 13 and the like. The final plat shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than one inch equals 100 feet unless approved otherwise by the director. 
(b)  Final plat contents. The final plat shall conform to the general concept of the preliminary plat, with the following additions. 
(1)  Direction and distance from a point on the boundary of the subdivision ("subdivision monument") to at least one specific point of reference ("county monument"). All final plats shall depict the exact boundary lines of the tract by bearings and distances. Such depiction shall include the individual identification indicator, elevation and Georgia State Plane (West) coordinates of each such county monument identified. The location of all such county monuments shall be supplied to any interested party by the department upon request. These requirements shall specifically apply to all acquisitions of land by the county, except those solely for the purpose of acquiring right-of-way or for acquiring easements (permanent or temporary). All plats or surveys contracted by or paid for by the county must include the appropriate monument data as required by this chapter. 
(2)  Municipal, county and land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and bearings where these lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
(3)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth foot and bearing to the nearest second, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not less than 1:10,000. 
(4)  Name of subdivision, exact locations, right-of-way widths, pavement widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining plat. 
(5)  Street centerlines. 
(6)  Lot lines, with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth foot, and bearings. 
(7)  Lots numbered in numerical order. 
(8)  The following information pertaining to location, dimension and purpose: 
a.  Location, dimensions and purposes of any easements and any area to be reserved or dedicated to public use. 
b.  Size of all culvert pipes, on the site and adjacent to subdivision limits. 
c.  Flood limit line corresponding to the 100-year floodplain elevation shall be shown. 
d.  Location, description and dimensions of any stormwater runoff retention/detention facility and to include an access easement thereto having a minimum width of 20 feet and not more than 20 percent longitudinal gradient. 
e.  Location and dimensions of any public and private water systems and fire hydrants. 
f.  All water and wastewater systems and fire hydrants shall be provided for in compliance with all applicable requirements of chapter 98 and article II of chapter 50. 
(9)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. All corner monuments must be in place prior to approval of the final plat. 
(10)  A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants. 
(11)  The following certifications: 
a.  An engineer's or surveyor's certification, directly on the plat as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and accurate and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as 'future' and their location, size type and material are correctly shown, and that all engineering requirements of Title 3 of the Rockdale County Unified Development Ordinance have been fully complied with. 
Registered Georgia Civil Engineer No. _____ 
By: ___________ 
OR 
Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No. _____ 
By: ___________ 
b.  An owner's certification: 
Owner's Certification: State of Georgia: County of Rockdale: The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that all state, city and county taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid. 
Agent: ___________ Owner: ___________ 
Date: ________ Date: ________ 
c.  A dedication certificate, directly on the plat as follows: 
"Dedication Certification: State of Georgia: County of Rockdale: It is hereby certified that the lands and improvements shown on this plat and designated as being dedicated to public use are hereby dedicated to Rockdale County, Georgia, for public use. 
Owner: ___________ 
Date: ________ 
d.  Certificate of approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission, directly on the plat as follows: 
Pursuant to Title 3 of the Rockdale County Unified Development Ordinance, all the requirements for approval having been fulfilled, this Final Plat was given Final Approval by the Conyers-Rockdale County Planning Commission on ________. 

 
e.  Revised final plats shall provide the date of the revision, description of revision and adequate space for the appropriate signature of the engineer or surveyor and planning commission chair. 
(c)  Specifications of revised final plat. 
(1)  A new tracing shall be required for revision of that portion of the subdivision being revised showing all requirements listed under subsection 302-66(a). 
(2)  Revision and notation explaining these revisions shall be shown in ink on the revised plat. When revised, the plat shall be designated as "revised final plat". 
(3)  Revised plats shall be prepared at the same scale as the original plat, or at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. 
(4)  The revised plat shall comply with the regulations of Title 2 of the UDO, "Land Use and Zoning." 
(5)  The revised plat shall contain the following wording: 
"This revised plat has been submitted to and considered by Conyers-Rockdale County Planning Commission and is hereby approved subject to any protective covenants shown hereon. 
Dated this _____ day _______, ___ 
Conyers-Rockdale County Planning Commission 

 
All changes shall be bound by the protective covenants on the original plat, and a statement to that effect shall be noted on the revised plat. 
(6)  Other data which may be required in a final engineering design report on proposed revisions and such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as may be required by the county in the enforcement of Title 3 of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 302-67. - As-built drawings. 
(a)  As-built drawings required in article III of this chapter 302 shall show the location, vertical and horizontal alignment and finished elevations (top and inverts, as appropriate) of the improvements listed below: 
(1)  Drainage system pipes and channels. 
(2)  Bridges or culverts. 
(3)  Stormwater management facilities. 
(4)  Sanitary sewer system in accordance with requirements of Rockdale Water Resources. 
(5)  Water system in accordance with requirements of Rockdale Water Resources. 
(6)  Streets, including street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. Also indicate pavement width and pavement structure (individual thickness of wearing course, binder course, base, and/or sub-base). 
(7)  Curb and gutter, sidewalks, multi-purpose trails, bicycle facilities, and recreation improvements on property dedicated to the public. 
(8)  Signage in public rights-of-way and other public dedicated areas. 
(9)  Any other improvements subject to maintenance by the county. 
(b)  As-built drawings shall bear the stamp and certification of a professional engineer or registered land surveyor. 
(c)  Digital as-built submittal standards. As of August 1, 2007, all as-built plans submitted to Rockdale County must be provided in electronic computer aided design (CAD) format. The following standards must be followed for all plans. Final plans will not be approved or certificates of occupancy will not be issued until these standards are met. The as-builts must be submitted with the first review set of plans delivered to the Rockdale County Plans Coordinator. 
General Requirements 
(1)  Requirements for as-built plans submitted to Rockdale County. 
a.  All as-built drawings must be referenced to the Rockdale County control network. All drawings must contain four-reference survey markers (pins or monuments) tied to the Rockdale County monument network. Each marker should have the coordinates established on the drawing. A copy of the Rockdale County monument network can be found on the county's website at:  www.rockdalecounty.org  or may be obtained in person at the Rockdale County Administrative Services building, Room 207. This requirement is in addition to the monument requirement contained in the Unified Development Ordinance. 
b.  All features depicted in the as-built drawings must be surveyed after construction. Rockdale County may, at its discretion, spot check coordinates for accuracy. In the case where a spot check is made and a significant discrepancy exists, the as-builts will be rejected. A significant discrepancy is defined as greater than one and one-half times the horizontal or vertical tolerance. 
c.  The following features are acceptable: Line, polyline, and polygon. Any other features such as leaders, blocks, etc., should not be present on the standard Rockdale County CAD features layers. 
d.  Profiles for roads, stormwater and sewer are required. 
e.  In addition to the electronic version, two sets of paper copies must be submitted. 
f.  Electronic "as-built" files must be compatible with the Rockdale County Water Resources (RCWR) version of AutoCAD. Contact Rockdale County Water Resources for clarification. 
g.  The following text blocks must be included in the electronic as-builts per RCWR Water and Wastewater Standards: 
I certify that this project has been constructed in accordance with Rockdale County Water Resources Water and Wastewater Standards and Specifications, latest edition. I also certify that this project has been built as shown on the "As Built" drawings. 
I certify that the plans and specifications of this project were designed in accordance with all applicable standards. I also certify that all facilities, structures and utilities were installed in full accordance with the project design drawings and specifications. 
I certify that this project has been built as depicted on "As-Built" drawings. I further certify that I have field verified all elevations, volumes and locations as appropriate for the potable water, sanitary sewer and stormwater management structures depicted on these drawings. 
(2)  The following are requirements for the layering of the as-built plans. 
a.  Layer names for required layers must exactly match Rockdale County standard layer names. 
b.  All required layers listed in the Rockdale County CAD layers must contain only the features that are described for that layer. For example, the "BOUNDARY_LINE" layer must only contain the boundary line and not such features as north arrows or parcels. 
c.  All required layers must be present in the drawing except for features that do not pertain to a particular project. For example, some commercial projects or apartment complexes may not contain sewer taps as part of the construction and should not be included in the drawing. 
d.  All layers must be clearly differentiated from each other. 
e.  Two layers having the names "WATER_LINE" and "WATER_LINES" should not exist in the same drawing. 
f.  "SEWER_LINE_TEXT" and "SEWER_TEXT" shall not exist in the same drawing. 
g.  All text must appear on separate layers from the layers they annotate. For example, text describing a sewer line must be on the "SEWERLINE_TEXT" layer, not the "SEWERLINE" layer. 
h.  Text leaders should be placed on the text layer, not the feature layer. For example, the leader for the diameter of a water pipe should be on "WATER_LINE_TEXT" layer, not the "WATER_LINE" layer. Leaders should be drawn using Line features, not Leaders. 
Rockdale County Standard Layers 

 
(3)  Annotations. 
a.  Any non-standard water and/or sewer lines must be annotated as such. Line diameter, material, ownership, etc., that does not conform to standard practice should be noted in the corresponding annotation layer. 
b.  All required text must be single line text. 
c.  All annotation for polyline (polygon) features must be bounded by the polygon it annotates. 
(4)  Filing name and revisions. 
a.  File names should correspond exactly to the subdivision or project name and should be consistent from one version to the next. The file name should include the drawing revision date (in YYYYMMDD format) as part of the name. There should be no spaces in the name, only underscores. An example file name for the May 7, 2007 revision for the third phase of the Orange Grove Subdivision is "Orange_Grove_3_20070507" 
b.  File revision dates shall be updated only by the contractor/developer. 
(5)  Deliverable format. 
a.  All files will be delivered on a single disk media in AutoCAD (Release 2000 or higher). CDs and DVDs are the only acceptable media. No submission will be accepted via internet as an e-mail attachment. 
b.  All deliverables will be labeled with the file name, company name, contact name and phone number. A transmittal letter stating this information will also accompany the disk. 
(6)  Sanitary sewer specifications. 
a.  Survey accuracy requirements for sanitary sewer infrastructure. 
1.  Coordinate data for sanitary sewer manholes shall be established at the center of the top of the lid. Accuracy requirements shall be a horizontal accuracy < 0.25 foot and a vertical accuracy of < 0.1 foot. 
2.  Coordinate data for sanitary sewer lines shall be established through the use of the sanitary sewer manhole coordinate data. Invert elevations shall be established by direct measurement of the distance from the lid elevation to the invert of each pipe. Vertical accuracy of < 0.1 foot shall apply to all sanitary sewer inverts. 
3.  Coordinate data for sanitary sewer taps at the right-of-way or stub-out shall be a horizontal accuracy of < 0.5 foot. Coordinate data for the connection of the tap to the sewer line shall be based on computed coordinates utilizing the distance from the upstream or downstream manholes and the sewer line geometry. The vertical coordinate (i.e. elevation) shall not apply to sewer taps. 
(7)  Digital drawing specifications. The following specifications shall apply to the development of all digital as-built drawings pertaining to the sanitary sewer system. 
a.  Sewer lines will be drawn with proper directionality; lines must be drawn from the upstream manhole to the downstream manhole. 
b.  All sewer lines shall be drawn from the center point of the upstream manhole to the center point of the downstream manhole with a single line. No gaps should exist between the sewer lines. Lines must not continue for more than one manhole. 
c.  Manholes shall be drawn consistently with a circle centered exactly on the sewer line endpoints. 
d.  Sewer tap locations shall be drawn with a single line from the location of the intersection of the right-of-way or stub-out (if applicable) to a point intersecting the sewer line. 
e.  All manholes shall be labeled with a unique identifier (Sanitary_Sewer_Manhole#1, SSMH_1, etc). 
f.  All Sewer Lines shall be labeled with a unique identifier (Sanitary_Sewer_Pipe#1, SSPipe_1, etc), pipe diameter (8 inch, etc.) and pipe material (PVC, DIP, etc). 
g.  All sewer taps shall be labeled with a unique identifier (Sanitary_Sewer_Tap#1, SSTap_1, etc.). 
(8)  Approved sewer symbology. 

Manhole 
(9)  Water system specifications. 
a.  Survey accuracy requirements for water system infrastructure: 
1.  Coordinate data for fire hydrants, valves and meters shall be established at the center of the top of the fire hydrant, valve or water meter. Accuracy requirements shall be a horizontal accuracy of < 0.25 foot and a vertical accuracy of < 0.1 foot. 
2.  Coordinate data for water line tees, caps, bends and reducers shall be established at a point on the ground surface directly above the tee, cap, bend or reducer as determined by a utility locate. Accuracy requirements shall be a horizontal accuracy of < 0.25 foot and a vertical accuracy < 0.1 foot. Alternatively, tees, caps, bends and reducers can be surveyed directly prior to back filling. If this alternative method is utilized, a note should be added to the drawing indicating these features were surveyed as such. 
3.  Coordinate data for water lines shall be established at points on the ground surface directly above the water line as determined by a utility locate and data collected for valves, tees, caps, bends and reducers. Coordinates should be collected for points along the water line averaging every 50 feet or closer if appropriate. Accuracy requirements shall be a horizontal accuracy of < 0.25 foot and a vertical accuracy of 0.5 foot. Alternatively, water lines can be surveyed directly prior to back filling. If this alternative method is utilized, a note should be added to the drawing indicating these features were surveyed as such. 
(10)  Digital drawing specifications. The following specifications shall apply to the development of all digital as-built drawings pertaining to the water system: 
a.  All water lines shall be drawn from valves, tees, caps, etc. to the next valve, tee, cap, etc and be continuous between these features. No gaps should exist between water lines. 
b.  Water meters, valves, hydrants, reducers, caps, etc. shall be drawn consistently with approved symbology centered exactly at the coordinates provided for the feature. 
c.  Water line laterals shall be drawn from the location of the water meter to a point intersecting the water line. 
d.  All water meters, valves, hydrants, reducers, caps, etc. shall be labeled with a unique identifier (Fire_Hydrant#1, FH_1, etc.). 
e.  All water lines shall be labeled with a unique identifier (Water_Line#1, WL_1, etc.), pipe diameter (eight-inch, etc.) and pipe material (PVC, DIP, etc.). 
(11)  Approved water symbology. 
Water Meter 

Water Line Valve 

Water Line Reducer 

Backflow Preventer 

Water Line Bend 

Water Line Tee 

Water Line Cap 

Fire Hydrant 

(12)  Stormwater infrastructure drainage. 
a.  Survey accuracy requirements for storm drainage infrastructure. 
Coordinate data for storm drain surface structures shall be established at the center of the top of the access lid (Catch Basins, Junction Boxes), center of the top of the grate (drop inlets, hooded grate inlets) or the invert of the pipe (headwalls, flared end sections). Accuracy shall be a horizontal distance of < 0.25 foot and a vertical accuracy of < 0.1 foot. 
Coordinate data for storm drain pipes/culverts shall be established through the use of the storm drain surface structure coordinate data. Invert elevations shall be established by direct measurement of the distance of the lid or grate elevation to the invert of each pipe. Vertical accuracy of < 0.1 foot shall apply to all storm drain pipe/culvert inverts. 
(13)  Digital drawing specifications: The following specifications shall apply to the development of all digital as-built drawings pertaining to the storm sewer system. 
a.  Storm lines will be drawn with proper directionality; lines must be drawn from the upstream structure to the downstream structure with a single line. 
b.  All storm lines shall be drawn from the coordinates of the upstream structure to the coordinates of the downstream structure. No gaps should exist between storm lines. Lines must not continue for more than one structure. 
c.  Headwalls, drop inlets, catch basins, etc. Shall be drawn consistently with approved symbology centered exactly at the coordinates provided for the feature. 
d.  All structures shall be labeled with a unique identifier (Catch_Basin#1, CB_1, HW_19, etc). 
e.  All storm lines shall be labeled with a unique identifier (Storm_Pipe#1, SP_1, etc.), pipe diameter (36 inch, etc.) and pipe material (BCCMP, RCP, HDPE, etc.). 
f.  Detention ponds must be a closed polygon representing the limits of the structure, and must be labeled with a unique identifier (DetPond#!, Det_1, etc.). 
(14)  Approved storm drain symbology. 
Drop Inlet 

Hooded Grate Inlet 

Single Wing Catch Basin 

Double Wing Catch Basin 

Raised Lid Yard Inlet 

Junction Box 

Headwall 

Flared End Section 

Outlet Structure 

(15)  Roadway specifications. 
a.  Survey requirements for roadway infrastructure. Accuracy requirements shall be a horizontal accuracy of < 0.1 foot for all centerlines and roadway polygons. 
b.  Digital drawing specifications. The following specifications shall apply to the development of all digital as-built drawings pertaining to new roadways. 
1.  Roadway centerlines shall be drawn from intersection to intersection and should not continue beyond the intersection points. 
2.  Roadway polygon edges should be drawn from the right-of-way to the right-of-way. 
3.  Intersecting road polygons should meet at the point of centerline intersections. 
4.  All edges on polygons must be snapped together at the vertices. Gaps in polygon boundaries will not be accepted. 
5.  Roadway polygons should be completely enclosed. 
6.  All roadway centerlines shall be labeled with the road name and right-of-way width. 
(16)  Proper method of segmenting roadway polygons. 

T-Street

Cross-Street
(17)  Property boundary/easement specifications. 
a.  Digital drawing specifications. The following specifications shall apply to the development of all digital as-built drawings pertaining to property and easement boundaries. 
1.  Each property, lot, easement or greenspace parcel must be an enclosed polygon. 
2.  Each enclosed polygon shall be labeled with a unique identifier (lot number, etc.). 
3.  All edges on polygons must be snapped together at the vertices. Gaps in polygon boundaries will not be accepted. 
(18)  Impervious surface specifications (non-single family residential only). 
a.  Digital drawing specifications. 
Survey Accuracy Requirements for Impervious Surfaces. 
Accuracy requirements shall be a horizontal accuracy of < 0.25 foot. 
The following specifications shall apply to the development of all digital as-built drawings pertaining to impervious surfaces. 
1.  Impervious surface polygons must be closed. 
2.  Each impervious surface polygon must be labeled with a unique identifier (Imp_Surf#1, IS_1, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 17(Exh. A), 7-24-2007) 
Sec. 302-68. - Structure location plans. 
Structure location plans required in subsection 302-26(e) shall contain the following elements: 
(a)  Structure location plans shall be prepared, signed and sealed by a land surveyor, professional engineer, or landscape architect registered in the State of Georgia, drawn to scale and may be shown on a certified boundary survey of the lot or any other drawing showing the information required below. 
(b)  The structure location plan shall be a drawing with sufficient readability and accuracy to ensure that the proposed improvements will be constructed on the lot in conformance with the requirements of Title 3 of the UDO, or other regulations as applicable. 
(c)  Structure location plans shall show the following, as applicable: 
(1)  Boundary lines of the lot, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth of a feet and bearings to the nearest minute. 
(2)  Location and names of all abutting streets or other rights-of-way. 
(3)  Minimum required front, side and rear building setback or buffer lines with dimensions and notation of the existing zoning on the property. 
(4)  The location of all buildings with finished floor elevations, driveways, parking areas, swimming pools, recreational courts, patios, accessory structures and other improvements existing or proposed on the property, and dimensions of buildings and distances between all structures and the nearest property lines. 
(5)  All easements, public water, sewer or storm drainage facilities traversing or located on the property, septic tank and septic tank drain field. 
(6)  Subdivision name, lot designation, land lot, district, and tax parcel ID number. 
(7)  North arrow and graphic and numeric scale. 
(8)  Limit of the 100-year floodplain, wetland areas, streams, historic structures and any applicable buffers or special building setback lines. 
(9)  All other applicable requirements of the UDO or conditions of zoning approval. 
(10)  Name, address and telephone number of the owner and the person who prepared the structure location plan. 
(11)  Existing and proposed grades with two-foot contour intervals, and erosion and sediment control measures as required. 
(d)  A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for the structure or other improvements until conformance to the provisions or other requirements of the structure location plan have been field verified by the department or by a foundation survey prepared for the applicant. 
(e)  The following note shall appear on all structure location plans: 
"This Structure Location Plan has been reviewed for general compliance with the Rockdale County Unified Development Ordinance and is approved for issuance of a building permit for the residential structure and other improvements shown hereon. (No framing inspection will be approved until a flood elevation certificate has been received by the department.) This approval is granted with the provision that no Certificate of Occupancy or Certificate of Completeness shall be issued until conformance to this structure location plan has been field verified by the building official or has been verified by an as-built foundation survey prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor or Professional Engineer." 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-23, § 10, 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 302-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PRIVATE STREETS AND GATED COMMUNITIES 

Sec. 302-70. - Standards and procedures. 
All development utilizing private residential streets shall meet the standards of this article VII. The provisions of the Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) and other applicable county Codes shall also apply to all such private residential street development, except to the extent such other provisions conflict with these article VII standards. All plans utilizing private residential streets shall be subject to the development review process and shall require final approval by the Directors of General Services and Engineering, Rockdale Water Resources, and emergency services consistent with the provisions of this article VII and other applicable provisions of the Code of Rockdale County. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 302-71. - Design and construction standards. 
Private residential streets shall conform to the same standards regulating the design and construction of public streets found in chapter 332 of the UDO. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 302-72. - Gate installation. 
Gate installation shall conform to the following provisions: 
(a)  All gate entrance design installations must be approved by the director of general services and engineering and the director of emergency services prior to installation. The installation must be completed and approved prior to the recording of the final plat of the development. 
(b)  Gate design may incorporate one or two gate sections to meet the required minimum gate width of 24 feet. If the entrance will incorporate a median, guard shack or similar structure that results in a divided gate arrangement, the individual gate widths may be reduced if approved by the director, but in no case shall any one-way travel lane have an unimpeded opening of less than 12 feet. 
(c)  Approach and departure areas on both sides of the gated entrance shall provide adequate setbacks and proper alignment to allow free and unimpeded passage of emergency vehicles through the entrance area. All entry gates must be setback a minimum of 100 feet from any adjacent public street right-of-way to allow for vehicle stacking out of the public travel lanes. 
(d)  Automatic gate installations shall conform to the design and performance guidelines approved by the director of general services and engineering and the director of emergency services. 
(e)  All components of the gate system shall be maintained in an approved operating condition, with all components serviced and maintained on a regular basis as needed to insure proper gate operation. A proper power supply shall be maintained to all electrical and electronic components at all times. In instances of power failure the security gate shall default to an open position to allow access into the property(s). Each security gate regulated under this section shall be subject to a performance test as determined by the director of emergency services. Upon failure of a performance test, the security gate system shall be disabled and maintained in the open position until repaired, and shall not be placed back in service until tested and authorized by the director of emergency services. 
(f)  All streets, gates, signage, equipment and other improvements in the vicinity of the access gate(s) may be subject to periodic inspection by county agents and or employees to ensure necessary emergency access and repaired immediately by the homeowner's association if found to be in a condition of disrepair so as to restore such emergency access. The county agents and or employees shall have the right to enter the subdivision and disable, open or remove any gate, device or other feature that impedes or controls vehicle access at the sole expense of the homeowner's association. Emergency repairs shall be assessed against the homeowner's association. 
(g)  The record title owner of the private street parcel as defined in section 302-74 shall be responsible for and liable for any violations of this section. 
(h)  The homeowners association shall coordinate with the United States Postal Service for mail delivery, the school board for school bus service, and local providers for garbage and trash pickup throughout a gated community. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 302-73. - Property associations required. 
Subdivisions developed and all properties served by private residential streets shall have a mandatory property owners association ("association"). Membership in the association shall be mandatory for each original and successive purchaser of a lot within the development by virtue of a recorded declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions (declarations) or other similar document binding all property owners in the subdivision. The declarations shall require that at the time of the initial first sale of each lot following the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the lot purchaser shall be required to contribute an amount to a capital reserve account of the association equal to at least $400.00, or an amount based on the total annual budget of the association as determined by the association, whichever is greater. In addition, the declarations shall require the association to execute a capital reserve study performed by a licensed Georgia engineer at least once every five years where the useful life and replacement cost is determined for each of the improvements for which the association is required to maintain. The declarations shall further require the association to annually establish a capital reserve budget based upon the capital reserve study and assess lot owners an amount that will ensure that the association has adequate funds for the yearly maintenance and repair of the capital improvements the association is required to maintain, including the private street system. The capital reserve budget shall also be sufficient so that the association will, over time, be positioned to replace said capital improvements as those improvements reach the end of their useful life. The declarations and articles of incorporation shall be reviewed by the county attorney to ensure that they conform to this and other applicable county ordinances and regulations. The declarations shall be filed and recorded in the deed records with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Rockdale County following approval by the county attorney. No portion of the association's declarations or documents pertaining to the maintenance of the private street system and assessments related thereto may be amended without the written consent of the county attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 0-2010-11, § 1, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 302-74. - Private street parcel. 
Private street systems shall be constructed within a separately designated property parcel owned by the association and shall receive a designated tax map parcel number for county real property taxation purposes. The recorded association covenants shall include an access easement granted to Rockdale County that covers the entire private street system and expressly grants to Rockdale County and its employees and agents unrestricted access to the subdivision for any purpose related to the exercise of a county service or function, including but not limited to fire and sheriff protection, inspections and code enforcement, including inspections of water, sewer and storm drainage systems. The access easement shall permit the county to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street parcel that impairs emergency access. The private street parcel shall contain all infrastructure normally found within Rockdale County public streets. Street lights and signs shall be installed and maintained by the association subject to the approval by the county. The association's documents shall give the county the right, after giving notice in emergency situations, to perform maintenance upon streets to protect health, safety and welfare of the residents and to place a lien upon the lots within the gated community to recover the cost of such work performed, if not promptly reimbursed by the association. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 302-75. - Construction and maintenance cost. 
The developer or association shall be solely responsible for and pay for all of the costs of construction, maintenance, repair and liability of all elements off the private street system, and shall be liable for said system within the gated subdivision. Said private street system shall be defined to include streets, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs, monuments, entry gates, gate house, and other appurtenances in any way associated with the private street system. The association's declarations shall provide that the association be empowered to levy assessments against property owners within the development for the payment of expenditures made by the association for maintenance of the private street system and other appurtenances in any way associated with the private street system and that unpaid assessments shall constitute a lien upon the lot owner's property in favor of the association. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 0-2010-11, § 2, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 302-76. - Water and sewer. 
Master meters shall be prohibited. All water and sewer lines and facilities placed within the private street system parcel shall be installed to county standards. The developer or association shall pay the entire cost of installation and connection to the Rockdale County water and wastewater conveyance system. Said water and sewer lines and facilities shall be dedicated to the county and become the property of the county by written agreement pursuant to the requirements and standards of chapter 98. In addition, a property easement in favor of the county within the private street system within which said water and sewer lines and facilities are located shall be executed by the developer or association in accordance with the terms and requirements of the Director of Rockdale Water Resources. All county regulations relating to infrastructure, financing, bonds, developer cost participation and capital cost recovery shall apply to said water and sewer lines and facilities within the private street system. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 302-77. - Plans and inspections. 
Developments proposed as gated communities with private residential streets shall be subject to the same regulations and shall submit to the county the same plans and engineering information required to construct public streets and utilities except as specifically modified by this article VII. The association shall be responsible for the ongoing inspection of private streets to identify necessary repairs. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 302-78. - Waiver of services. 
The subdivision final plat, property deeds and association documents shall note that certain county services will not be provided on private streets. Among the services which will not be provided are routine sheriff patrols, street lighting, enforcement of traffic and parking ordinances, as well as installation, repair, maintenance, and liability of the entire private street system. All private traffic regulatory signs shall conform to the Georgia Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Depending on the characteristics of the proposed development other services may not be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 302-79. - Petition to convert to public streets. 
The association documents shall allow the association to request that the county accept private street systems as public streets and right-of-way upon written notice to all association members and the favorable vote of 100 percent of the membership. However, in no event shall the county be obligated to accept said private street systems as public. Should the county elect to accept the streets as public, the county shall inspect the private streets and assess the association and lots owners for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the county's acceptance of the streets. The county will be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed in accordance with county standards. The county may also require, at the association's expense, the removal of the guard shack, access control devices, landscaping or other aesthetic amenities located within the private street system parcel or right-of-way. The association covenants and documents shall provide for the county's right to assessment. Those portions of the association documents pertaining to the subject matter containing in this paragraph shall not be amended without the written consent of the county attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 302-80. - Hold harmless. 
The association covenants shall contain language stating that the association, as owner of the private street system and all appurtenances, agrees to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the county, its officers, employees and agents, for damages to the private street system occasioned by the reasonable use of the private street system by the county, its officers, employees and agents, or for damages or injury (including death) arising from the condition of said private streets; and for damages and injury (including death) arising out of the reasonable use by the county, its officers, employees and agents, of any restricted access gate or entrance. Further, such language shall provide that all owners of all lots shall release the county, its officers, employees and agents, for damages and injuries (including death) to or upon said private streets and/or at any restricted access gate or entrance, occasioned by the reasonable use of the private streets, restricted access gate or entrance by the county, its officers, employees or agents, or arising from the condition of said private streets. Nothing in this section is intended to alter the county's obligation with regard to any claim for worker's compensation relative to a county employee. Nor shall any defense or immunity available to the county, its officers, employees or agents be abrogated, limited, changed, waived or altered by this section. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 302-81. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks, in accordance with the UDO, shall be constructed for all lots adjoining streets, along major thoroughfares where lots do not adjoin the street or in other areas as required by section 332-9. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009) 
Sec. 302-82. - Drainage and stormwater. 
All development and plats shall conform to the UDO for drainage facilities. Design, material, construction, maintenance and liability of stormwater drainage systems shall be the sole responsibility of the association and shall be performed in accordance with county standards found in chapter 310 and all other applicable sections of the UDO. The county shall be authorized to inspect any gated subdivision for compliance with county stormwater standards and issue citations for violations thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2009-15, § 2, 11-10-2009) 
Secs. 302-83, 302-84. - Reserved. 
Chapter 306 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 0-2018-03, § 1, adopted March 27, 2018, amended Ch. 306 by deleting said chapter in its entirety and enacting a new Ch. 306 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 306, §§ 306-1—306-10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 28, 2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 17, adopted May 22, 2007; and Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 18, adopted July 24, 2007; Ord. No. 0-2010-12, § 1, 7-13-2010. 

Sec. 306-1. - Title. 
This chapter will be known as Rockdale County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 0-2018-03, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 306-2. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
(1)  Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the 'Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia' published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(2)  Board: The board of natural resources. 
(3)  Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
(4)  Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
(5)  Coastal marshlands : Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
(6)  Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
(7)  CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
(8)  Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
(9)  Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
(10)  Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
(11)  Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
(12)  District: The Rockdale County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(13)  Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
(14)  Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
(15)  Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
(16)  Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 306-4(c) of this chapter. 
(17)  Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
(18)  Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the Manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
(19)  Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
(20)  Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
(21)  Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
(22)  Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 306-3.5. 
(23)  Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this subsection, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
(24)  Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
(25)  Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
(26)  Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
(27)  Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
(28)  NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
(29)  NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
(30)  Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
(31)  Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
(32)  Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
(33)  Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
(34)  Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
(35)  Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
(36)  Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
(37)  Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
(38)  Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
(39)  Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
(40)  Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Rockdale County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(41)  Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
(42)  State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
(43)  State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
(44)  Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(45)  Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
(46)  Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
a.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
b.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
c.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
(47)  Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
(48)  Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 0-2018-03, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 306-3. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections (15) and (16) of section 306-4(c) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 0-2018-03, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 306-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions . Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the chapter and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of section 306-4 (b) and (c) of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES General Permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in section 306-4 (b) and (c) of this chapter shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection (c) 15, 16 and 17, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 (c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 306-4 (b)(2) of this chapter; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsections (16) and (17) of this section, there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed ; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to Code Section 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to Code Section 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this subsection, maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "Minor Buffer Impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in section 306-4 (b) and (c) of this chapter. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 0-2018-03, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 306-5. - Application and permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Rockdale County without first obtaining a permit from the local issuing authority to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in section 306-5 (c) of this chapter. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 306-4 (b) and (c) of this chapter will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by ten copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the Division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the Division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The District shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances required by section 306-4 (c) 15, 16 and 17 have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 306-5 (b)6, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this chapter section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 306-4 (b) and (c) of this chapter, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits . 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by Rockdale County unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by section 306-4 (c) 15, 16 and 17 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 306-5 (b)6, are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 (f) (1). 
(Ord. No. 0-2018-03, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 306-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The local issuing authority will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The local issuing authority shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 (a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to Code Section 12-7-8 (a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8 (a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7 (e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 0-2018-03, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 306-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of Rockdale County. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 306-5 (b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. 
(2)  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 0-2018-03, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 306-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19 and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 0-2018-03, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 306-9. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the board of adjustment within 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Rockdale County. 
(Ord. No. 0-2018-03, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Sec. 306-10. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the 27th day of March, 2018. 
(b)  Validity . If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 0-2018-03, § 1, 3-27-2018) 
Chapter 310 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 310-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section; except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge: A discharge prohibited by the UDO, which occurs by chance, and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Buffer: With respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area lying adjacent to the stream. 
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Clean Water Act (CWA): The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Hotspot: An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Illegal connection: Either of the following: 
(a)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the county's separate storm sewer system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the county's separate storm sewer system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(b)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the county's separate storm sewer system, which has not been documented in, plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge: Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the county's separate storm sewer system, except as exempted in subsection 310-14(a). 
Inspection and maintenance agreement: A written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction or covenant on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice: Any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility: A stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site that it serves. 
On-site facility: A stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site that it serves. 
Open space: Permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Pollutant: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution: The contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of air or water by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color turbidity, or odor, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Post-development: Refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development: Refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, and so forth), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-developed conditions. 
Redevelopment: A land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional non-point source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility: Stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Regulatory floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan. 
Rockdale County separate storm sewer system: Any facility designed or used for collecting, treating and/or conveying stormwater located in the unincorporated areas of Rockdale County, including but not limited to highways, county streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures; and which is: 1) not a combined sewer, and 2) not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Stormwater better site design practices: Non-structural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for non-structural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management measure: Any stormwater management facility or structural or non-structural stormwater practice. 
Stream protection area or protection area: With respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Structural stormwater control: A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Watershed: The land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-2. - Pollution and littering. 
In addition to the penalty provisions contained in this chapter, violations of the provisions of this chapter that degrade the water quality and aquatic resources through littering or dumping waste may be prosecuted pursuant to the provisions of chapter 78 of the Rockdale County Code entitled "Solid Waste and Weeds" where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-3. - Penalty for violation. 
Violations of this chapter, except as otherwise provided, shall be subject to punishment as set forth in section 1-11, General penalty. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 310-4—310-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 310-11. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the Rockdale County separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law and to provide flood control. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the Rockdale County separate storm sewer system in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(a)  Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the Rockdale County separate storm sewer system by any person. 
(b)  Prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the separate storm sewer system. 
(c)  Prevent non-stormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the Rockdale County separate storm sewer system. 
(d)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-12. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the unincorporated area of Rockdale County. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-13. - Responsibility for administration. 
The director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-14. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall drain, discharge, cause, or otherwise allow to be discharged into the Rockdale County separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
(2)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting and other discharges specified in writing by the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and/or the Federal Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provided that the discharge is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval from the authorizing governmental agency has been granted for any discharge to the Rockdale County separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the Rockdale County separate storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(1)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(2)  A person violates this article if the person causes a conveyance of sewage or septic effluent into the Rockdale County separate storm sewer system or allows such a connection or conveyance to continue. 
(3)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved on-site wastewater management system or, with the written approval of the director of the Rockdale County Water Resources Department, into the county sanitary sewer system. 
(4)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been included in plans, maps, or otherwise documented and that may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice from the director requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice shall specify: 
a.  A reasonable time period of not more than ten days, unless a longer period is authorized by the director, within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed. 
b.  That the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer, or other. 
c.  That the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system, or other discharge point be identified. 
(5)  The results of the investigations of the property owner or occupant shall be documented and provided to the director. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-15. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the director prior to allowing discharges to the Rockdale County separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-16. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
(a)  The director shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  If a property or facility has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to the director during normal business hours. 
(c)  The owner or operator shall allow the director ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination, and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(d)  The director shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary, in the opinion of the director, to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(e)  The director may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring, as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the director. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his/her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated, to the satisfaction of the director, to ensure their accuracy. 
(f)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(g)  Delays of more than five business days in allowing the director access to a facility shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-17. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity, or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharges from that facility or operation that are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the Rockdale County separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. Said person shall notify the director by phone, facsimile, or in person no later than 24 hours of the location, nature, quantity, and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the director within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(b)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(c)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided above shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 18, 5-22-200) 
Sec. 310-18. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. In the event the violation of any provision of this article constitutes an immediate danger to public health, safety, or welfare, the director is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The director is authorized to seek reimbursement for costs of the abatement as outlined in subsection (c). 
(b)  Notice of violation. If the director determines that a violation of this article has occurred, the director may order compliance by issuing a written notice of violation to the person responsible for the violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator. 
b.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred. 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation. 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and the deadline for the completion of such remedial action. 
e.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting. 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections. 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist. 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property. 
e.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, the director may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County to answer charges for such violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The director may seek restitution for attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses and costs of abatement. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 310-19—310-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 310-31. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose and intent of this article is to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and non-point source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. Proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure; safeguard the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare of the public; and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources. 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, non-point source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats. 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality. 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards. 
(5)  Encourage the use of non-structural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of open space and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include open space, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and non-structural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety. 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval, and disapproval of stormwater management plans and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-32. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development; including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless otherwise exempted. The provisions of this article shall apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more. 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation or addition of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more. 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the director to be a "hotspot" land use. 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (1) and (2) of this subsection, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development; even though multiple, separate, and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Development of individual single-family or duplex residential lots that involve the creation of less than 5,000 square feet of impervious cover or that involves other land development activities less than one acre and are not part of a subdivision or phased development project. 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures that involve the creation of less than 5,000 square feet of impervious cover or that involves other land development activities less than one acre. 
(3)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the director. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-33. - Responsibility for administration. 
The director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-34. - Stormwater design manual. 
The director shall utilize the policy, criteria, and information, including technical specifications and standards, set forth in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as now and hereafter amended, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring, and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 310-35—310-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 310-41. - Stormwater management permit required. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first obtaining a stormwater management permit and meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall first submit a stormwater management permit application to the director. 
(c)  Applications for a stormwater management permit shall be on a form provided by the director for that purpose and shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 310-42. 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 310-43. 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 310-44, if applicable. 
(4)  Performance guarantee in accordance with section 310-45, if applicable. 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 310-47. 
(6)  Construction drawings, stormwater hydrology, and hydraulics report and site analysis. 
(d)  Applications for a stormwater management permit that are incomplete or which otherwise do not meet the criteria set forth above, as determined by the director, shall not be reviewed by Rockdale County. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-42. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(a)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the landowner or developer shall meet with the director for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place prior to the submission of any development or redevelopment plan. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project; as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities, and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(b)  To accomplish this goal, the following information shall be included in the concept plan, which shall be submitted to the director a minimum of five business days prior to the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans that illustrate, at a minimum, existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas, and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources located within a ¼-mile radius of the site as they exist prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site; as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers, and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Post-development stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system, including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
(4)  Local watershed plans, the Rockdale County greenspace projection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-43. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in division 3 of this article. 
(b)  The stormwater management plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) or registered landscape architect licensed in the State of Georgia, who is qualified to address stormwater issues and who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the requirements of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure compliance with the requirements and criteria in this article and minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required by the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(2)  Vicinity map. 
(3)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. 
The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types, and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 3 of this article; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in division 3 of this article must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  Where the existing development is to be redeveloped, the applicant should attempt to make every reasonable effort to provide water quality and detention for the total land area of the redeveloped site, which may include but not be limited to underground detention and subsurface water quality treatment. 
(6)  The applicant shall utilize the Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District's spreadsheet based computer modeling tool to complete the post-development hydrologic water quality analysis. This modeling tool can be accessed online at http://www.rockdalecounty.org. 
(7)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings, and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system shall include a map and/or drawing of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of non-structural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 3 of this article; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(8)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis, which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(9)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan which satisfies the requirements of chapter 306 of the Code of Ordinances of Rockdale County, Georgia. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(10)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(11)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, ongoing funding sources, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(12)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure adequate access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. Regular maintenance shall be the responsibility of the homeowner's association or the property owner. 
(13)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the director, as provided in subsection 310-44(e), the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with section 310-44. 
(14)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable environmental permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the director that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(15)  Fencing of retention and detention areas. Permanent cyclone fencing or equivalent at least four feet in height shall be required around all those facilities having a maximum water on undercut depth of more than four feet or a bank slope steeper than 2:1 (horizontal:vertical) or those designated by the health department as constituting a public health hazard. This fencing shall be designed, installed and maintained to allow the free flow of runoff and sediment into the facility. The fence shall include a gate of sufficient size to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 19, 5-22-2007; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 19, 7-24-2007) 
Sec. 310-44. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the director requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the director, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the director prior to plan approval, and recorded in the office of the Rockdale County Clerk of Superior Court, real estate division upon final plat approval. 
(c)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner(s). If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall include a schedule for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(e)  The Rockdale County Board of Commissioners may, upon recommendation by the director, accept in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement the dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-45. - Performance guarantee. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of a stormwater management permit under this article, the applicant shall provide to the county sufficient financial security to guarantee the performance of stormwater management facilities for a period of two years after the final plat is recorded or a certificate of occupancy is issued, described in the applicant's approved stormwater management plan. The applicant's financial guarantee may be any of the following: (1) an escrow of funds with the county; (2) an escrow with a bank or savings and loan association upon which the county can draw funds; (3) an irrevocable letter of commitment or credit upon which the county can draw funds; (4) a certificate of deposit with assignment letter; and (5) any other form of guarantee approved by the board of commissioners that will satisfy the objectives of this article. The guarantee shall be in an amount to secure the full costs, as determined by the director, of constructing, installing or maintaining the stormwater management facilities required by this article. 
(b)  In the event the applicant or responsible person fails to ensure adequate maintenance pursuant to the approved stormwater management plan, the director may elect to take those steps necessary to correct the defective maintenance pursuant to the provisions of section 310-74. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-46. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for stormwater management permits shall be filed with the director. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection 310-41(c) of this article (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(c)  The director shall notify the applicant in writing within 30 days of receipt of the completed application whether the application, stormwater management plan, and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or denied. 
(d)  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are denied the written notification from the director shall specify the reasons for the denial, and the applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same. Such resubmittal shall be treated as a new application; however, no new application fee shall be required. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the director that the stormwater management permit application, stormwater management plan, and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article; the director shall issue a stormwater management permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the stormwater management permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land development will be completed according to the approved plan. 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan. 
(3)  No changes may be made to an approved stormwater management plan without review and written approval by the director. 
(4)  Upon completion of the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans pursuant to section 310-62 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-47. - Permit application fees. 
The fee for review of an application for a stormwater management permit shall be based on the fee structure established by the county board of commissioners. The total fee due shall be submitted with the application and review of the application shall not begin until the permit application fee is paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-48. - Stormwater management plan modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project should provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project. Where the physical characteristics of the site so dictate, as determined by the director, the applicant may be allowed to modify the stormwater management plan to utilize an off-site or regional stormwater management facility. 
(b)  A modified stormwater management plan must be submitted to the director that shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property. 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures. 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation. 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat. 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(d)  The off-site or regional facility must be: 
(1)  Located on property legally dedicated for the purpose. 
(2)  Designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices. 
(3)  There must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. 
(e)  In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 310-49—310-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 

Sec. 310-51. - Water quality. 
(a)  All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or non-structural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the director are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, non-structural practices, and pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-52. - Stream channel protection. 
(a)  Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer. 
(2)  24-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(b)  The director may modify or waive the requirements of this section for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a manmade channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream streambank or channel integrity. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-53. - Overbank flooding protection. 
(a)  Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under subsection 310-52(b) is waived or modified, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(b)  The director may modify or waive the provisions of subsection (a) for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-54. - Extreme flooding protection. 
(a)  Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and/or safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(b)  Extreme flood protection shall be provided either by controlling the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event through on-site or regional structural stormwater controls to maintain the existing 100-year floodplain and/or by sizing the on-site conveyance system to safely pass the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event and allowing it to discharge into a receiving water whose protected floodplain is sufficiently sized to account for extreme flow increases without causing damage. 
(c)  The director may modify or waive the provisions of subsection (a) for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-55. - Structural stormwater controls. 
(a)  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the director before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. 
(b)  Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-56. - Stormwater credits for non-structural measures. 
The use of one or more better site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 310-51. The applicant may, if approved by the director, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-57. - Drainage system guidelines. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters, shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems, and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-58. - Dam design guidelines. 
Any land development activity that involves a site which proposes a dam, as such term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-5-372(4), shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 310-59, 310-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 310-61. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
(a)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the director or conducted and certified by a P.E. licensed in the State of Georgia, a registered landscape architect (RLA), or a registered surveyor (RLS) who has been approved by the director. However, the P.E., RLA, or RLS who conducts the periodic inspection, if applicable, shall not be the person who certifies the plans pursuant to section 310-62. The purpose of the inspections shall be to establish compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(b)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection. 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications. 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(c)  If any violations are found the applicant shall be notified in writing in accordance with the provisions of section 310-81. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-62. - Final inspection and as-built plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted or a final plat recorded, the applicant shall be responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a P.E. licensed in the State of Georgia, an RLA or an RLS. A final inspection by the director is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. The director may verify the accuracy of the submitted as-built plans prior to the issuance of a final recorded plat or certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 310-63—310-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND PRACTICES 

Sec. 310-71. - Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan that are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan, and this article. 
(b)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the director shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement the director may correct the violation as provided in section 310-74 of this article. 
(c)  Inspection programs by the director may be established on any reasonable basis; including, but not limited to, routine inspections, random inspections, inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations, and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-72. - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall expressly allow the director to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when he has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-73. - Records of maintenance activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall, upon his request, provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the director. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-74. - Failure to maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the director, after 30 days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 310-75—310-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 310-81. - Notice of violation. 
If the director determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a stormwater management permit, a notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The applicant or other responsible person shall be provided a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days, to cure such violation; except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person. 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring. 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation. 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the stormwater management permit, the stormwater management plan, or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action. 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-82. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. 
(1)  Stop work order. The director may issue a stop work order that shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The director may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The director may suspend, revoke or modify any permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the director may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the director shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the director has taken one or more of the actions described above, the director may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, the Director may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County to answer charges for each violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 20, 5-22-2007) 
Secs. 310-83—310-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 310-101. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses resulting from erosion, siltation, and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams of Rockdale County for the protection of water resources. 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-102. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in this chapter. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law. Any approval pursuant to or exemption from the provisions of this article does not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-103. - Land development stream buffer requirements. 
(a)  All land development activity, including subdivisions of land and platting activities governed by chapter 302 of the UDO, shall meet the following buffer and setback requirements unless otherwise exempted in this article: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(b)  Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 310-105. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-104. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Pre-existing conditions. This article shall not apply to the following pre-existing conditions: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of this article. 
(2)  Existing development and on-going land development activities including but not limited to existing silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land development activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of this article. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Exempted activities. This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one or more of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line. 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures. 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property. 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks. 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths. 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the stream, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land development activities should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (b)(1), above. 
(3)  Permitted land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
(4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land development activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the director on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the director to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land development in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land development activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-105. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of this chapter 310 (July 26, 2005), and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the director finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the board of zoning appeals may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(b)  The board of zoning appeals shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting notice and a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance in accordance with the procedures of UDO section 238-9. 
(c)  Variances will be allowed only in the following cases: 
(1)  When a property's size, shape, topography or other physical conditions prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
(2)  When such unusual circumstances exist so that strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in this chapter would create an extreme hardship. 
(3)  When relief, if granted, would not cause a substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter. 
(d)  Variances shall not be considered when actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(e)  At a minimum, an application for a variance shall include the following information: 
(1)  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries, and other natural features, as determined by field survey. 
(2)  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation, and other physical characteristics of the property. 
(3)  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land development, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated. 
(4)  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained. 
(5)  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible. 
(6)  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion. 
(7)  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable. 
(8)  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(9)  Other information required in subsection 238-9(d). 
(f)  The following factors shall be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
(1)  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation, and other physical characteristics of the property. 
(2)  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries. 
(3)  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion. 
(4)  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion. 
(5)  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance. 
(6)  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(g)  Appeals from final decisions of said variances by the board of adjustments shall be as provided for in UDO section 238-13. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-106. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
Any land disturbance permit applications pursuant to section 306-5 of this Code for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following information: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property. 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property. 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals. 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone. 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land disturbance in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback. 
(2)  A description of all proposed land disturbance within the buffer and setback. 
(3)  Any other documentation that the director may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to insure that the provisions of this article are addressed in the approval process. 
(4)  All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-107. - Inspection. 
The director may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made in accordance with the provisions of section 306-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-108. - Violations, penalties, and enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation. If the director determines that a land disturbance permit applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the property owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person. 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred. 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation. 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the land disturbance permit, the approved site plan, or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action. 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(b)  Penalties and enforcement. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the director shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the director may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The director may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The director may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of land disturbance permit. The director may suspend, revoke or modify the land disturbance permit authorizing the project in accordance with the provisions of section 306-7 of this Code. 
(4)  Citations. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the director shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient), the director may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-109. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-110. - Responsibility for damages. 
Neither the issuance of a land disturbance permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon Rockdale County, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 310-111—310-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 310-131. - Findings. 
The county board of commissioners makes the following findings of fact: 
(1)  Rockdale County is authorized by the State Constitution, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I(a) and III(a)(6) thereof and state law to provide stormwater management services throughout Rockdale County. 
(2)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the government of Rockdale County hereby exercises its authority to establish a stormwater utility and establish rates for stormwater management services. 
(3)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this Section, Rockdale County is acting pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the Charter of Rockdale County to provide for stormwater collection and disposal. Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 
(4)  Improper management of stormwater runoff may cause erosion of lands, threaten businesses and residences, and other facilities with water damage and may create environmental damage to the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within and adjacent to Rockdale County. 
(5)  A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within Rockdale County and surrounding areas. 
(6)  The county presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities, which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness and operational function of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the county, and the additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the county to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities within the county in concert with the management of other water resources within the county. In order to do so, the county must have both a comprehensive stormwater management program as well as an adequate and stable funding source for its comprehensive program operation and drainage related capital improvement needs. 
(7)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater affects the operations of sanitary sewer operated by Rockdale County by, among other things, increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. 
(8)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater contributes to the further degradation of the water quality in area waterbodies which may result in higher levels of treatment requirements imposed on the county's wastewater treatment facilities and increased water treatment cost of potable water supplies. 
(9)  Proper management of stormwater is a key element of having clean water with adequate assimilative capacity for treated wastewater discharges and adequate potable drinking water that are essential to support existing and future development in Rockdale County. Rockdale County has several rivers and streams listed on the list of impaired waters produced by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, or other appropriate authorities pursuant to Section 303(d) of the Act. 
(10)  The county is required under federal and state regulations [i.e. the county's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II Georgia Notice of Intent (NOI) and stormwater permit effective March 13, 2003] to provide enhanced management of stormwater runoff quality to mitigate the impacts of pollutants which may be discharged from the public municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and stormwater conveyance system into State of Georgia or United States' waters. Therefore, it is appropriate for the county to impose a stormwater user fee charge upon all properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public MS4 and stormwater conveyance system, whether the property is private or public in nature. 
(11)  Compliance with the regulatory obligations of the NPDES permit will substantially increase the cost of stormwater management above that which is currently spent for water quality management, drainage and flood control. 
(12)  The cost of operating and maintaining the county stormwater management system and financing necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the system. 
(13)  The professional engineering and financing analysis, known as the stormwater utility implementation master plan, prepared by the county's consulting stormwater engineer, properly assesses and defines the county's stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities as well as the stormwater management program funding strategy. 
(14)  Given the stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities and funding strategy identified in the professional engineering and financing analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management systems within the county in concert with other water resource management programs. 
(15)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the unincorporated areas of the county. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the unincorporated areas of the county is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(16)  The stormwater needs in the county include, but are not limited to, protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. Provision of stormwater management services renders and/or results in both a service and a benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens, and residents of the county in a variety of ways as described in the stormwater utility implementation master plan. 
(17)  The services and benefits rendered, or resulting from provision of stormwater management services, may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management systems and programs, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among the owners of properties in proportion to the long term demands the properties impose on the county's stormwater management services which render or result in services and benefits to such properties and the owners thereof. 
(18)  A stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services throughout the county, and the most equitable means to regulate the use of a higher level of stormwater management services in the urban and suburban areas of the unincorporated portions of the county through stormwater user fee charges, user fees and other mechanisms as described in the stormwater utility implementation master plan prepared for the county. 
(19)  A schedule of stormwater utility user fee charges based in part on the area of impervious surface located on each property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services throughout the urban and suburban areas of the unincorporated area of the county. Such user fee charges may be complemented by other types of charges which address specific needs, including, but not limited to, special service fees, special assessments, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes and other forms of revenue, as deemed appropriate by the board of commissioners. 
(20)  The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site or off-site systems, facilities, activities or assets which reduce or otherwise mitigate the impact of a particular property on the county stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities should be taken into account to reduce the user fee charge on that property either in the form of a direct reduction or credit, and such reduction or credit should be conditional upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the stormwater manager. Reductions or credits for privately owned and maintained stormwater management systems, facilities, activities or assets shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the peak rate of runoff from the property benefited by such systems. 
(21)  The area of impervious surfaces on each property is the most important factor influencing the cost of the stormwater management services provided by the county or to be provided by the county in the future, and the area of impervious surfaces on each property is therefore the most appropriate parameter for calculating a periodic stormwater user fee charge. 
(22)  It is imperative that the proceeds from all user fee charges for stormwater management services, together with any other revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, be dedicated solely to those purposes, and such proceeds of user fee charges and revenues shall therefore be deposited into the enterprise accounting fund of the county stormwater utility and shall remain in that fund and be dispersed only for stormwater management capital, operating and non-operating costs, lease payments and debt service of bonds or other indebtedness for stormwater management purposes. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-132. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act: Means and refers to the Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant thereto. 
Credit: Reduction in the amount of a stormwater user fee charge to the owner of a particular property for the existence and use of privately owned, maintained and operated on-site or off-site stormwater systems or facilities, or continuing provision of services or activities that reduce or mitigate the county stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services for that particular property. 
Developed land: Property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than 200 square feet of impervious surfaces. 
Impervious surfaces: See section 106-1 of the county code of ordinances. 
Service area: All unincorporated areas within the county. 
Stormwater director: The person appointed by the board of commissioners to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater management services: All services provided by the county which relate to the: 
(1)  Transfer, control, conveyance, storage, treatment, or management of stormwater runoff within the unincorporated portions of the county. 
(2)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(3)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs. 
(4)  Administration and regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems and facilities. 
(5)  Education of the public about stormwater issues. 
(6)  Stormwater management services may address the quality of stormwater runoff as well as the quantity thereof. 
Stormwater management systems and facilities: Those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, head walls, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff, which are owned by the county or through which the county has an easement or other legally binding right of use for stormwater drainage, and for which the county has the obligation of maintenance for stormwater drainage purposes. 
Stormwater manager: A person designated by the stormwater director to assist with administrative and enforcement duties. 
Stormwater user fee charge: The user fee charge imposed pursuant to this article by the county's stormwater management program. The fee is directly based upon the amount of impervious surface present on a parcel of land within the stormwater service area. The fee is for the exclusive purpose of funding the county's stormwater management program including, but not limited to capital costs, debt service, non-capital costs, maintenance, labor, and regulatory compliance related to the county's stormwater management program. The fee may not be used to fund non-stormwater management functions of the county. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2017-30, § 1, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 0-2018-15, § 1, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 310-133. - Stormwater utility and enterprise fund established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility to be known as the Rockdale County Stormwater Utility, which shall be responsible for stormwater management services throughout the unincorporated areas of the county, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of the county's stormwater management services. 
(b)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility enterprise fund in the county budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the county stormwater utility, including, but not limited to, rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses, as may be established by the board of commissioners from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the county stormwater utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater utility enterprise fund, and all expenses and capital investments of the stormwater utility shall be paid from the stormwater utility enterprise fund; provided, however, that other revenues, receipts, and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management services as deemed appropriate by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The board of commissioners shall determine the appropriate department or departments for the responsibility of operation, maintenance and regulation of stormwater management services. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2017-30, § 2, 11-28-2017) 
Sec. 310-134. - Scope of responsibility for stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(a)  The county owns or has rights established by written agreements that allows it to operate, maintain, improve, and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  Within county-owned property and rights-of-way. 
(2)  On private property, but within easements accepted by the county's board of commissioners for the purpose of providing such stormwater management services. 
(3)  On public land which is owned by another governmental entity, if the county's board of commissioners agrees to provide such stormwater management services. 
(b)  Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private or public property not owned by the county, and for which there has been no easement accepted by the county for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management systems and facilities, shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as otherwise directed by the board of commissioners according to subsection 82-5(a) of the Code of Rockdale County. 
(c)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the county. The county expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the county, its commissioners, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(d)  If any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the county as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the county pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the county, or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the county, its commissioners, officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2011-11, § 1, 7-12-2011; Ord. No. 0-2013-05, § 1, 5-14-2013; Ord. No. 0-2018-15, § 2, 11-13-2018) 
Editor's note— The "Stormwater Utility Construction Expenditure Rating System" (as shown in section 2 of Ord. No. 0-2011-11, adopted July 12, 2011), referenced as if fully set out herein, is on file and available for inspection in the office of the county clerk and/or the stormwater manager. 
Sec. 310-135. - Stormwater service area. 
The stormwater service area shall consist of all properties in unincorporated Rockdale County and may be amended from time to time. A current map of the stormwater service area shall be kept on file in the office of the stormwater director for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2018-15, § 3, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 310-136. - User fee charges. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the county that user fee charges for stormwater management services to be provided by the stormwater utility in the designated service areas shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management services by individual properties and/or the level of service rendered by or resulting from the provision of stormwater management services. Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable, and the resultant user fee charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services. Similarly situated properties shall be charged similar rentals, rates, charges, fees or licenses. User fee charge rates shall be structured to be consistent and coordinated with the use of other rates, charges, or fees employed for stormwater management within the unincorporated areas of the county, including, but not limited to, plan review and inspection fees, special fees for services, fees in lieu of regulatory requirements, system development charges and special assessments. In setting the rentals, rates, charges, fees or licenses for stormwater manage-ment services, the board of commissioners shall also take into consideration the impact such will have in regulating the use of such services. 
(b)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater user fee charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the county's standards by public and private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities or to private stormwater management systems and facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-137. - Stormwater user fee charge rates. 
(a)  Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be set and may be modified from time to time by the board of commissioners. In setting or modifying such rates it shall be the goal of the board of commissioners to establish rates that are fair and reasonable, reflect the value of the stormwater management services to those property owners who benefit therefrom, and which, together with other sources of support available to the county stormwater utility, are sufficient to support the cost of the stormwater management services, including, but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, non-operating expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  A stormwater user fee charge shall be billed to all developed properties within the county's stormwater service area. This fee may be adjusted by resolution from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  A stormwater user fee charge shall be billed to all county-owned rights-of-way. This fee may be adjusted by resolution from time to time by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2018-15, § 4, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 310-138. - Stormwater user fee charge exemptions. 
Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no public or private property located in the county's stormwater service area shall be exempt from the stormwater user fee charges. No exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater user fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion or other condition unrelated to the amount of impervious area or to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. Exemptions to the stormwater user fee charges are as follows: 
(1)  Parcels which contain no more than 200 square feet of impervious surfaces shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(2)  Railroad tracks and other infrastructure within railroad rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, and/or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(3)  Roads and other infrastructure within Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction services undertaken by GDOT within their rights-of-way. However, maintenance buildings and/or other developed land used for GDOT purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2018-15, § 5, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 310-139. - Stormwater user fee charge credits. 
(a)  The stormwater manager shall grant credits or adjustments based on the technical and procedural criteria set forth in the Credit Technical Manual. Copies of the Credit Technical Manual will be maintained by and available from the stormwater manager. 
(1)  A stormwater user fee charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements, standards and criteria contained in the Credit Technical Manual. The amount of credit, or reduction of the stormwater user fee charge, shall be in accordance with the criteria contained in the Credit Technical Manual. 
(2)  Any credit allowed against the stormwater user fee charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the county's design and performance standards as stated in the Credit Technical Manual and/or upon continuing provision of the controls, systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. The stormwater manager may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance with applicable standards and criteria as established in the Credit Technical Manual or this article. 
(3)  In order to obtain a credit, the property owner must make application to the county on forms provided by the stormwater manager for such purpose, and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the Credit Technical Manual. 
(4)  Property owners may apply for any credits or adjustments that they believe apply. 
(5)  The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, and be in the format established by the stormwater manager. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for consideration and processing. 
(b)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the stormwater manager, he shall have 30 days from the date the complete application is accepted to either grant the credit in whole, grant the credit in part, or deny the credit. Credits applied for by the property owner and granted in whole or in part, shall apply to all stormwater user fee charges in accordance with the terms defined in the Credit Technical Manual. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-140. - Enforcement methods and inspections. 
(a)  All property owners of developed lands within the unincorporated areas of Rockdale County shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and discharge stormwater runoff in a safe manner consistent with all county development regulations, ordinances, and state and federal laws. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a violation of this article and be subject to citation and prosecution in the Magistrate Court of Rockdale County. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Alternately, in the event a public nuisance is deemed to exist by the stormwater manager, the county may elect to sue in the Superior Court of Rockdale County to abate such nuisance. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the property owner fails to abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the county may enter upon the property and cause work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the property owner in the same manner as a tax levied against the property. From date of filing of such abatement action, the county shall have lien rights which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the Superior Court of Rockdale County. 
(c)  The county shall have the right for its designated officers and employees to enter upon public and private property during reasonable hours and upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this article, and state and federal law. Such inspections shall be limited to the following purposes: 
(1)  Inspecting or conducting engineering tests on existing stormwater management systems and facilities located on-site; or 
(2)  Determining that stormwater management systems and facilities need to be constructed. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 310-141. - Stormwater user fee charge billing, delinquencies, collections, adjustments. 
(a)  The property owner, as identified from public land records of Rockdale County, shall be obligated to pay the appropriate stormwater user fee charge for that property. 
(1)  Billing. Stormwater user fee charges shall begin to accrue October 1, 2005, and shall be billed prospectively. A bill for stormwater user fee charges may be sent through the United States Postal Service or by alternative means, notifying the owner of the property being billed of the amount of the stormwater user fee charge, less credits, the date the payment is due and the date when payment is past due. 
(2)  The stormwater user fee charge will be billed and collected through the current county property tax billing system, or through another method, as deemed most effective and efficient by the board of commissioners. If the board of commissioners elects to include the stormwater user fee charge on the county's property tax bill, the stormwater user fee charge shall be paid in full before any payment is applied toward the property tax bill. 
(3)  Frequency of the billing of stormwater user fee charges shall be specified by the board of commissioners. 
(4)  Failure to receive a bill or receipt of an incorrect bill shall not be justification for nonpayment. 
(5)  If a property is unbilled, if no bill is sent, or if the bill contains errors for a particular property, the Rockdale County Stormwater Utility may back bill for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties or be entitled to any interest for any delinquency during the back billed period. 
(b)  Delinquencies and collection. 
(1)  Unpaid fees shall be collected in any manner permissible by Georgia law, including but not limited to: utilizing the services of a collection agency; by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account; or by enforcement of any lien resulting from a judgment. In no instance shall the unpaid fee constitute a direct lien against the property. 
(2)  A stormwater user fee charge shall be declared delinquent if not paid within 60 days of the due date specified on the billing document. 
(3)  If suit is instituted for the collection of any fees due hereunder or for the enforcement of this article, the owner shall pay court costs, litigation expenses, and reasonable attorney's fees associated therewith. 
(4)  Uncollected bills may be written off at the discretion of the board of commissioners following a recommendation from the stormwater director. 
(c)  Adjustments. The stormwater manager shall administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge. 
(1)  Customers may seek an adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge allocated to a property at any time by submitting the request in writing to the stormwater manager and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. 
(2)  Customers requesting the adjustment may be required, at his, her or its own expense, to provide supplemental information to the stormwater manager, including, but not limited to, survey and customer account data provided and certified by a registered land surveyor or a professional engineer. Failure to provide such information within the time limits established by the stormwater manager, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the adjustment request. 
(3)  Once a completed adjustment request and all required information are received by the stormwater manager, the stormwater manager shall have 30 calendar days within which to render a written decision. Concurrent payment of any charges allocated to the property is not required as a condition precedent to this request for review. 
(4)  In considering an adjustment request, the stormwater manager shall consider whether the calculation of the stormwater utility user fee charge for the property is correct. 
(5)  The stormwater manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. 
(6)  If the result of an adjustment is that a refund is due the applicant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the applicant's next stormwater bill. 
(d)  Conflict with preceding ordinances. If a section, subsection or provision of this article shall conflict with the provisions of a section, subsection or part of a preceding ordinance of the county, then the preceding section, subsection or part shall be deemed repealed and no longer in effect. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2017-30, §§ 3, 4, 11-28-2017; Ord. No. 0-2018-15, § 6, 11-13-2018) 
Sec. 310-142. - Appeals, hearings. 
(a)  Appeals; how taken. An appeal to the director may be taken by any property owner or customer aggrieved by any decision of the stormwater manager. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the decision of the stormwater manager by filing with the director a notice of appeal in writing specifying the grounds thereof. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the stormwater manager shall forthwith transmit to the director all documentation constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Hearing. The director shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give written notice to the appellant at least ten days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall indicate the place, date and time of the hearing. The director shall affirm, reverse, affirm in part, or reverse in part the decision of the stormwater manager after hearing the evidence. If the decision of the stormwater manager is reversed in whole or in part, resulting in a refund or credit due to the property owner, then such refund or credit shall be calculated retroactive to the date of the initial appeal. 
(c)  Appeals from decisions of the director. 
(1)  Appeals from a decision of the director may be had to the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures set forth in UDO section 238-8. Appeals from final decisions of the board of adjustment shall be as provided for in UDO section 238-13. 
(2)  If the decision of the board of zoning appeals results in a refund or credit due to the property owner, then such refund or credit shall be calculated retroactive to the date of the initial appeal. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Chapter 320 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-17, § 1, adopted Oct. 25, 2016, repealed Ch. 320 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 320 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 320, §§ 320-1—320-7, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2007-09, § 26(Exh. B), adopted May 22, 2007. 

Sec. 320-1. - Introduction. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Rockdale County, GA are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(3)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
a.  Protect human life and health, 
b.  Minimize damage to private property, 
c.  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains, and 
d.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(b)  Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, Rockdale County, GA, does ordain this chapter and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction provisions for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 2016-17, § 1(Exh. A), 10-25-2016) 
Sec. 320-2. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(b)  Applicability. This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Rockdale County, GA. 
(c)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The GIS manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter as the floodplain manager. 
(d)  Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics—Flood area maps and studies. For the purposes of defining and determining "areas of special flood hazard," "areas of future-conditions flood hazard," "areas of shallow flooding," "base flood elevations," "floodplains," "floodways," "future-conditions flood elevations," "future-conditions floodplains," potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this chapter, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated December 8, 2016, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. 
(2)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to Rockdale County, GA; and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology and approved by Rockdale County, GA. 
(3)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to Rockdale County, GA; and 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology approved by Rockdale County, GA. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at Suite A, 1329 Portman Drive SE, Conyers, GA. 
(e)  Compatibility with other regulations. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(f)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of Rockdale County, GA or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(h)  Definitions. 
Accessory structure or facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the GIS manager's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or the Rockdale County Department of Planning and Development's enforcement of same consistent with section 320-6. 
Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as Zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. Also see section 106-1. 
Building has the same meaning as "structure". Also see section 106-1. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. Also see section 106-1. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before March 6, 1975. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 6, 1975. Also see section 106-1. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). Also see section 106-1. 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. Also see section 106-1. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. Also see section 106-1. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this chapter the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. Also see section 106-1. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after March 6, 1975. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March 6, 1975. Also see section 106-1. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. Also see section 106-1. 
Permit means the permit issued by the Rockdale County Department of Planning and Development to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. Also see section 106-1. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. Also see section 106-1. 
Repetitive loss means flood related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank), that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. Also see section 106-1. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes repetitive loss. Also see section 106-1. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official. The term does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2016-17, § 1(Exh. A), 10-25-2016) 
Sec. 320-3. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the Rockdale County Department of Planning and Development a permit application on a form provided by the Rockdale County Department of Planning and Development for that purpose. 
No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(b)  Floodplain management plan requirements. An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection [320-5(b)(2)]; 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in subsection [320-5(a)(5)]; and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including but not limited to permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
(7)  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(c)  Construction stage submittal requirements. For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the floodplain manager a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain manager shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(d)  Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain manager. Duties of the floodplain manager shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the floodplain manager shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of sections 320-4 and 320-5; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the floodplain manager shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (GA DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, (e.g. where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain manager shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter in section 320-6. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the floodplain manager and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the Rockdale County Department of Planning and Development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-17, § 1(Exh. A), 10-25-2016) 
Sec. 320-4. - Standards for development. 
(a)  Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(1)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(2)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the county GIS manager. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the county GIS manager, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the county department of planning and development. Methodologies that are acceptable are HEC-RAS compatible and must be provided in HEC-RAS compatible format via electronic means for inclusion into the county's geographical information system. As a note, cross sections must be no greater than 100 feet along the thalweg. The entire model must be submitted in Georgia State Plane (West), feet, ND93, NAVD 88 in no less than HEC-RAS 4.0 format. 
(b)  Definition of floodway boundaries. The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the county GIS. If floodway data is not available from the county GIS, it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the county department of planning and development. 
(c)  General standards. 
(1)  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
a.  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
b.  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
c.  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
d.  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(2)  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under subsection (c)(1) shall also meet the following conditions: 
a.  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
b.  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
c.  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
d.  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than 0.01 foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of subsection (d); 
e.  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
f.  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the county department of planning and development using the FEMA Community Concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(d)  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the Rockdale County Department of Planning and Development prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the county department of planning and development. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles. Methodologies that are acceptable are HEC-RAS compatible and must be provided in HEC-RAS compatible format via electronic means for inclusion in the county geographical information system. As a note, cross sections must be no greater than 100 feet along the thalweg. The entire model must be submitted in Georgia State Plane (West), feet, NAD 93, NAVD 88 in no less than HEC-RAS 4.0; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development. Methodologies that are acceptable are HEC-RAS compatible and must be provided in HEC-RAS compatible format via electronic means for inclusion in the county geographical information system. As a note, cross sections must be no greater than 100 feet along the thalweg. The entire model must be submitted in Georgia State Plane (West), feet, NAD 93, NAVD 88 in no less than HEC-RAS 4.0; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(e)  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below; 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof in no less than HEC-RAS 4.0 compatible format via electronic means for inclusion into the county's geographical information system. As a note, cross sections must be no greater than 100 feet along the thalweg. The entire model must be submitted in Georgia State Plane (West), feet, NAD 93, NAVD 88 in no less than HEC-RAS 4.0 compatible format; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the county department of planning and development until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the county department of planning and development. 
(f)  Maintenance requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The county department of planning and development may direct the property owner (at no cost to the county) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the county department of planning and development. 
(Ord. No. 2016-17, § 1(Exh. A), 10-25-2016) 
Sec. 320-5. - Provisions for flood damage reduction. 
In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(a)  General standards. 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of subsections 320-4(c), 320-4(d), and 320-4(e) have been met; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the county department of planning and development to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(9)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(10)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(11)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding; 
(12)  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding; 
(13)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
(14)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
(15)  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this chapter; and 
(16)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(b)  Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
(1)  Residential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 320-4(c), 320-4(d) and 320-4(e) have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 320-4(c), 320-4(d) and 320-4(e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5). 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5). 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. 
a.  New construction. New construction of principal nonresidential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 320-4(c), 320-4(d) and 320-4(e) have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 320-4(c), 320-4(d) and 320-4(e) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5). New construction that has met all of the requirements of subsections 320-4(c), 320-4(d) and 320-4(e) may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain manager using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
b.  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the floodplain manager to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5). Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain manager using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(3)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of subsections 320-4(c), 320-4(d) and 320-4(e) and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with subsection (a)(5) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(4)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
b.  Meet all the requirements for residential buildings—substantial improvements (subsection 320-5(b)(1)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(5)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
a.  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 320-4(c), 320-4(d) and 320-4(e) have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 320-4(c), 320-4(d) and 320-4(e) have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5). 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
i.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
ii.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(7). 
(c)  Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(1)  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5). 
(2)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the level of the base flood elevation or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5). Nonresidential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(d)  Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-zones). 
(1)  For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), the floodplain manager shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
(2)  If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
b.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood prone enclosures in accordance with subsection (a)(5). 
(e)  Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(5); 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain manager using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Standards for subdivisions of land. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(2)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
(3)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with subsection 320-3(b). 
(4)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(5)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and, 
(6)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the county department of planning and development to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2016-17, § 1(Exh. A), 10-25-2016) 
Sec. 320-6. - Variance and appeal procedures. 
The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
Variances to the regulations set forth in this chapter shall be decided in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in section 238-10. Appeals by aggrieved parties (as defined in subsection 238-8(a)(2)) from any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain manager of the department in administration or enforcement of the regulations set forth in this chapter shall be as authorized in subsection 238-10(a)(2) and shall be decided in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in section 238-8. 
(Ord. No. 2016-17, § 1(Exh. A), 10-25-2016) 
Sec. 320-7. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(a)  Notice of violation. If the county department of planning and development determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the Rockdale County Board of Adjustment (see section 320-6) by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(b)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the county department of planning and development shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the county department of planning and development may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The county department of planning and development may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The department of planning and development may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The county department of planning and development may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the county department of planning and development may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the county department of planning and development shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the county department of planning and development has taken one or more of the actions described above, the Rockdale County Department of Planning and Development may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the Rockdale County Department of Planning and Development may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in Rockdale County Magistrate Court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2016-17, § 1(Exh. A), 10-25-2016) 
Chapter 324 - ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING CRITERIA 

Sec. 324-1. - Protection of groundwater recharge areas. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8 and the DNR, environmental protection division's Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria chapter 391-3-16, this section establishes regulations to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other development. 
(1)  Applicability. Groundwater recharge areas are delineated according to the DNR's "Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrological Atlas 18 (1989 Edition)" and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' "Pollution Susceptibility Map," which categorizes county by areas of high, medium, and low groundwater pollution potential. 
(2)  Development standards. All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts, except those specifically prohibited in subsection (b) are permitted in groundwater recharge areas subject to the following standards: 
a.  New sanitary landfills must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
b.  New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall meet the requirements of U.S. EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 112.1. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal regulations. 
c.  New agricultural waste impoundment sites must be lined if they are within: 
1.  A high pollution susceptibility area 
2.  A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acres-feet. 
3.  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. At a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than five x ten-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. 
d.  Subject to minimum lot sizes established in section 214-1 of this UDO new homes served by septic tank/drainfield systems must be on lots having the following minimum size limitations, as identified on Table MT-1 of the department of human resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (DHR Table MT-1): 
1.  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
2.  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
3.  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
e.  Subject to minimum lot sizes established in section 214-1 of this UDO, new manufactured home parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems must have lots or spaces having the following size limitations as identified on Table MT-2 of the Department of Human Resources' Manual for On-Site Sewage Management Systems (DHR Table MT-2): 
1.  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-2, if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
2.  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-2, if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
3.  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size of DHR Table MT-2, if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
f.  No construction may proceed on a building or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank unless the Rockdale County Division of Environmental Health first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the DHR manual and paragraphs d. and e. above. 
g.  New facilities that handle hazardous materials, of types and amounts determined by the DNR, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems, as prescribed by the DNR. 
h.  Any project involving the spray irrigation of wastewater sludges in areas of high pollution susceptibility must conform with requirements specified in the DNR's "Criteria for Slow Rate Land Treatment." 
i.  Exclusive of mining settling basins, all new wastewater treatment basins must have an impermeable liner in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(b)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited: 
(1)  The land disposal of hazardous wastes. 
(2)  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins in areas of high pollution susceptibility. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 324-2. - Protection of wetlands. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8 and the DNR, environmental protection division's Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria chapter 391-3-16, this section establishes regulations to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas and wildlife habitat areas. 
(b)  Wetlands development permit requirements. No activity or use, except those identified in subsection (c), shall be allowed in the wetlands without issuance of a local development permit. Local permits will be issued only if the proposed use is in compliance with the requirements of the underlying zoning district and this section. Furthermore, if the area of proposed development is located within 100 feet of the wetlands boundaries, as established by Figure IV-2 of the Rockdale County Comprehensive Land Use Plan, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers delineation is required under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. If wetlands are altered or degraded, mitigation to offset losses may be required as a condition of a Section 404 permit. Local development permits will not be issued until after any necessary Section 404 permits have been secured. 
(c)  Permitted uses. Subject to federal and state requirements, the following uses are permitted by right in wetlands to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided that they do not require structures, grading, filling, draining or dredging; unless a permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act is obtained. 
(1)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with BMPs approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(2)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish or other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the State of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that they would require an individual permit pursuant to Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(3)  Outdoor passive recreation activities; including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(4)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(5)  Normal agricultural activities; including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to BMPs approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(6)  Other uses permitted under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(d)  Prohibited uses. 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 324-3. - Protected river corridor regulations. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division's Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria Chapter 391-3-16, this section establishes regulations to preserve river corridors as habitats for wildlife, recreation sites and sources of clean drinking water. 
(1)  Applicability. River corridors includes all parcels or portions of parcels lying within a protected river corridor. For purposes of this UDO, protected rivers shall include perennial rivers or watercourses with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second (cfs), as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents and any other river meeting criteria established by the DNR. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Except as noted below, the river corridor shall be maintained as a natural vegetative buffer, and all construction within the buffer shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Single-family dwellings. Single-family dwellings shall be permitted subject to the state-mandated riparian buffer and subject further to the following conditions: 
(1)  The dwelling must be in compliance with all applicable zoning regulations. 
(2)  The dwelling must be located on a tract of land containing at least two acres. No portion of the two acres may include any area that lies within the protected river. 
(3)  Only one such dwelling may be on the two-acre or larger tract of land. 
(4)  Septic tanks serving such dwellings shall not be located within state-mandated riparian buffer. 
(5)  Septic tank drainfields shall not be located in the state-mandated riparian buffer. 
(d)  Industrial and commercial land uses. Industrial and commercial land uses existing prior to the establishment of this section shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The industrial and commercial uses of river corridors must not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
(2)  The industrial and commercial uses of river corridors must meet all state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
(e)  Road and utility crossings. Road and utility crossings shall be permitted, provided the construction of such road and utility crossings shall meet all requirements of the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, and the applicable local ordinances on soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(f)  Additional permitted uses. The following are additional uses of river corridors are permissible, provided that such uses do not impair the long-term functions of the protected river or the river corridor: 
(1)  Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Timber production and harvesting must be consistent with BMPs established by the Georgia Forestry Commission and all other state and federal regulations. 
b.  Timber production and harvesting must not impair the drinking quality of the river water, as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(2)  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8. 
(3)  Wastewater treatment. 
(4)  Recreational usage consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river-dependent recreation. For example, outdoor passive recreational activities such as fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating (including a boat launch ramp), horseback riding and canoeing would be consistent with this criteria; but a hard-surfaced tennis court would not. Parking lots are not consistent with this criterion. 
(5)  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
(6)  Agricultural production and management, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Agricultural production must be consistent with BMPs established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, regulations established by the Georgia Department of Agriculture and all other state and federal regulations. 
b.  Agricultural production must not impair the drinking quality of the river water, as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
(7)  Other uses permitted by the DNR or under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(g)  Restoration of buffer. The natural vegetative buffer shall be restored within 120 days after any permitted land disturbing activity within the river corridor. 
(h)  Exempt uses. 
(1)  Legally established land uses existing in river corridors prior to the establishment of this section. 
(2)  Mining activities, if permitted by the DNR, pursuant to the Georgia Surface and Mining Act of 1968, as amended. 
(3)  Utilities, except as discussed above, if such utilities cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer area, provided that: 
a.  The utilities must be located as far from the river bank as reasonably possible. 
b.  The utilities must be installed and maintained so as to protect the integrity of the buffer area as well as is reasonably possible. 
c.  The utilities may not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
d.  Specific forestry and agricultural activities except as listed in subsection (f)(6). 
(i)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited within river corridors: 
(1)  Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste. 
(2)  Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills. 
(3)  Automobile parking lots. 
(4)  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields except as provided in subsection (c) concerning single-family dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-06) 
Chapter 328 - BUFFERS, LANDSCAPING, AND TREE PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - BUFFERS AND SCREENING 

Sec. 328-1. - Screening requirements and transitional buffers. 
(a)  Transitional buffers shall be of such nature and density so as to screen activities, structures, and uses on the property from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot and shall further provide a year-round effective visual screen. 
(b)  Transitional buffers shall be natural, undisturbed, and free of encroachments, except as authorized by a condition of zoning, conditional use or variance approval, and shall contain the existing tree cover and vegetation, as well as any supplemental plantings or re-plantings as may be required. 
(c)  Transitional buffers required along side property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required to observe the sight distance requirements in section 332-3, or as authorized by a condition of approval provided in section 238-15. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 328-2. - Supplemental plantings in transitional buffers. 
(a)  Transitional buffers in which vegetation is non-existent or is inadequate to meet the screening requirements of this section shall be planted with supplemental plantings so as to provide a year-round effective visual screen. 
(b)  Supplemental plantings and re-plantings shall consist of evergreen trees, shrubs, or combination thereof, native or adaptable to the region. All trees planted shall be a minimum of six feet in height at the time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. All shrubs planted shall be a large growing species, shall be a minimum of three feet in height at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least ten feet at maturity. 
(c)  All supplemental plantings shall be installed to allow for proper plant growth and maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 328-3. - Non-vegetative screening. 
(a)  Non-vegetative materials utilized to satisfy the screening requirements of this section, in addition to the use of existing vegetation and/or supplemental plantings may consist of walls, fences, earthen berms, or a combination thereof. 
(b)  If walls or fences are to be utilized, their placement and installation shall be such so as to cause minimal disturbance of existing vegetation and located so as to provide an effective visual screen. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 328-4. - Disturbance or encroachments. 
(a)  Ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, and any associated easements, shall not encroach into a transitional buffer unless approved by the director. Access and utility crossings (e.g. stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes) may encroach into the transitional buffer if placed as near to perpendicular as practical. 
(b)  Supplemental plantings or re-plantings of vegetation or authorized non-vegetative screening devices may encroach into a transitional buffer provided there is minimal disturbance of any existing vegetation. 
(c)  Land disturbance is authorized in areas of a transitional buffer that are void of significant vegetation provided that the final grade and re-plantings of vegetation meet the screening requirements contained herein. 
(d)  Diseased, hazardous, dying or dead trees may be removed from a buffer provided minimal disturbance occurs. Vegetation removed from a transitional buffer shall be replaced where necessary to meet the screening requirements in section 328-1. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 328-5. - Protection during land disturbing activities. 
(a)  During authorized land disturbing activities, buffers shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during, construction. 
(b)  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with tree protection fencing as described in subsection 328-19(a)(5) and in administrative standards promulgated by the department. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 328-6. - Location and width of transitional buffers. 
Transitional buffers shall be required between dissimilar districts or uses in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or as a condition of approval as provided in section 238-15. 
(a)  A transitional buffer shall be required along any side and rear property line, unless required as a condition of approval as provided in section 238-15. 
(b)  All transitional buffer areas and screening shall be established in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Transitional buffers shall meet the minimum width requirements for dissimilar districts as shown in the "Table of Minimum Transitional Buffer Requirements" unless otherwise authorized. 
(2)  In situations where the required transitional buffer width is partially or completely contained within an existing easement, the screening requirements of this Ordinance shall be met outside of the easement area. 
(c)  Transitional buffer widths may be reduced by 50 percent or ten feet (whichever is less) by the addition of a solid fence or wall at least six feet in height. 
(d)  The width of required transitional buffers may be reduced by variance by no more than 50 percent, as appropriate, if and only if: 
(1)  It is clearly demonstrated that existing topography and/or vegetation within the reduced area achieve the purpose and intent of this section. 
(2)  It is clearly demonstrated that, for topographic reasons, a fence, wall and/or other screening device required herein could not possibly screen activities conducted on ground level from view from the normal level of a first-story window on any lot in a residential district abutting the use. 
(e)  Structures including driveways, parking facilities or retaining walls shall be located a minimum of five feet from any buffer. 
(f)  When a transitional buffer is required on a non-residential tract and the buffer is of greater depth than the minimum required setback, the minimum setback shall be increased to include five feet in addition to the width of the required transitional buffer. 
(g)  All transitional buffers shall be so designated on the site construction plan and final plat. 
(h)  The final plat shall contain the following note, "Property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the vegetation and non-vegetative screening materials within transitional buffers and outdoor screening required in conformity with chapter 328 of the UDO and all conditions of rezoning approval applicable to this property." 
Table of Minimum Transitional Buffer Requirements  Width of Buffer in feet (a)  Adjacent Districts 

 
Notes: 
(a)  Transitional buffer widths may be reduced by 50 percent or ten feet (whichever is less) by the addition of a solid fence or wall at least six feet in height, as provided in subsection (b)(2). 
(b)  See subsection 206-5(d)(20). 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 328-7. - Outdoor screening. 
(a)  Outdoor storage of materials and outdoor servicing activities shall be enclosed by a wall or fence of solid appearance or visually continuous evergreen hedge not less than six feet high when adjacent to a residential district. 
(b)  In any district where reference is made requiring adequate screening of a specified operation, such screening shall be a wall or fence of solid appearance or visually opaque, continuous evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height. However, chain link fencing with or without slats will not be accepted by the department to satisfy the screening requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 328-8—328-13. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LANDSCAPING AND TREE PROTECTION AND REPLACEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, adopted Nov. 25, 2008, amended Art. II in its entirety, in effect deleting Art. II and enacting a new Art. II to read as set out herein. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 28, 2006. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § II, adopted Apr. 26, 2016, renamed Art. II to read as set out herein. Former Art. II was entitled 'Tree protection and replacement.' 

Sec. 328-14. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as "The Rockdale County Landscaping and Tree Protection and Replacement Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § III, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-15. - Authority, findings, purpose and intent. 
(a)  Authority. This article is enacted pursuant to the county's exclusive planning authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, para. IV, and Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, para. III, as well as authority granted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, including by not limited to O.C.G.A. § 36-70-3, as well as 1977 Ga. Laws, page 2817, as amended, and 1969 Ga. Laws, page 3639, as amended, and the general police powers of the county and other authority provided by federal, state and local laws applicable to this article. 
(b)  Findings, purpose, and intent. It is the intent of this article to provide standards for landscaping and for the preservation and replacement of trees as part of the land development and building construction process in unincorporated areas of the county. The county finds that the existence of adequate tree cover and landscaping in the county directly affects the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the regulations in this article. The purpose and intent of the board of commissioners in enacting this article are as follows: 
(1)  To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the county, and to implement the policies and objectives of the comprehensive plan through the enactment of a comprehensive ordinance governing tree preservation and replacement in the county. 
(2)  To require landscaping and the preservation and replacement of trees in certain areas within the county in order to ensure the continued health of its citizens through improved air and water quality. 
(3)  To provide developers and others active in the county with the appropriate guidance to better ensure proper tree preservation and replacement in the course of the land development process in the county. 
(4)  To preserve property values in the county by maintaining a safe, aesthetically pleasing environment. 
(5)  To reduce flooding of county rivers and streams by planting trees and other vegetation so as to aid in slowing the rate of stormwater runoff. 
(6)  To reduce soil erosion in the county by planting trees and other vegetation so as to aid in prevention of soil loss through stormwater runoff and flooding and to promote stormwater infiltration. 
(7)  To reduce noise and glare on adjacent properties from properties that has been extensively developed. 
(8)  To conserve energy by cooling surrounding air temperatures through the existence of adequate shade trees. 
(9)  To provide improved atmospheric quality by reducing airborne particulates and carbon monoxide and by increasing oxygen through adequate tree cover. 
(10)  To promote the saving of trees in nodes throughout a development, rather than as individual trees scattered over a development or around the periphery of a development. 
(11)  To prevent clear-cutting and mass grading of land that results in the loss of mature trees, and to ensure appropriate replanting when tree loss does occur. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § IV, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-16. - Administration. 
The county forester shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article, and for making professional judgments regarding any arboricultural principles or practices related to the implementation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 328-17. - Exemptions. 
The following activities are specifically exempted from this article: 
(1)  The construction of single-family detached and duplex dwellings in subdivisions of no more than four lots. 
(2)  Any addition, alteration, improvement or remodeling of an existing residence or the construction of structures accessory to an existing residence. 
(3)  Tree removal by individual single-family detached and duplex homeowners; 
(4)  Agriculture as defined in chapter 106. 
(5)  Removing trees from nurseries and botanical gardens, which are being grown for retail or wholesale sale. 
(6)  Growing orchards of trees in active commercial operation. 
(7)  Removal of diseased, damaged or infested trees upon receiving written confirmation from a certified arborist or the director. 
(8)  Timber harvesting operations, provided they comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24 and section 328-37. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 328-18. - Permit procedures; application and plan review. 
(a)  All applications for a land disturbance permit or a building permit pursuant to chapter 302, article 5, shall require submission and approval of a tree protection and replacement plan as defined in this article. 
(b)  All tree protection and replacement plans and landscape plans, as well as related documentation, shall be reviewed by the county forester for conformance to the provisions of this article and either approved, returned for revisions, or denied. 
(c)  Signature by the county forester shall constitute an approval of the required landscape and tree protection and replacement plan and conformance to the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The department shall not issue a land disturbance permit without an approved landscape and tree protection and replacement plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § V, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-19. - Landscape and tree protection and replacement plan requirements. 
When required by this article, landscape and tree protection and replacement plans shall be prepared in accordance with section 302-63 of this UDO. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § VI, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-20. - Landscape and tree protection and replacement plan review procedures. 
Landscape and Tree protection and replacement plans required in this article shall meet the standards of section 302-63. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § VII, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-21. - Density requirements. 
(a)  The quantity of total existing and replacement trees and landscaping on a site must be sufficient so as to produce a total site density of not less than that required by section 328-24 or section 328-25 for all developments. 
(b)  The required density shall not include required tree and landscape plantings such as required buffers, transitional buffers, and/or vegetative screenings. Such buffers may include but are not limited to state waters buffers, required landscape buffers and/or planted non-access easements. The required density is in addition to all required plantings. 
(c)  The tree density factor shall be calculated using the total acreage from disturbed areas. Trees to be used in calculating density should be distributed throughout the development in nodes rather than as individual trees. (See administrative standards for specifications.) 
(d)  Required landscape areas shall be defined as a minimum of twelve (12) percent of the total buildable area in any parcel, not including required buffers or landscape strips. Such landscape areas shall be designed in order to enhance any buildings on the site. 
(e)  All required landscape areas shall be planted with a combination of trees, shrubs, perennials, groundcover, and grass, as approved by the director. Landscape areas shall be designed with a minimum 40 percent coverage in trees and large shrubs. Small shrubs, perennials, ornamental grasses, and groundcover may constitute no more than 35 percent coverage of the landscape area, and sod may constitute no more than 25 percent coverage of the landscape area. The following sizes shall be used when calculating coverage of the landscape materials: 
a.  Trees greater than six-inch caliper: 100 ft. 
b.  Trees less than six-inch caliper: 50 ft. 2 
c.  Large shrubs (four-foot height by four-foot spread or larger): 16 ft. 2 
d.  Ornamental grasses: 12 ft. 2 
e.  Small shrubs: 9 ft. 2 
f.  Perennials: 6 ft. 2 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § VIII, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-22. - Tree protection standards. 
(a)  This section establishes standards by which plans and field conditions are to be site evaluated in order to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Protection of existing trees. If trees exist on the site, the required density (see section 328-21) should be met with those trees. If this cannot be done, replacement trees shall be required. A landscape and tree protection and replacement plan must be a part of the approved land disturbance plan. When a choice is available as to which existing trees to save, exceptional trees should be given preference over other trees. Non-exceptional trees, however, should be saved in stands rather than as individual trees scattered over a site. 
(2)  Tree inventories and surveys. All trees that are to be counted toward meeting density requirements must be inventoried. On sites two acres or less, all trees need to be individually counted. All exceptional trees and critical root zones must be shown on the tree protection and replacement plan with an indication whether they are to be retained or removed. On sites greater than two acres, all trees counted must be inventoried using a sampling method. Exceptional trees to be saved as well as the critical root zone must be shown for trees outside of the tree save areas. Exceptional tree calculations can be done using sampling. Sampling method must be approved and overseen by county forester. 
(3)  Plan review standards. All tree save areas must be delineated on the tree protection and replacement plan with tree protection fencing during all phases of construction. The method used to inventory the trees must be indicated on the plans. All buffers must be identified on the tree protection and replacement plan. 
(4)  Construction standards. Tree protection fences are necessary to eliminate activities detrimental to trees including but not limited to: 
a.  Soil compaction in the critical root zone from heavy equipment, vehicular or excessive pedestrian traffic, or storage of equipment or materials. 
b.  Root disturbance due to cuts, fills or trenching. 
c.  Wounds to exposed roots, trunks or limbs. 
d.  Other activities such as chemical storage, cement truck cleaning, fire, etc. 
(5)  Location and types of tree protection fencing. Tree protection fences are to be installed as shown on the tree protection and replacement plan and shall be located outside of the critical root zone of all exceptional trees to be preserved. Once tree protection areas are established and approved, any changes to such areas are subject to review and approval by the county forester. 
(6)  Materials. Tree protection fencing shall consist of four-foot wide orange laminated plastic fencing. Tree protection fencing specifications may be found in the administrative standards promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(7)  Sequence of installation and removal. All tree protection fencing shall be installed prior to the commencement of any land disturbing activity. The county forester shall inspect the installation of tree protection fencing. It shall be the joint and several responsibility of the property owner, developer, contractor, and builder, as applicable, to ensure that all tree protection fencing remains in place during all phases of development. 
(8)  Other specifications. Where the clearing of trees has been approved as part of a tree protection and replacement plan, trees shall be removed in a manner that does not adversely impact the trees to be preserved. No trees shall be felled into tree protection areas and no roots shall be disturbed inside the tree protection areas. All erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be installed uphill so that sediment will not reach any tree protection fencing. All tree protection areas for commercial developments shall be designated as such with "Tree Protection Area" signs posted visibly on all sides of the fenced-in area. These signs are intended to inform subcontractors of the tree protection process. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § IX, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-23. - Tree replacement and landscape standards. 
(a)  This section establishes standards by which landscape and tree protection and replacement plans and field conditions are to be evaluated to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Tree protection and replacement plans shall be prepared with appropriate consideration given to the function of trees in the urban landscape. Every effort should be made to maximize the environmental benefit of the plant material. 
(2)  Trees selected for planting must be from the approved tree list (available on the Rockdale County website), #1 quality, free from trunk or root injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and must be of good vigor in order to assure a reasonable expectation of survivability. Landscaping materials selected for planting must be from the approved shrub and groundcover lists (available on the Rockdale County website), and must also be free from defects. Whenever appropriate, all landscaped areas shall utilize existing natural vegetation in an undisturbed state. 
(3)  Required comments and standards for transplanting shall be in keeping with those established in the International Society of Arboriculture publications, "Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual", "The Practical Science of Planting Trees", or similar publication. Reference the American Association of Nurserymen publication American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60, -2014) for plant material quality specifications. The location of plant materials shall be such that developers incorporate landscaping design that enhances the aesthetics of the property in keeping with the planned use. 
(4)  Tree planting standards. 
a.  Always pick a tree up by the container or root ball, never by the trunk. 
b.  The hole shall be a minimum of two times the width of the root ball with sloped sides. 
c.  The depth of the hole should be no deeper than the height between the bottom of the root ball and the trunk flare. 
d.  Once the tree is placed in the hole, all strapping plus the upper half of burlap and wire basket must be removed from the top of the root ball. 
e.  Backfill soil must be watered and all air pockets removed and filled with clean dirt. 
f.  Stake the tree only if necessary. 
g.  All requirements of the planting comments and planting detail will be followed. 
(5)  Species. Species selected as replacement trees must be native to the Piedmont Region of Georgia and selected from the county's most recent approved tree list, and be ecologically compatible with the site where they are to be planted. A mix of trees with no more than 25 percent of one genus is acceptable for meeting density requirements. Landscaping materials must be ecologically compatible with the site where they are to be planted, and a mix of shrubs with no more than 25 percent of one genus is acceptable for meeting density requirements. 
(6)  Minimum root zones. In order to provide sufficient growing area for planted trees within tree islands, the minimum root zone of 170 square feet is required for all trees. No utility lines shall be located within 15 feet of required tree planting location(s) unless approved by the director. 
(7)  No disturbed ground shall be left exposed. All exposed ground shall be covered with grasses, shrubs, and/or trees to meet the minimum density requirements stated in 328-21(e). 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § X, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-24. - Requirements of single and two-family residential subdivision developments. 
(a)  Each new single family or two-family residential subdivision development shall prepare a landscape and tree protection and replacement plan showing compliance with this section. All other developments shall comply with the provisions of section 328-25. 
(b)  The landscape and tree protection and replacement plan must, at a minimum, protect ten units per acre of existing dominant and co-dominant trees. When possible those protected trees should be evenly distributed over the site. 
(1)  If sufficient existing dominant and co-dominant trees are not available for protection, then two two-inch caliper shade trees shall be required per buildable lot. 
(2)  The county forester may reduce the ten unit per acre requirement by up to 50 percent if he determines that a hardship exists due to existing topographical or other physical conditions not caused by the property owner. 
(3)  If sufficient existing dominant and co-dominant trees are available but are removed without appropriate review and approval of the county forester then ten replacement density factor units per acre shall be required for recompense. 
(c)  Tree protection and replacement plans must, in addition to complying with the requirements of subsection (b) above, comply with either of the following: 
(1)  Each buildable lot with septic tank and drain field shall have a minimum of two two-inch caliper minimum shade trees, planted or preserved. Each buildable lot serviced by sewer shall have three two-inch caliper shade trees, planted or preserved. All trees shall be at least 15 feet from any utility line, septic tank and drain field. Roots within the critical root zone of preserved trees shall remain undisturbed or the tree will not be counted. All trees shall be planted prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  The developer and builder shall protect at least 15 units per acre of existing vegetation and trees on the land being developed in addition to already required buffers and landscape strips. The tree density calculations shall not utilize trees within required buffers in determining for the overall density factor, existing density factor, or replacement density factor. Such buffers may include but are not limited to; state waters buffers, required landscape buffers and/or planted non-access easements. The intent is to clear for the road(s) and utility infrastructure only. 
No reduction from the requirements of this subsection shall be authorized except as otherwise permitted in accordance with the provisions of section 328-29. 
(d)  All traffic calming devices within such subdivision developments shall include one three-inch caliper approved tree plus one native shrub on each side of the tree. All work shall be completed by the developer prior to issuance of the final plat; and shall conform to the provisions of subsection 332-10 regarding traffic calming devices. 
(e)  All such subdivision developments with common off street parking areas consisting of five or more spaces shall comply with the provisions of subsection 328-25(e), Landscape islands. 
(f)  Any person developing a lot for which a landscape and tree replacement and protection plan has been approved by the county shall be required to comply with the provisions of that approved plan. 
(g)  The county forester shall inspect all landscaping and tree plantings. The county forester shall file a written report with the department detailing and certifying the completion of all required landscaping and tree plantings as required in the plans. The report must be received by the department prior to the issuance of a final plat or certificate of occupancy. 
(h)  Where development is intended to occur in phases or increments, landscape and tree protection and replacement plan density calculations shall be based on a site area defined by each development phase or increment. Existing trees to be counted toward meeting the tree density requirements must be located within each phase or increment. 
(i)  Standards for subdivision entrances. For each subdivision entrance sign located on private property, there shall be a minimum of one (1) large tree, one (1) medium or small tree, and five (5) shrubs. The type, size, and location of these plant materials shall conform to the specifications set forth in section 328-23. Plant materials shall not be located to interfere with clear visibility requirements set forth by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § XI, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-25. - Requirements for other developments. 
(a)  Each new development not covered by section 328-24 shall prepare a landscape and tree protection and replacement plan showing compliance with this section. 
(b)  The tree protection and replacement plan must, at a minimum, protect or plant 15 units per acre of trees on the land being developed. The tree density calculations shall not utilize trees within required buffers in determining for the overall density factor, existing density factor, or replacement density factor. All new development with eight (8) or more parking spaces, or expanded development that results in eight (8) or more parking spaces, shall provide interior landscaping. 
(c)  Rockdale County has given priority to the retention and placement of trees in frontage planting strips and parking lot planting islands. Trees retained or placed in these areas may be used to meet the tree density factor for a project. However, if the tree density factor is met with trees saved or planted in other areas, the tree location guidelines outlined below must still be performed with additional tree plantings. 
(d)  Required landscape strips and re-vegetated buffers. Landscape strips shall meet the minimum depth requirements as indicated in the following table. Trees may be planted in groups rather than in a single line. Adjoining residential zoning districts, evergreen trees shall be saved or planted in such density or spacing as to provide an eight-foot tall visual barrier within two years of planting. Required landscaping strips shall not be encroached upon by parking space, driveway surfaces or storm water detention facilities except when complying with requirements below. Driveway crossings may traverse such strip as near to a perpendicular alignment as practical. Signs may be located in the required landscape strip. 
(1)  Portions of a stormwater management facility, classified as either a bioretention area or an enhanced swale, may encroach upon the landscaping strip, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  No future right of access will be granted across any part of the facility. 
b.  No future construction will degrade the ability of the facility to provide water quality treatment or to provide safe conveyance and drainage of stormwater. 
c.  The side slopes of the facility within the landscaping strip are not steeper than 5:1. 
d.  The 100-year ponding depth of the facility shall not exceed 24 inches. 
e.  The extent of the 100-year ponding shall not be within five feet of any property line or right-of-way line. 
f.  The facility provides at least six inches of freeboard above the 100-year ponding elevation. 
g.  Portions of the facility within the landscaping strip must be fully planted in accordance with the Rockdale County Unified Development Ordinance and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(2)  Portions of all other stormwater management facilities may encroach upon the landscaping strip provided all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  No future right of access will be granted across any part of the facility. 
b.  No future construction will degrade the ability of the facility to provide water quality treatment or to provide safe conveyance and drainage of stormwater. 
c.  The side slopes of the facility within the landscaping strip are not steeper than 5:1. 
d.  The facility shall not have retaining walls or fencing within the landscaping strip. 
e.  The 100-year ponding depth within the landscaping strip shall not exceed 12 inches. 
f.  The extent of the 100-year ponding shall not be within ten feet of any property line or right-of-way line. 
g.  The facility provides at least 12 inches of freeboard above the 100-year ponding elevation. 
h.  Portions of the facility within the landscaping strip must be fully planted in accordance with the Rockdale County Unified Development Ordinance. 
Table of Dimensions for Landscape Strips 

 
(e)  Parking landscape islands. Landscape islands shall be provided within parking areas (but not within vehicle storage, maneuvering, or display areas) as follows: 
(1)  Landscape islands shall be located at the end of every parking bay, such that no more than eight (8) parking spaces occur in an unbroken row. Measuring from the trunk, the tree must be a minimum of six feet from the back of the curb. No portion of an island less than three feet in width may be counted. All landscape islands shall contain a minimum of 200 square feet. Parking lot interior landscaping is not required beneath canopies or other structures that block sunlight or rainfall. 
(2)  Landscape islands shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the parking area. A planting area located wholly within a generally rectangular area that is (a) devoted to parking and (b) between a building and a lot line or between two buildings will generally serve this purpose. 
(3)  At least one tree shall be planted in every landscape island, with no less than 200 square feet per tree. There shall be at least one overstory tree for every eight parking spaces. 
(4)  Adequate irrigation to the landscape island shall be provided. The method of irrigation shall be indicated on the tree protection and replacement plan. 
(5)  Light posts and underground utilities shall not be located in landscape islands. 
(6)  Combination drainage swale/planting strips for parking lots are encouraged provided that: 
a.  Adequate drainage is provided for the trees and plants; and 
b.  Bottomland hardwood species are used. 
(f)  Any person developing a lot for which a landscape and tree replacement and protection plan has been approved by the county shall be required to comply with the provisions of that approved plan. 
(g)  The county forester shall inspect all tree and landscape plantings. The county forester shall file a written report with the department detailing and certifying the completion of all required tree plantings as required in the plans. The report must be received by the department prior to the issuance of a final plat or certificate of occupancy. 
(h)  Where development is intended to occur in phases or increments, tree protection and replacement plan density calculations shall be based on a site area defined by each development phase or increment. Existing trees to be counted toward meeting the tree density requirements must be located within each phase or increment. 
(i)  Stormwater management facilities shall be integrated landscape features, rather than single-purpose flood control or water quality treatment measures. Such facilities shall be planted with appropriate grasses, shrubs, and trees wherever naturally-occurring vegetation is unlikely to be attractive, dense, and healthy. In the event that stormwater facilities cannot be integrated landscape features, then all such facilities shall be masked from the street, open space, and abutting lots. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § XII—XV, 4-26-2016; Ord. No. 0-2017-33, § 1, 12-12-2017) 
Sec. 328-26. - Exceptional trees. 
(a)  Some trees on a site warrant special consideration and encouragement for protection, and are deemed exceptional trees. Specifications for exceptional trees may be found in the administrative standards promulgated pursuant to this article. 
(b)  To obtain credit as an exceptional tree, the tree must be protected in its natural state, free from damage within the critical root zone. In order to encourage protection of exceptional trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, additional density credits shall be given for exceptional trees that are successfully protected from damage up to and including the date a certificate of occupancy is first issued or a final plat is first approved for the property. 
(c)  Credit for any exceptional tree saved, with three feet of critical root zone protected per one inch of diameter at breast height, will be three times the assigned unit value shown in the administrative standards. Exceptional trees that need to be removed require written documentation indicating the reason for removal, to be submitted to the county forester prior to the removal. Exceptional trees removed with prior approval from the county forester must be replaced at the rate of half a unit for each unit awarded in the administrative standards. Exceptional trees must be replaced by species with similar characteristics. If an exceptional tree is damaged or removed without prior approval by the county forester, recompense or penalty shall be required or imposed as follows: 
(1)  Any exceptional tree that is damaged or removed without the appropriate review and approval of the county forester must be replaced by trees with a total density equal to three times the unit value of the tree removed. Size alone will determine whether a tree was of exceptional tree quality if the tree is removed without approval and there is no evidence of its condition. 
(2)  In the event the county forester determines an exceptional tree is a hazard to property, power lines or people, the tree may be removed without recompense or penalty. 
(3)  Any exceptional tree saved with one foot of critical root zone protected per one inch of diameter at breast height shall be given no credit towards the required density units and will require no recompense. 
(d)  Trees that would otherwise be considered exceptional trees which are located in the right-of-way or within any required utility or drainage easements shall not be counted as exceptional trees in any calculation pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 328-27. - Maintenance period for all developments. 
(a)  New landscape or tree plantings or existing protected trees used to meet the density requirements of this article for all developments shall be maintained for two years after the date of final inspection and shall require the posting of a maintenance bond by the applicant. Maintenance bonds shall be in an amount equal to 125 percent of the estimated cost of replacement of the newly planted or existing protected trees and landscape materials. Such maintenance shall keep landscape materials healthy, neat, and orderly in appearance, and free of litter and debris. 
(b)  During the period of the two-year maintenance bond, the county forester shall have the right to conduct periodic inspections during normal business hours in order to confirm the health and viability of all required trees and vegetation. 
(c)  If the county forester finds that vegetation or trees planted or protected to meet the required site density are dead or near death, the county forester shall so notify the applicant and the applicant shall replace those trees and landscape materials with plants of similar size within 30 days of notification. The failure of the applicant to timely plant any such replacement trees or landscaping shall result in forfeiture of the maintenance bond unless a performance bond is sought and granted pursuant to section 328-28. 
(d)  Not sooner than 75 days nor later than 60 days prior to the expiration of the maintenance bond, the applicant shall petition the county forester to release the maintenance bond. Failure to petition the county forester shall result in forfeiture of the maintenance bond. Upon receipt of the petition, the county forester shall inspect the project to determine the health and viability of all required trees and landscaping. If the county forester finds that trees or landscaping need to be replaced, the county forester shall so notify the applicant and the applicant shall timely perform such additional work necessary to comply with the tree density requirements of this article. The failure of the applicant to timely replace the trees or landscaping specified by the county forester may result in forfeiture of the maintenance bond. Upon the county forester's final determination that all required trees and landscaping are healthy, the county forester shall so notify the applicant, and the maintenance bond shall be released. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § XVI, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-28. - Performance bonds. 
New tree plantings and landscaping used to meet the density requirement of this article for commercial or residential developments may be postponed for up to six months provided that a performance bond is obtained. The basis for delay must be that either planting stock availability is low or weather conditions are not appropriate for planting new trees. All performance bonds shall be submitted to the department with the following: 
(1)  The performance bond must be as provided in section 302-27. 
(2)  Performance bonds shall be submitted to the department with appropriate documentation and justification of low plant stock availability and/or adverse weather conditions. 
The developer will provide three estimates for material and labor to install required plantings from three different nurseries. The director will choose the appropriate bond amount from the three estimates provided. The bond will be assessed at 125 percent of the cost to ensure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § XVII, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-29. - Alternative compliance. 
(a)  Where the minimum density requirements cannot be fully met because the site cannot support the required density of trees, the applicant shall make a contribution to the tree replacement fund. Contributions to the tree replacement fund shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of any required permit. Such contributions shall be used for the sole purposes of planting and maintaining trees on public property. 
(b)  The amount of the contribution shall be based upon the number, size and type of trees that cannot be planted at the site. The county forester shall estimate the cost to the county for the materials and labor associated with the trees. The amount of the contribution shall be 100 percent of the estimated costs for the materials and labor of planting such trees. The developer shall provide the county forester with three estimates from three different arborist or nurseries for the trees, materials and labor associated with planting. 
(c)  The county forester may waive the provisions of this section if he determines that: 
(1)  The unmet density is less than ten percent of the density requirement for the site; and 
(2)  The developer otherwise substantially complies with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 328-30. - Inspections. 
(a)  The county forester may periodically inspect the project during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following the completion of work. Applicants shall cooperate with the department in making such inspections. The department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for the purpose of entering at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land-disturbing activities. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized county employee who requests entry for the purpose of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(c)  Prior to the issuance of a permit for any land-disturbing activity, the county forester shall inspect all tree protection fencing for compliance with the tree protection and replacement plan. Failure to adhere to the landscaping and tree protection and replacement plan will subject the project to enforcement procedures found in this article. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, final plat, or other forms of county acceptance, the county forester shall inspect for compliance with the requirements of this article. Any disturbances in tree save areas or deficiencies in the required tree density factor will be cited at this time. Tree save area deficiencies must be corrected with new tree plantings prior to project release. 
(e)  Existing trees that are not expected to survive will not be counted toward meeting density requirements. Conversely, any existing trees not shown to remain on plans but which have been saved (meeting all tree protection standards) through field adjustments may be counted toward density requirements, provided that all changes are recorded on the certificate of occupancy or the final plat. 
(f)  Once a tree save area has been established through the department plan approval process, any unauthorized removal of trees in that area must be mitigated by planting new trees to a tree density factor of 60 units per acre. A revised tree protection and replacement plan must be submitted to and approved by the county forester. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § XVIII, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-31. - Remedial care of trees and tree save areas. 
Trees in tree save areas that have been adversely impacted, as determined by the county forester, by the construction process may be subject to remedial care. Remedial care may include but is not limited to: pruning, soil aeration, fertilization, or supplemental watering. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 328-32. - Suspension, revocation, and modification of permits; stop-work orders; citations. 
(a)  Suspension, revocation, and modification. Any land disturbance permit or building permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the director upon finding that the holder is in violation of any portion of this article. 
(b)  Stop work orders. If it is determined that a person has engaged in land disturbing activities and has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be posted on the site. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of this article within 24 hours after such notice of non-compliance has been issued shall result in immediate issuance of a stop work order. Where any emergency exists, as determined by the director, no written notice shall be required before a stop work order is issued. 
(c)  Citations. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided for in chapter 110. Each day's continuance of a violation may be considered a separate offense. The owner of any building, structure or site, or part thereof, where anything in violation of this article exists, and any architect, builder, contractor, operator or agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits or assists in the commission of any violation shall be guilty of a separate offense. In addition to or in lieu of any fine or imprisonment, the department may require the replacement of trees by the person violating this article in order to meet the minimum requirements set out herein. 
(d)  Future permits prohibited. In addition to all other penalties for violations of this article, no land disturbance permit or other permits shall be issued for any property or portion thereof until all outstanding violations of this article applicable to such property have been fully corrected and satisfied. Outstanding violations of this article shall continue to apply to such property regardless of a change in ownership. The director shall place appropriate holds on the county's land records to enforce this provision. This subsection shall not apply to permits issued by Rockdale County to stabilize or correct prior illegal or improper acts performed on such property. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 328-33. - Tree topping. 
No tree topping or roundovering shall be allowed on new developments, county rights-of-way, county lands, or commercial property. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 328-34. - Fees. 
Fees for processing plan applications and for inspections may be established and modified by the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 328-35. - Appeals of decisions of administrative officials. 
(a)  Appeal to director. Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the county forester or any other administrative official made pursuant to the provisions of this article may appeal that decision to the director. The aggrieved person shall file a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof, within ten days after the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the director, after the notice of appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the director or court of record on application, on notice to the official from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. The director shall schedule a date, time, and location for the hearing of the appeal and shall give notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. The applicant and affected administrative official may submit written evidence or arguments. The director shall issue a written decision on the appeal within 30 days after the hearing. If no decision is made within this time frame, the appeal shall be considered granted. An appeal shall be sustained upon an expressed finding by the director that the administrative official's action was based upon an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that he or she acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the director may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided that all requirements imposed by the applicable laws other than these are met. 
(b)  Appeal to board of adjustment. Any aggrieved person not satisfied by the decision of the director on appeal may appeal that determination to the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures set forth in UDO section 238-8. Appeals from final decisions of the board of adjustment shall be as provided in UDO section 238-13. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008) 
Sec. 328-36. - Administrative standards. 
The regulations set forth in the Rockdale County Landscaping and Tree Protection and Replacement Ordinance Administrative Standards have been promulgated and adopted pursuant to this article. These administrative standards shall apply to any activity on real property, public or private, in unincorporated areas of the county to which the provisions of this article apply. The county forester shall administer these administrative standards. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § XIX, 4-26-2016) 
Sec. 328-37. - Timber harvesting. 
(a)  Eligibility. If timber harvesting took place on the site within 36 months prior to submitting a preliminary plat or applying for a land disturbance permit or a zoning amendment, no such plat, permit or zoning amendment shall be approved. 
(b)  Erosion control. As per O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(6), as amended, Forestry Land Management Practices (including harvesting) are exempt from the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act (GESA). However, "when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in [O.C.G.A.] paragraphs (15) and (16) of subsection (b) of code section 12-7-6, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices." 
(c)  Reforestation plan. Clear-cutting or seed tree harvesting a stand of trees for capital gain will only be permitted with a plan for how the area will be reforested. The selected type of harvest shall be listed on the Timber Harvesting Information Form. A reforestation plan, written by a professional forester, must be attached with the timber harvesting packet before a permit will be issued. The reforestation plan must show how the site will be prepared before re-establishing a fully stocked stand. The plan must show types of practices and dates for site preparation and replanting. A fully stocked stand may vary depending on species. For pine species there must be at least 400 trees per acre (TPA) growing freely throughout the harvested areas one year after planting or reseeding is complete. For general hardwood species replanting, a minimum of 150 TPA is required to be considered a fully stocked stand. The landowner must show documentation of reforesting the land within two years after harvesting is complete. If no progress has been completed, property owner will be subject to a three-year moratorium in which no further actions shall be approved on the property including application for a land disturbance permit, a zoning amendment, or the submittal of a preliminary plat. 
(d)  Reforestation. As defined in the "National Management Measures to Control Nonpoint Source Pollution Forestry EPA 841-B-05-001, May 2005," silvicultural practices occur when "...forests are tended, harvested and replaced, usually defined by, but not limited to, the method of regeneration." Reforestation can be accomplished artificially or naturally. Natural regeneration is defined as allowing the crop trees to regenerate an area. The most common methods are coppice, seed-in-place, seed trees, and shelterwood. Artificial regeneration is defined as establishing a new forest by planting seedlings or by direct seeding. 
(e)  Timber harvesting operations. Timber harvesting encompasses several operations for the purpose of this section. In addition to cutting trees, timber harvesting typically includes the layout of access roads, log decks and skid trails. It is in the best interest of everyone involved in forestry operations to properly plan and manage their operations by consistently following Georgia Best Management Practices to prevent any potential water quality problems. Below is a listing of the most common harvesting types used in this region: 
(1)  Clear-cutting a stand of trees is the removal of all (zero to eight trees per acre) merchantable trees on a tract and will only be allowed if a reforestation plan has been developed and included with the timber harvesting packet. The reforestation plan shall demonstrate how the property will be reforested once harvesting is complete. 
(2)  Seed-tree harvest can remove all trees, except eight to 15 uniformly spaced high quality seed producing dominant or co-dominant trees per acre to naturally re-seed the site after harvest. Seed-tree harvest can only be permitted if a reforestation plan has been developed and included with the timber harvesting packet. The management plan shall demonstrate how the property will be reforested once harvesting is complete. It is crucial to plan the timing of the harvest and to assure adequate seed fall. Prescribed burn and/or light harrow disking the ground after harvest will scarify the soil to ensure a germination of the seed. Seed trees should be selected to provide sufficient seed to achieve a fully stocked stand in the new cohort and ensure the seed trees continued survival and viability at the removal cut. Seed trees shall be selected based on the following key traits: 
a.  Trees with a large crown will maximize seed production due to their greater vigor and large leaf area. 
b.  Trees should be at reproductive maturity with past evidence of good seed production. Past evidence of good seed production is the best way to assure future seed production. 
c.  Trees need to be wind firm. Increased taper is correlated to wind firmness, but may be a less desirable phenotype when managing for poles. 
d.  Trees should have desirable phenotypes, since they are providing seed for the next rotation. 
e.  Their form should be free of defects such as forking, sinuosity, or rami-corns (an excessively large and steeply angled branch that forms a large knot). 
f.  No evidence of serious insect or disease susceptibility should be present. 
(3)  Shelterwood harvest method must leave 21 to 60 dominant or co-dominant seed trees per acre. This harvest is a preferred even-aged natural regeneration system for non-prolific seed producing species and as a visually appealing regeneration system for certain hardwood and conifer species. A shelterwood harvest provides an abundance of seed and shelter for seedlings, as well as residual shade to control weeds. This type of harvest will not require a reforestation plan due to the sufficient stocking density left on site, however, the selected seed trees should be high quality (exceptional) specimens so as to provide high quality seeds. 
(4)  Thinning operation means to leave a minimum residual stocking density that has the potential to restore to a closed canopy forest within ten years or have no more than 60 percent of the stand removed. Thinning harvest is intended to improve the overall health and quality of the remaining trees. If exceptional trees exist on-site, they should be given priority to be retained over other dominant or co-dominant trees. If the required density is met using non-exceptional trees and exceptional trees are found by the county forester to have been removed, then harvesting operation will not be considered as being for silvicultural purposes. This type of harvest will not require a reforestation plan upon permitting due to the sufficient stocking density left on site. 
(f)  Access roads. Road construction shall be solely for silvicultural purposes. Access roads shall not exceed the typical maximum allowable width of 16 feet or should not be wider than necessary for the transport of silvicultural products or access for forest management activities. Roads wider than 16 feet will only be allowed upon county forester approval. In general, tree stumps are only removed to construct access roads and log decks. The presence of intensive mechanical site preparations such as sheering, root raking, windrowing debris or "stumping" of the site may be deemed as non-silvicultural activities. 
(g)  GFC consulting. The Georgia Forestry Commission may be contacted by the county forester if technical assistance is required to determine if a land disturbing activity is a legitimate silvicultural activity exempt from Georgia Erosion and Sediment Control Act O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17, local erosion and sedimentation control ordinances, and permit requirements. The decision rendered by GFC shall be considered final. 
(h)  Bonding. All timber harvesting operations of areas larger than five acres shall be required to obtain a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state, protecting the county against any damage caused by such operations in an amount specified by the department not exceeding $5,000.00. Alternatively at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the same amount of and in lieu of such bond may be submitted. For purposes of this paragraph, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered. 
(i)  Additional requirements. The following practices shall be required of all timber cutting incidental to development. 
(1)  All access onto public roads shall have culverts and stone pads as prescribed in the Manual of Standards and Specifications for Georgia Erosion and Sediment Control Act. 
(2)  Stream sides and access roads shall be seeded upon completion of harvesting operations as prescribed in the Manual of Standards and Specifications for Georgia Erosion and Sediment Control Act. 
(j)  Additional requirements. The following practices shall be required of all timber harvesting for silviculture: 
(1)  All such operations shall follow the latest version of Georgia's Best Management Practices for Forestry, available from the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(2)  All persons or firms harvesting standing timber for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any wood yard or processing plant shall provide notice of such harvesting operations by completing and submitting the harvesting package provided by the county prior to cutting any such timber. 
(3)  Prior written notice shall be required of any person or firm harvesting such timber for each separate tract to be harvested thereby. 
a.  Such notice shall be submitted on a form provided by the Georgia Forestry Commission and shall consist of: 
1.  A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested, the route trucks will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, and the main and secondary (if any), points of ingress/egress to such tract from a public road(s). The map shall also include all areas harvested, all stream crossings and all loading decks; 
2.  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under state law; 
3.  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
4.  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber; 
b.  Such notice may be submitted to the department in person, by facsimile, or by mail. 
c.  Such notice shall be effective for stated harvesting operation on such tract upon receipt by the department and compliance with all of the requirements stated above. Notice will be active until such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract or one year has expired. Any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the department within three business days after such change. 
d.  Violation of the notice requirements in this subsection shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 0-2008-19, § 2, 11-25-2008; Ord. No. 0-2015-01, § 1, 2-10-2015; Ord. No. 0-2015-12, §§ I, II, 12-8-2015; Ord. No. 0-2016-03, § XX—XXII, 4-26-2016) 
Chapter 332 - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 332-1. - Street classification and right-of-way requirements. 
(a)  Street classification. 
(1)  Streets are classified into a street hierarchy system based on road function and traffic volumes. Streets are classified into the following categories: 
a.  Interstate principal arterials. 
b.  Principal arterials. 
c.  Minor arterials. 
d.  Collector streets. 
e.  Local streets in urban area boundaries. 
(2)  The application for approval of a preliminary plat, site development plan, or building permit that will require the applicant to construct new public streets or make improvements to existing public streets shall determine the design of the street based on projected traffic volumes and use the right-of-way and lane widths as noted in the "table of minimum right-of-way and lane widths." The final determination regarding the classification of any existing or proposed street shall be made by the director. 
(b)  Right-of-way and lane widths. 
(1)  Minimum widths for new streets or roads shall be as shown in "table of minimum right-of-way and lane widths." See Rockdale County Standard Design and Construction Details for detailed dimensions. Total width of streets includes lane width plus curb and gutter (back to back of curb) or from edge of pavement if no curbs exist. Local streets will use a 24-inch curb and gutter. Other road/street classifications will use a 30-inch curb and gutter. If an existing street is used for access, the developer shall conform to the existing street width if it is greater than is required for a new street in this UDO. 
(2)  Minimum widths of right-of-way and lanes shall be as shown in the table of right-of-way and lane widths. 
Table of Minimum Right-of-Way and Lane Widths 

 
Notes: 
*Lane widths include only pavement width. Example: Two lanes at 11 feet with two feet C&G would be 26 feet back to back of curb. 
Ten-foot lanes are allowed in conservation residential subdivisions. 
Lane widths on collector streets and other local (non-subdivision) streets will be based on design speed and traffic volumes. 
Number of lanes will be determined based on traffic volumes, except for subdivision streets which will be typically two lanes only. 
Street categories based on the current Federal Functional Classification System for Rockdale County. 
Typical section details are shown in the Rockdale County Standard Design and Construction Details. 
(c)  Right-of-way dedication. 
(1)  The minimum width of right-of-way shall be dedicated based upon the street classification, as provided in this section and approved by the director. 
(2)  On any existing street abutting a proposed development, one-half of the required width of right-of-way shall be dedicated, at no cost to Rockdale County, as measured from the centerline of the roadway along the entire property frontage. Right-of-way widths for existing streets shall be based on the current classification as determined by the director. 
(3)  Additional right-of-way may be required at intersections or other locations fronting the property where turning lanes, storage lanes, medians, re-alignments or other traffic safety improvements are required. 
(4)  If a new street or thoroughfare is proposed by Rockdale County or the State of Georgia to adjoin or traverse the property, the proposed road shall be accommodated into the development plans of the property in accordance with this UDO. These right-of-way requirements shall govern except where there exist clearly defined plans of the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) or Rockdale County that require additional right-of-way. In that case, the greater right-of-way requirements shall govern. 
(d)  Clear zone requirements. All new roads/streets should utilize the concepts, designs, and philosophies in the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) Roadside Design Guide, where practical and feasible to use the latest state-of-the-practice in roadside safety. New roads/streets should also use context-sensitive design concepts in the applications of clear zone. Context-sensitive design concepts are also on the GDOT web site (www.dot.state.ga.us). The application of clear zone concepts on existing roads/streets needs to be used where the greatest safety benefit can be realized. Crash reports, site investigations, and maintenance records offer starting points for identifying these locations. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-2. - Access management. 
(a)  Applicability. Except for development projects consisting of single-family dwelling units or industrial development, land subdivision and development that takes its primary access from a state or federal highway or a thoroughfare classified as a major collector or arterial in the latest Federal Functional Classification Systems for Rockdale County shall comply with these standards. These standards shall apply unless a more restrictive standard is required by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(b)  Joint and cross access. 
(1)  Adjacent commercial or office properties on major collectors and arterials shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites. 
(2)  Joint driveways and cross access easements shall be established for multi-parcel commercial, office or industrial development, wherever feasible, along major arterial highway corridors. The building site shall incorporate the following: 
a.  Continuous service drives or cross access corridor connecting adjacent parcels along the thoroughfare. 
b.  A design speed of 15 mph and a two-way travel aisle width of 24 feet to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles and loading vehicles. 
c.  Driveway aprons, stub-outs and other design features to allow abutting properties to be connected and provide cross access via a service drive. 
(3)  The department may reduce the required separation distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  Joint access driveways and cross access easements are provided wherever feasible in accordance with this section. 
b.  The site plan incorporates a unified access and circulation system for vehicles and pedestrians in accordance with this section. 
(c)  Minimum driveway setbacks from street intersections. 
(1)  Driveway connections shall not be permitted within the functional area of the intersection, of two public streets. The functional area includes the longitudinal limits of auxiliary or turning lanes. 
(2)  Minimum standards. No driveway access shall be allowed within 150 feet of the centerline of an intersecting major collector or arterial street, or within 100 feet of any minor collector street. 
(d)  Minimum access requirements. 
(1)  All developments shall have one or more driveways or entrances to a public right-of-way. 
(2)  The number of such access points shall be as shown in "Table of minimum number of access points." 
Table of Minimum Number of Access Points 

 
(e)  Separation of access points. 
(1)  Subdivisions located along existing county roads shall be required to provide reverse frontage lots or parallel frontage roads where feasible. All other lots must comply with the following: 
a.  Along state or federal highways, no more than one point of vehicular access from a property shall be permitted for each 300 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof, although requirements of the GDOT shall apply whenever more restrictive. 
b.  Along arterial or collector roads other than state or federal highways, no more than two points of vehicular access from a property to each abutting public street shall be permitted for each 300 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof; provided, however, that lots with less than 200 feet of frontage shall have no more than one point of access to any one public street. The department shall determine whether the points of access may be unrestricted or will have to be designed for right-in, right-out traffic flow. To make this determination the department may require a traffic study to be performed by the owner. 
(2)  No point of access shall be allowed within 35 feet of the right-of-way line of any street intersections for single-family and two-family residential lots and within 50 feet for multi-family and non-residential properties. 
(3)  Corner lot access shall be located as far from the intersection as reasonably possible to reduce turning movement conflicts and to promote proper traffic circulation. 
(4)  Otherwise, the separation of access points on any street or road shall be determined by the established speed limit of the street or road, with the following minimum spacing requirements as provided in "Table of minimum driveway spacing." 
Table of Minimum Driveway Spacing 

 
(5)  The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway to the centerline of the nearest adjacent driveway or roadway. 
(6)  Driveways shall be located so that the radius return is a minimum of four feet from a property line that intersects the right-of-way line. 
(7)  The requirements of this section are not intended to eliminate all access to a parcel of land that was legally subdivided prior to the enactment of this section. 
(f)  Emergency access. All public streets, private and residential drives shall be designed and maintained so as to provide safe and convenient access for emergency vehicles, as required by the Rockdale County Fire Marshal. New developments with restricted access, such as gated subdivisions, must receive a variance from this requirement based on review and approval of the Rockdale County Sherriff's Department. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-3. - Driveway design standards. 
(a)  Permits required. No driveway shall be constructed abutting a county-maintained road or street until all applicable driveway permits have been approved and issued by the department. For driveways that abut a state or federal highway, all applicable permits shall be obtained from the GDOT prior to construction. 
(b)  General requirements. See also section 332-2. 
(1)  Joint access driveways are permitted in order to achieve minimum driveway spacing requirements. 
(2)  No property may have a curb cut in excess of 50 feet in width without approval of the director. 
(3)  If a non-residential driveway design is one-way in or one-way out, then the driveway shall be a minimum width of 16 feet and shall have appropriate signage designating the driveway as a one-way connection. 
(4)  For two-way, non-residential access, each travel lane shall have a minimum width of 11 feet. When more than two lanes are proposed, a specific driveway design must be approved by the department. 
(5)  Driveways that enter an arterial or collector street at traffic signals must have at least two outbound lanes of at least 11 feet in width and one inbound lane with a maximum width of 12 feet. 
(6)  Except for single-family and two-family residences, driveway grades shall conform to the requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation Design Standards. 
(7)  Driveways shall intersect roads or streets with no more than a ten degree skew from a 90 degree angle. 
(8)  Driveway aprons shall slope from the right-of-way to the edge of pavement or gutter flow line. For all non-single-family driveways and entrances, a storm sewer inlet or grade break shall be provided at the right-of-way line to prevent discharge of stormwater onto the public right-of-way. 
(9)  Driveways shall comply with the minimum requirements of the Rockdale County Standard Design and Construction Details, based on projected use and classification. 
(10)  Driveways serving single-family detached or duplex residences may be no less than ten feet wide at the right-of-way line and shall provide a radius to the back of the curb or edge of the pavement of the roadway of no less than five feet. All other driveway curb cuts on public streets shall conform to the standards shown on the driveway details contained in the Rockdale County Standard Design and Construction Details. All driveways and driveway curb cuts on state highways shall conform to GDOT Standards. 
(11)  All driveways and driveway curb cuts on state highways shall conform to GDOT Standards. 
(c)  Driveway construction standards. 
(1)  Sidewalks and curbs adjacent to driveways shall meet requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. 
(2)  Portions of driveways within the public rights-of-way shall be of concrete pavement six inches thick and a minimum of 3,000 psi for residential driveways, and eight inches thick, 3,500 psi concrete over compacted subgrade for commercial and industrial driveways. 
(3)  Driveways shall be no closer than three feet, at the closest point, to an at-grade utility structure, including, but not limited to, curb inlets, drainage structures, streetlights, telephone and electrical poles, boxes and transformers, manholes, handholes and fire hydrants. 
(4)  Driveways shall be no closer than ten feet from a street tree or fire hydrant. 
(5)  Water and sewer lines shall be located outside of driveways, except for generally perpendicular crossings. 
(6)  Commercial driveways shall provide a 35-foot minimum radius at intersection with a public street. If designed for tractor-trailer trucks, the minimum radius shall be 75 feet. 
(d)  Auxiliary lanes. 
(1)  Along any arterial or major collector street, a deceleration lane, acceleration lane, larger turning radius, traffic islands or other devices or designs may be required to avoid specific traffic hazards that, otherwise, would be created by the proposed driveway location. 
(2)  Deceleration lanes shall be required by Rockdale County at each access point on roads classified as arterials or collectors when the posted speed limit is 30 mph or higher and otherwise where considered necessary by the director based on traffic volumes. Deceleration lanes are required on county roads classified as arterial and major collector streets when the posted speed limit is 30 mph or higher. Minimum deceleration lengths are specified in the "Table of deceleration lane requirements." The director may vary length requirements based upon a consideration of available sight distance and traffic volumes. 
Table of Deceleration  Lane Requirements 

 
(3)  When a new deceleration lane required by this chapter is proposed to begin or end within 50 feet of an existing deceleration lane, driveway or street intersection, then the new deceleration lane shall be extended as needed to provide a safe, continuous connection with adjacent or nearby deceleration lanes, driveways and intersections. 
(e)  Sight distance. All roads, streets, and driveways shall provide adequate sight distance as shown in the Table of intersection sight distance requirements. See also Standard Design and Construction Detail 3.09. 
Table of Intersection Sight   Distance Requirements 

 
SDR means sight distance required for vehicle approaching from right side of driveway. 
SDL means sight distance required for vehicle approaching from left side of driveway. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 20, 7-24-2007) 
Sec. 332-4. - Requirements for new streets and roadways. 
(a)  All new streets proposed to be constructed in a subdivision or other development shall be designed and constructed to the minimum standards contained in this chapter, in accordance with the classification of streets. 
(b)  If a new street or thoroughfare is proposed by Rockdale County or the State of Georgia to traverse the property, the proposed road shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the street classification as shown in the latest Federal Functional Classification System for Rockdale County and contained in this chapter or as shown on plans proposed by the county or State of Georgia. The specific vertical and horizontal alignment of the proposed roadway shall be as established or approved by Rockdale County and/or the State of Georgia, as applicable. 
(c)  Substandard streets. 
(1)  If a substandard street (dirt or gravel road or inadequate width of pavement or right-of-way) provides a means of access to a major subdivision or non-residential development, the street shall be upgraded to the street classification standard required by the Rockdale County/City of Conyers Functional Classification System and in accordance with this article. These improvements shall extend from the entrance of the development to the nearest standard paved road of an equivalent or higher classification, along the route of primary access. 
(2)  All right-of-way required for these off-site improvements shall be acquired at the expense of the developer. Additional requirements may be mandated by the county as outlined in subsection (b). 
(d)  Improvements along state highways. For any development that abuts a state or federal highway, improvements to the roadway and the location and design of any street or driveway providing access from the state highway shall comply with the standards and requirements of the GDOT and this chapter. A permit for the proposed access or improvements shall be required to have been approved by the GDOT and incorporated into the construction drawings for the project prior to issuance of a development permit by the department. 
(e)  Permanent dead-end streets. See subsection 302-10(b). 
(1)  New streets shall connect at both ends to existing streets unless the director determines that unique parcel configuration or terrain make a fully connected street pattern infeasible or unsafe. 
(2)  When necessary, streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall provide a cul-de-sac turnaround and may be no more than 800 feet in length, unless otherwise approved by the director. 
(3)  The length of a cul-de-sac street shall be measured from the center of the cul-de-sac to the center of the intersection with another street. 
(4)  Cul-de-sacs shall conform to design requirements of the Rockdale County Standard Design and Construction Details. 
(f)  Temporary dead-end streets. 
(1)  A temporary dead-end street shall be provided to the boundary of a subdivision to provide access to abutting property for planned continuity of future circulation, improved access for public safety vehicles or for the extension of public water or other utilities to neighboring properties. Such dead-end streets shall be designed to meet the requirements of this article, and to allow their reasonable extension and shall be located so as to be reasonably incorporated into a street design for the neighboring property. A temporary vehicular turnaround shall be provided as shown in the standard details. 
(2)  Existing dead-end streets on abutting property shall be extended into a proposed subdivision and incorporated into the street design of the development. 
(3)  Subsections (1) and (2) of this subsection may be modified by the director in cases of serious topographical hardship or unacceptable land use conflicts between the two developments. This modification may be conditioned on the provision of easements necessary for the extension of public utilities, the provision of a cul-de-sac or other permanent turnaround on the dead-end street or the removal of the dead-end street back to its nearest intersection. 
(4)  Where a dead-end street (other than a cul-de-sac) serves four or more lots in a multi-phase subdivision and such street is to be extended later, the developer shall be required to provide a temporary vehicular turnaround complying with subsection 332-1(b). This requirement may be waived if extension of the dead-end street is approved and under construction prior to its inclusion in a final plat. 
(g)  Access roads. Where a development borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, major utility easement, limited access highway right-of-way or a major thoroughfare; a public street may be required to be constructed and dedicated within the development approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way. Locations of such service roads shall be aligned with similar service roads on adjacent properties. 
(h)  Construction access drives are required for vehicles with gross weight of 10,000 pounds or more. 
(1)  On multi-phase developments, the developer shall be required to dedicate, install, maintain and remove temporary construction access drives for the ingress and egress of construction vehicles, personnel and equipment. 
(2)  Temporary construction access drives shall be shown on the concept plan and preliminary plat and shall access an existing county road where possible. Construction access drives shall be permitted through the department, and shall comply with sight distance requirements in subsection 332-3(e). 
(3)  Temporary construction access drives shall be utilized as the sole means of ingress and egress during the construction of subsequent phases of the development, to prevent the flow of construction and heavy vehicular traffic on newly constructed streets completed under earlier phases. 
(4)  If a temporary construction access drive cannot be provided at the discretion of the director, due to site-specific restrictions, then the developer shall provide a maintenance bond for those portions of the newly constructed roadway utilized for construction access. The maintenance bond shall provide surety for roadway repairs and resurfacing. The required bond amount per linear foot shall be the current amount established by the board of commissioners. The maintenance bond shall be provided to the county prior to the start of construction, and shall not expire for a period of 24 months following the completion of all construction activities. 
(i)  Half streets. Both the construction of new half streets and the extension of access to existing half streets shall be prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
(j)  Reserve strips. Land in private ownership adjacent to public rights-of-way, which could control or is intended to control access to streets, alleys or public lands, shall not be permitted unless control is given to the county under ownership, dedication or easement conditions approved by the county attorney or acceptable to the director. No development shall be designed so as to deny access to abutting properties. 
(k)  Alleys. Alleys may be permitted by the director where lots are less than 75 feet in width or otherwise when the developer produces satisfactory grounds for the request. In the event the director approves the request, the alleys must be laid out in a grid fashion at rear lot lines, and double-fronting lots are permitted. The alley shall be designated as a public street pursuant to the standards contained in this chapter. Alleys shall not be permitted as dead end-streets. 
(l)  Street jogs. 
(1)  Local streets shall either directly align or have offsets of a minimum of 125 feet for residential subdivision streets and a minimum of 200 feet for non-residential subdivision streets, as measured between the centerlines. 
(2)  Where it is not feasible to align new streets or entrances with an existing street intersecting nearby on the opposite side of a collector or arterial street, then the new street intersection shall be no less than 600 feet from the intersection of the existing street, as measured between centerlines of the two opposing streets. 
(m)  Traffic-calming measures. Traffic-calming measures shall be incorporated in accordance with the Rockdale County Traffic-calming Guidelines. Specific measures may include easeabouts, speed tables or other methods approved by the director. Street layout and configuration should include a series of relatively short interconnected roadways in lieu of longer straight roads, to discourage excessive speeds. See section 332-10 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-5. - Street intersections. 
(a)  Angle of intersections. Intersections of two public streets shall form an angle that is between 85 and 95 degrees, unless otherwise approved by the director. If the intersection is signalized, the angle of the intersection may be reduced subject to the review and approval of the director. 
(b)  Intersection approaches. 
(1)  The approaching street at any intersection shall be designed and constructed to provide both the minimum horizontal and vertical approach distances, as defined in this section and indicated in the table below. 
(2)  Minimum horizontal approach distance is defined as the minimum distance required along the centerline of an approaching street, perpendicular or no less than 85 degrees to the intersected street, as measured from the edge of pavement of the intersected street to the point of horizontal curvature on the approaching street. 
(3)  Minimum vertical approach distance is defined as the minimum distance required along the centerline of the approaching street, at a grade less than or equal to the recommended grade indicated in the "Table of intersection approach distances," as measured from the edge of pavement of the intersected street to a point on the profile of the approaching street where grades exceed recommended values. 
Table of Intersection Approach Distances 

 
(c)  Crown taper. The typical crowned street cross section shall be tapered over a distance of not less than 50 feet on the approaching street at all intersections, in order to connect flush with the line and grade of the edge of pavement on the intersected street. The cross section taper shall be designed and constructed so as to provide for the adequate drainage of surface water from all portions of the travel surface and gutter. 
(d)  Intersection radii. Intersection radii for roadways measured at back of curb and for the right-of-way lines shall be as shown in the "Table of intersection radii." For intersecting streets of different classification, the larger radii shall be provided. Larger radii may be required for streets intersecting at angles less than 90 degrees. In all cases, adequate right-of-way shall be provided to maintain a minimum of 12 feet from back of curb to right-of-way line. Miters are acceptable. 
Table of Intersection Radii 

 
(e)  Islands. Islands in street intersections shall conform to the design requirements of the Rockdale County Standard Design and Construction Details. In no case shall anything in an island extend more than three feet above the street grade within the right-of-way; except traffic regulatory devices, street trees and other infrastructure erected or approved by Rockdale County. No island shall be approved that contains less than 100 square feet. Irrigation or other private systems shall not be installed within public right-of-way. 
(f)  Intersection corner sight distance. 
(1)  Intersections shall be designed with adequate corner sight distance for each approaching street. Where necessary, back slopes shall be flattened and horizontal or vertical curves lengthened to provide the minimum required sight distance. 
(2)  The minimum corner sight distance from the approaching street shall be calculated using latest edition of AASHTO "Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets", chapter 9 (at-grade intersections). 
(g)  Obstructing visibility at intersections. On all corner lots located at a street intersection, a clear sight zone shall be maintained at all times. The design and location of new intersections shall meet the standards of subsection 332-3(e). 
(h)  Turning lanes at intersections. Both center left-turn and right-turn lanes shall be provided on all new internal project streets, and on all existing county roads, where traffic volumes and turning movements warrant the installation. At the request of the director, the developer or applicant shall prepare and submit a detailed traffic study (as defined herein), outlining projected traffic volumes, turning movements and auxiliary lanes required. The methodology and conclusions presented in the traffic study are subject to the review and approval of the department. 
(1)  Center turn lane storage. A minimum storage length of 150 feet shall be provided for center left turn lanes on any arterial streets. A minimum storage length of 100 feet shall be provided on all collector streets. Additional storage capacity shall be provided as required, based on projected peak traffic volumes and turning movements. 
(2)  Taper length. The taper length shall be in accordance with AASHTO design standards, based on the lane widths and design speed of the subject street. 
(3)  The design, right-of-way acquisition, drainage system improvements, roadway widening, asphalt construction, traffic control, traffic striping, signage and all other improvements required or incidental to the installation of auxiliary turn lanes required to support any proposed development shall be completed by the developer or applicant, at no cost to Rockdale County. 
(4)  Under the following conditions, left storage lanes shall be added to two-lane collectors or arterials with speed limits of 30 mph or more, at unsignalized locations where left turning vehicles will leave the arterial or collector street and enter major driveways or development entrances. See the "Table of left storage lane requirements." 
Table of Left Storage Lane Requirements 

 
Source: Institute for Traffic Engineers, Traffic Engineering Handbook. 
Note: Traffic volume shall include all additional vehicles from proposed development. 
(5)  The length of left turn storage lanes and tapers shall be as prescribed in the Table 4-9, "Minimum Design Elements of Left Turn Lanes", GDOT "Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control", and the latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-6. - Geometric street design standards. 
(a)  All streets and roadways shall be designed in accordance with the AASHTO Standards, as provided in "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets," latest edition and any amendments thereto. All applicable signage, markings or other traffic control measures shall be designed in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Devices (MUTCD), latest edition and any amendments thereto. 
(b)  Horizontal curvature and super-elevation. All new streets shall adhere to the standards governing horizontal curvature and super-elevation in "Table of horizontal curvature and super-elevations," unless otherwise specified by AASHTO Standards: 
Table of Horizontal Curvature and Super-Elevations 

 
Note: Super-elevation not required for local streets. 
(c)  Tangents. Between reverse horizontal curves there shall not be less than the minimum centerline radii and tangents shown in the "Table of Horizontal Alignment and Reverse Curves," unless otherwise specified by AASHTO Standards. Compound radii are prohibited. 
Table of Horizontal Alignment and Reverse Curves 

 
(d)  Vertical alignment. 
(1)  All changes in street profile grades having an algebraic difference greater than that shown in Table 4.3.5 of the latest edition of the GDOT Design Manual shall be connected to a parabolic curve having a minimum length in feet (L), which is equal to the algebraic difference between the grades in percent (A) multiplied by the design constant (K) assigned to the street according to its classification and design speed (i.e. L = KA). 
(2)  (K) values shown in the Table of Constant (K) Values for Vertical Alignments shall be utilized in all cases, and in no case shall the constant K value be less than the minimum permitted. 
Table of Constant (K) Values for Vertical Alignments 

 
(e)  Street centerline grades. 
(1)  Street or road grades exceeding ten percent for a minor collector and 12 percent for local streets are prohibited, unless otherwise approved by the director. The director may grant limited exceptions on maximum grades, based on conclusive evidence that shows a lesser grade is impractical due to topographic or site specific limitations. 
(2)  The minimum centerline grade for any street or roadway shall not be less than 1.5 percent, without exception, due to drainage concerns. A desirable minimum centerline grade of two percent shall be provided where possible. 
(3)  The maximum centerline grade across any cul-de-sac turnaround shall be five percent. 
(f)  Crown slope. Unless super-elevated, all streets and roadways, except alleys, shall be designed and constructed with a crown slope of one-quarter-inch per foot, to provide for the adequate drainage of surface water from the street centerline to the gutter or edge of pavement. 
(g)  Super-elevation. The design of arterial and major collector roadways may require the super-elevation of the travel surface on horizontal curves in accordance with AASHTO Standards. The design and horizontal alignment of minor collectors and local streets serving residential areas should avoid the use of super-elevation where possible. In all instances, the maximum super-elevation rates shall be in accordance with subsection (b) above. Under no circumstance is a curved street of any classification to be reverse super-elevated. 
(h)  Pavement design. 
(1)  Pavement sections shall be constructed in accordance with the standards in the "Table of standard pavement sections." 
Table of Standard Pavement Sections 

 
Notes: 
1.  Only roads that serve strictly residential uses (<1 percent trucks) shall use the sections listed above as residential. All other developments shall use the commercial/industrial sections. 
2.  All streets designated as "arterial" shall have a pavement design submitted that meet the requirements below. 
3.  Graded Aggregate Base (GAB). 
(2)  The developer may submit for review and approval an alternative pavement design, prepared at the developer's cost. This submittal shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Design prepared by a professional engineer licensed in Georgia. 
b.  Soils testing results prepared by a professional engineer licensed in Georgia. 
c.  Design shall be completed using the GDOT's "Asphalt Pavement Design Procedures", latest edition. 
d.  Design shall be based on 15-year pavement life. 
e.  Traffic shall be calculated using the Trip Generation Manual, by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, latest edition. 
f.  Traffic projections shall be made for any streets that serve areas outside of the proposed development. 
g.  Traffic counts, including truck traffic, shall be made as required on existing roads. 
h.  Rockdale County will require written certification that material used in sub-base conforms to the soils test results used in the design. 
i.  Cores of pavement and base will be made as necessary to verify actual thickness of each pavement layer (surface, base, and sub-base). Copies of the test reports will be made available to the inspector. The minimum number of cores of surface, binder, base, and sub-base is one core per 500 feet of each street (or one core with streets less than 500 feet in length). 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-7. - Street construction standards and specifications. 
Unless otherwise specifically set forth in these regulations, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship used in street construction shall conform to GDOT's "Standard Specifications for the Construction of Transportation Systems," latest edition and any amendments thereto. 
(a)  Pre-construction meeting. A mandatory pre-construction meeting is required for all development, construction and land disturbing activities, unless this requirement is specifically waived by the department. The applicant or developer shall contact the department to schedule the pre-construction meeting. The department will ensure the attendance of all necessary county staff. The applicant or developer must, at a minimum, have the following project personnel attend the pre-construction meeting: 
(1)  On-site project representative on behalf of the applicant or developer. 
(2)  General and/or grading contractor. 
(3)  Sub-contractors performing drainage system installation, base course construction and asphalt paving. 
(4)  Other specialty contractors performing a significant portion of the work. 
(5)  Design professional responsible for project design. 
(b)  Clearing and grubbing. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be first cleared and grubbed of all trees, stumps, roots, brush, debris and other objectionable materials. Specific trees that are intended for preservation shall be indicated on the design plans and subject to the review and approval of the department. All clearing limits shall be marked and tree protection fence installed prior to the pre-construction meeting. All erosion control measures shall be installed as required by the approved plans and in accordance with this chapter. 
(c)  Rough grading. 
(1)  Grading activities shall be performed in accordance with the lines and grades shown on the approved construction plans. Grading plans shall include a plan view of the proposed roadway, showing existing and proposed contour lines at an interval of no more than two feet, as well as a profile of the street centerline and all applicable curve and design data. Grading plans shall outline those areas required to remain undisturbed (i.e., tree protection areas, buffers, etc.) and shall indicate protective fencing or staking to be placed surrounding such areas. 
(2)  Cut or fill slopes shall not exceed three horizontal units to one vertical unit, unless otherwise approved by the director based on site-specific topographic and geotechnical conditions. Flatter slopes shall be provided, where possible, to better accommodate utility installation and maintenance activities. 
(3)  Erosion and sediment control best management practices (BMPs) shall be installed in accordance with the approved construction plans, prior to or concurrent with all land disturbing activities. Alternate or additional BMPs may be required by the county inspector, if it is deemed that current measures do not provide adequate protection. 
(4)  All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches or at other places as needed. Excess or unsuitable materials, including organics, soft clay, etc., shall be removed from within the right-of-way and for a distance not less than one foot on each side of the road surface for each vertical foot of unsuitable material at the right-of-way line. 
(5)  Fill material shall be placed in uniform horizontal layers or "lifts," not to exceed a compacted thickness of more than six inches. Moisture content shall be adjusted as necessary to compact material to 95 percent of maximum dry density. The top 12 inches of sub-grade material under any roadway, drive or parking area shall be compacted to 98 percent of standard proctor density. 
(d)  Final grading and sub-grade preparation. 
(1)  After rough grading, storm sewer and utility installation is complete and the back-fill in all such ditches is thoroughly compacted, the sub-grade shall be brought to the lines, grades, and typical roadway section shown on the plans. 
(2)  All utility crossings shall be installed prior to sub-grade approval. If utility installation cannot be completed at this time, the developer shall coordinate the installation of casings or conduits to accommodate subsequent utility installation without disturbance to the sub-grade. Utility trenches cut in the sub-grade shall be backfilled and compacted as specified herein. The county inspector may require additional compaction tests at utility crossings to verify compaction. 
(3)  Prior to sub-grade inspection and approval, the design professional shall certify in writing to the department that the lines and grades of the proposed street or streets are within six inches of design grades. This letter shall be submitted prior to sub grade inspection by county personnel. 
(4)  Sub-grade testing and inspection: Sub-grade compaction shall be tested by the county inspector, prior to construction of the graded aggregate base course. Compaction testing shall be accomplished by visual inspections of actual live axle loads, commonly referred to as a "roll test." The developer or contractor shall schedule all compaction tests with the county inspector no less than 24 hours in advance. The developer or contractor also shall provide an adequate testing vehicle, minimum 18-ton hauling capacity, fully loaded. All areas or sections of the sub-grade that do not pass visual live load compaction testing, at the discretion of the county inspector, shall be corrected. Once the developer or contractor makes all necessary corrections, it shall be his/her responsibility to re-schedule any and all subsequent roll tests. 
(5)  Provisions shall be made to provide adequate drainage of the road surface during the course of construction, including temporary four-inch drain lines in all concrete gutters. 
(e)  Graded aggregate base course construction. 
(1)  The base course shall consist of graded aggregate, of a minimum thickness as required based on the street classification. Minimum base course thickness is provided in subsection 332-6(h). The base course shall be constructed in accordance with the lines, grades and typical cross sections shown on the approved construction plans. All aggregate materials shall be secured from GDOT- approved sources and shall comply with section 815 of the "Standard Specifications for the Construction of Transportation Systems," latest edition. 
(2)  All base course material shall be spread uniformly with a mixture spreader, or other approved means, to the proper depth to obtain the required thickness. The maximum thickness of base course material to be placed in one course shall be six inches compacted. If the design thickness of the base course is more than six inches, it shall be constructed in two or more courses of approximate equal thickness. With sufficient and suitable equipment, the county inspector may allow base material to be placed in lifts up to eight inches. 
(3)  The moisture content of the aggregate material shall be uniformly distributed and shall be adequate to allow compaction to a minimum of 100 percent of the maximum dry density based on the modified proctor method. Immediately following the spreading of the graded aggregate, all material shall be compacted to the full width by rolling with a smooth-wheel, vibratory roller weighing seven to ten tons, or an equivalent sheepsfoot packer. Rolling shall progress gradually from the edge to the center, parallel with the centerline of the street and lapping uniformly each preceding track by one-half the width of such track. Rolling shall continue until the entire surface is smooth, closely knit, free from cracks, conforming to the prescribed line, grade and cross section, within the limits specified. 
(4)  Any irregularities, areas of segregation or depressions that develop under such rolling shall be corrected by loosening the material at these locations and adding or removing material until the surface is smooth and uniform. The application of water, applied uniformly over the base course, may be required to achieve adequate compaction. Shaping and rolling shall be performed alternately, as required to prepare a uniform compacted base. 
(5)  Along curbs, headers, walls and at all locations not accessible to the roller, the base course material shall be compacted thoroughly with mechanical tampers or approved hand tampers. 
(6)  No base material shall be deposited or shaped when the sub-grade is frozen, thawing, or during other unfavorable weather conditions. 
(f)  Graded aggregate base course testing and inspection. 
(1)  Cross section. The cross section and crown slope shall be verified at intervals or locations determined by the county inspector. The developer or contractor shall provide a string line and dedicated personnel to pull the line and allow verification measurements to be made by the county inspector. Those areas or portions of the roadway, which do not comply with the design cross section or crown slope, shall be corrected and verified by county personnel prior to base course approval. 
(2)  Roll test. Base course compaction shall be tested by the department prior to the application of bituminous asphalt paving. Compaction testing shall be accomplished by visual inspections of actual live axle loads (roll test). The developer or contractor shall schedule all compaction tests with the county inspector no less than 24 hours in advance. The developer or contractor also shall provide an adequate testing vehicle, minimum 18-ton hauling capacity, fully loaded. All areas or sections of the base course that do not pass visual live load compaction testing, at the discretion of the county inspector, shall be corrected. Once the developer or contractor makes all necessary corrections, it shall be his/her responsibility to re-schedule any and all subsequent roll tests. 
(3)  Prime coat. At the completion of base course construction, testing and approval by the county inspector; the base course shall be primed and sealed with 0.25 gallon of R.C. 70 per square yard. This requirement may be waived by the county inspector, if the placement of asphalt paving is anticipated within the following three to five days and prior to any significant rainfall event. 
(4)  Additional inspections due to weather conditions. If a significant weather or rainfall event occurs following the approval of base construction but prior to asphalt paving, the county inspector may require additional roll testing to re-verify the structural integrity of the road base. The developer or contractor shall be subject to comply with such additional inspections, at the discretion of the county inspector. 
(g)  Bituminous asphalt paving. 
(1)  Bituminous asphalt production, handling, transportation and placement shall meet or exceed the requirements of the GDOT's "Standard specifications construction of transportation systems," latest edition and any amendments thereto. Asphalt pavements shall be of the superpave mix design, as specified herein; and the use of conventional mix designs will not be permitted, unless otherwise approved by the director. 
(2)  Equipment. 
a.  Mechanical pavers. Mechanical pavers used for the placement of hot-mix asphalt shall be capable of spreading and finishing all courses to the indicated widths and depths, true to line, grade and cross section, and shall be capable of striking a smooth finish, uniform in density and texture. Mechanical pavers shall be equipped with extendable screeds, capable of spreading at the width of each travel lane in one pass. 
b.  Compaction equipment. The compaction equipment must be in good mechanical condition and capable of compacting the mixture to the required density. The number, type, size, operation, and condition of the compaction equipment shall be subject to the approval of the county inspector. At a minimum, a smooth drum vibratory roller (minimum eight tons) and a separate pneumatic-tired roller shall be provided. An additional finish roller or larger equipment may be required by the county inspector, based on visual observations of surface texture or density tests. 
(h)  Paving operations. 
(1)  The county inspector will require that a copy of the detailed asphalt mix design be submitted prior to asphalt paving. Only asphalt produced by a GDOT-approved plant may be utilized. Plant production, transportation and paving operations shall be so coordinated that a uniform continuity of operation is maintained. If the spreading operations are interrupted for one hour or more, a transverse joint shall be constructed. Asphalt shall be delivered to the job site at a temperature that is within 20° F ( 11° C) of the temperature of the job mix formula. The county inspector may reject any asphalt load that does not meet temperature requirements, contains segregated material or does not comply with mix design requirements. 
(2)  Weather limitations. The mixing and placement of bituminous asphalt pavement shall not be performed when the existing surface is wet or frozen. For all courses, the air temperature for placement of the mix shall be in accordance with the "Table of Air Temperature for Placing Asphalt Pavement." 
Table of Air Temperature for Placing Asphalt Pavement 

 
Note a: Temperature must be rising and base material may not be frozen. 
(3)  Bituminous tack coat. Tack shall be applied prior to the placement and compaction of all subsequent courses of asphalt pavement, in accordance with GDOT Standards, Section 413. On curbed streets, the edge of the gutter shall be tacked to provide a water-resistant seal at the joint. Special care shall be taken to avoid the application of bituminous tack to portions of the curb and gutter that are to be visible following construction. 
(4)  Wearing course must be placed at the earliest of the following times: 
a.  Upon completion (final inspection) of principal structures on 80 percent of the buildable lots in the subdivision. 
b.  Two years after recording of the final plat for the subdivision. 
c.  At an earlier time by the mutual consent of the developer and the department. 
(5)  Prior to installation of the surface pavement course and bituminous tack coat, the county inspector shall inspect existing asphalt pavement for damage from traffic and construction activities. Any areas found shall be repaired to the inspector's satisfaction prior to final paving. 
(i)  Concrete streets. Concrete streets are not allowed. 
(j)  Rural cross section. Certain local residential roads may be constructed without curb and gutter as provided in this chapter. On all such rural streets, the road base shall be extended one foot beyond the edge of the pavement. 
(k)  Typical sections. All streets and roadways shall be constructed to the typical sections specified in the Rockdale County Standard Design and Construction Details, based on street classification category. 
(1)  Copies of test results are to be made available to the county inspector as needed for verification of standards and specifications. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-8. - Curbs and gutters. 
(a)  All new streets or street widening sections shall be provided with curb and gutter, except as noted below. All gutters shall drain positively with no areas of ponding. 
(b)  Only in rare circumstances shall streets without curb and gutter be allowed with the approval of the director. Such cases may involve future street widening projects or unique circumstances that prevent the installation of new curb and gutter. Otherwise, all new streets shall have curb and gutter. 
(c)  All concrete curb and gutter shall be GDOT Standard 9032B, Type 2 (except in subdivisions, where the curb and gutter shall be 24 inches wide, while all other dimensions remain). Roll-back or Hollywood curbing shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Curbing shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Concrete shall be class "A," as defined by the GDOT, and have a minimum strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days. 
(2)  One-half inch expansion joints or pre-molded bituminous expansion joint material shall be provided at all structures and radius points and at an interval not to exceed 250 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. Contraction joints also shall be provided at ten-foot intervals along the curb line. 
(3)  When the development ties into existing curbing, the curb and gutter shall transition to and match the existing width and profile at the connection point. 
(4)  Terminations or curb tapers shall be provided at the end of any gutter. The curb height shall be tapered from six inches to zero inches over a distance of six feet. 
(e)  Curb and gutter shall be set true to the line and grade of the street, horizontally and vertically field staked and finished to the section shown on the plans. Line and grade shall be established by the developer's engineer or surveyor. Offset staking shall be provided at 50-foot intervals. 
(f)  Curbing not installed in accordance with the requirements of this section or the standard details shall be removed and replaced at the developer's expense. The county inspector may require and the developer shall provide core samples to verify concrete thickness. 
(g)  Disturbed areas along all curbing shall be back-filled, compacted, stabilized and grassed. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-9. - Sidewalks and bikeway requirements. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be located: 
(1)  Along the street frontage of all commercially zoned property 
(2)  Along the existing street frontage of any new development 
(3)  Within a ½-mile radius of any public school 
(4)  On one side of all streets in any residential subdivision except in the A-R and W-P zoning districts. 
(b)  Sidewalks in subdivisions shall be continued to the nearest arterial street. 
(c)  Sidewalks shall be located as shown on the Rockdale County Standard Design and Construction Details. All new sidewalks shall match and provide a smooth transition to any existing sidewalk. 
(d)  Sidewalks shall be installed on an individual lot basis at the time of building construction. The county shall inspect the location and construction of the sidewalk and shall not issue a certificate of occupancy until the required sidewalk is properly installed. 
(e)  A strip of grass or other approved landscape material at least four feet in width shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs on public streets. See Rockdale County Standard Design and Construction Details. 
(f)  Sidewalks shall be concrete and a minimum of five feet wide and four inches thick. Concrete shall be class "A," as defined by the GDOT, and have a strength of 3,000 PSI at 28 days. Disturbed areas along sidewalks shall be backfilled, compacted, stabilized and grassed. The county inspector may require and the developer shall provide core samples to verify core thickness. 
(g)  Additional sidewalks and/or pedestrian easements may be required in subdivisions or developments where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(h)  Bicycle lanes, where provided, shall be a minimum of four feet in width and placed between the outside lane of a roadway and the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is permitted, the bicycle lane shall be between the parking lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes shall be delineated with appropriate markings, as required by MUTCD Standards. Bikeways and bicycle lanes must be pre-approved by the department and meet the requirements of AASHTO "Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities," latest edition. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-10. - Traffic calming devices. 
(a)  Easeabouts and associated signage shall be included in the design and construction of all streets and roads in the county where either the design speed or the posted speed limit is 35 miles per hour or less. 
(b)  The director shall establish specific standards for the design, construction, placement and planting plan for easeabouts, as well as for the design and construction of other types of island splitters, including entrance islands, boulevards, roundabouts, cul-de-sac islands and other such vegetated or natural islands within the right-of-way. These standards shall be known as "Island, Easeabout and Roundabout Design and Placement Standards for Rockdale County," further referred to and known as the design and placement standards and are hereby made a part of this section by reference. The design and placement standards are available to the public and shall be maintained in the offices of the department and the office of the board of commissioners. The director may, from time to time, modify these technical standards. 
(c)  Easeabouts for all local streets shall be designed and installed in accordance with the design and placement standards. Easeabouts shall be placed at intervals and locations as specified in the design and placement standards. 
(d)  All other types of islands or island splitters, including entrance islands, roundabouts, cul-de-sac islands and other such vegetated or natural islands within the right-of-way shall conform to the design standards contained in the design and placement standards. 
(e)  Other designs or types of traffic calming devices may be approved at the discretion of the director, provided that such devices meet the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  The proposed traffic calming device must be recognized as such by the transportation industry, i.e., it must be recognized by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, American Association State Highway Transportation Officials, the Federal Highway Administration, the American Traffic Safety Services Association or other nationally recognized transportation industry organization or guiding authority. 
(2)  The proposed traffic-calming device must be designed, located and constructed in accordance with the minimum standards of the approving organization or guiding authority. The director may impose additional design, location or construction criteria prior to approving such a device. 
(3)  The proposed traffic-calming device must include plantings, water quality or other environmental enhancements or beautification elements. 
(4)  Traffic calming may be accomplished via proper geometric design of the streets. Such designs may be accepted by the director in lieu of easeabouts or other structural traffic calming devices. 
(5)  The director may disallow the use of devices that meet the criteria set forth in subsections (a) through (d) of this section if, in his judgment, the installation of such a device would create unusual or costly maintenance, create a safety hazard, restrict movement of emergency vehicles, or would otherwise not be in the best interest of the county. 
(f)  Islands that are not specifically for traffic calming, such as entrance islands, cul-de-sac islands, tree save islands or other decorative islands, may be approved for construction by the director, if they conform to the design principles contained in design and placement standards. 
(g)  All plant materials included in easeabouts or other islands shall be installed at the expense of the developer and shall be maintained by the subdivision's homeowner's association. A notification to this effect shall be included on the final plat recorded for the subdivision. 
(h)  The director may, at his or her discretion, approve unusually shaped islands or innovative designs. 
(i)  Any party may appeal a decision of the director regarding the design, construction, placement or planting requirements for easeabouts, entrance islands, roundabouts, cul-de-sac islands or other vegetated or natural islands within the right-of-way to the board of commissioners. The notice of appeal shall be filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners within ten days of the written decision of the director. The clerk of the board of commissioners shall set forth a date, time and place for the appeal hearing no less than ten days and no more than 30 days after the date the notice of appeal was filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners. The appellant shall submit a $75.00 fee with the notice of appeal to defray administrative costs. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-23, § 11, 10-9-2007) 
Sec. 332-11. - Traffic control devices. 
(a)  MUTCD compliance. All traffic signals, signage, striping and pavement markings shall conform to the MUTCD, latest edition and any amendments thereto. Traffic control signs shall comply in shape, color, size, reflectivity, height, materials and placement. 
(b)  Traffic signage. 
(1)  After final plat approval, the developer shall procure and install all necessary traffic signs, traffic signals, and pavement markings as called for in the final plat. Rockdale County will inspect the installation to insure that work is done in accordance with the final plat and the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD). 
(2)  Any signs that are damaged following initial installation, due to additional work at the site, shall be replaced at the developer's expense. 
(3)  Decorative signs or traffic control devices shall be prohibited. The use of decorative signposts may be approved at the discretion of the director, if covenants are provided that require decorative sign post replacement to be funded by an established property owner's association. If decorative signposts in any development are damaged or worn, the county will provide only a standard U-channel sign post as replacement. 
(c)  Pavement markings. 
(1)  Local streets with curb and gutter are exempt from traffic striping requirements, except for stop bars at stop signs and markings at ease-abouts and traffic circles. All other street classifications shall require both centerline and edge line striping in accordance with this chapter. 
(2)  All centerline or edge line striping shall be performed in compliance with GDOT Standard 652, Paint Striping. On any street classified as a major collector or arterial, all traffic striping shall be thermoplastic in accordance with GDOT Standard 653. 
(3)  All pavement markings shall be reviewed and approved by the department. All pavement markings shall be thermoplastic and shall be installed in accordance with GDOT Standard 653 and MUTCD requirements. 
(4)  On any newly paved or resurfaced streets on public rights-of-way, thermoplastic stop bars are required on all approach lanes in accordance with MUTCD Standards. 
(5)  Raised pavement markers or similar devices shall be required on all major collector and arterial streets, and on any other street installed by developers where safety conditions warrant such devices. 
(d)  Traffic signals. 
(1)  Prior to the installation of a traffic signal, the installation of a single-lane roundabout shall be considered. 
(2)  Traffic signal installation must be approved by Rockdale County and the GDOT, if on a state route. The developer shall submit a traffic study prepared by a professional engineer, registered in the State of Georgia, detailing existing and projected traffic volumes, movements, capacity and required improvements. The director may require that a traffic study be provided for any development where increased traffic volumes may significantly impact the existing capacity, traffic flow or safety on any existing county road. 
(e)  Traffic safety improvements. It shall be the developer's sole responsibility to fund, design, construct and/or install any all traffic safety improvements and traffic control devices required to provide safe ingress and egress to any development. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-12. - Unpaved county roads. 
(a)  Paving of the county's unpaved roads will be accomplished under the following procedures subject to availability of funds: 
(1)  Roads requiring additional right-of-way. These type roads are generally connecting roads to other more heavily traveled roads in the county. The road design would be in accordance with the subdivision standards. 
a.  Property owners will submit a request to the department to pave the road. 
b.  The request would include a signed petition by at least 60 percent of the owners that agree to donate the necessary right-of-way. 
c.  Upon completion of concept design, Rockdale County will provide notice to the public of a public information meeting (PIM) on the specific project. The purpose of the meeting will be to reveal the concept design and address any questions that the citizens may have on the project. Following the PIM, Rockdale County will evaluate the comments from this meeting; and, if 80 percent support is achieved, Rockdale County will proceed with the final design plans. 
d.  Upon completion of the final design plans, a second PIM will be held to answer any questions that may arise. Immediately following the second meeting, personal contact will be made with each property owner to secure donations of right-of-way. This contact will be made by an independent land acquisition person and/or a county employee to secure the right-of-way. At this stage of design, if a minimum of 80 percent of the property owners on the project have signed deeds donating right-of-way to the county, the county will proceed with right-of-way negotiations with the final 20 percent of the property owners. The percentage referred to in this paragraph may be changed for public necessity by the board of commissioners. 
e.  If Rockdale County is unsuccessful in securing the right-of-way from the final 20 percent of the property owners, the county shall proceed with condemnation of the right-of-way. 
(2)  Roads not requiring additional right-of-way. 
a.  The criteria for these roads would be in accordance with the following: 
1.  Traffic volumes less than 100 vehicles per day. 
2.  Dead-end road. 
3.  Existing right-of-way of at least 50 feet. 
4.  Less than ten homes/residences adjacent to the road. 
5.  No major drainage problems. 
6.  No major environmental issues. 
7.  Little or no crash history. 
8.  Approximately ½ mile in length or less. 
b.  The design of the road would be in accordance with the Guidelines for Geometric Design of Very Low-Volume Local Roads, latest edition. 
c.  The pavement structure would consist of a graded aggregate base (at least four inches) and a two-inch asphalt paved riding surface of at least 18 feet wide and a total roadway width of at least 20 feet. 
d.  Trees, vegetation side slopes, and open drainage abutting the roadway would be undisturbed to the maximum extent possible without compromising public safety. 
(b)  Paving of the unpaved county roads has to be included in the Rockdale County/City of Conyers Comprehensive Transportation Plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Secs. 332-13—332-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRAINAGE SYSTEM 

Sec. 332-16. - Drainage system requirements. 
(a)  Drainage improvements required. Drainage systems may include, but are not limited to, culverts, storm sewer piping, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, and ditches, shall be provided for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-way. Drainage systems that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, and the public right-of-way, shall meet the requirements of these regulations. 
(b)  Standard specifications. Unless otherwise specifically set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction and workmanship for the work covered in reference to drainage system construction shall conform to the most recent standard specifications of the GDOT "Standard specifications, construction of transportation systems," latest edition, and any amendments thereto. For roads constructed with public funds, either wholly or in part, or for roads classified as principal arterials, minor arterials, or collector streets, materials that meet the GDOT design standards shall be used, unless an alternative is specifically approved by the department. 
(c)  All drainage structures shall be constructed in accordance with the GDOT's current standard details. 
(d)  Design criteria - general. 
(1)  All drainage system design calculations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or landscape architect, licensed in the State of Georgia. 
(2)  The methods utilized in calculating stormwater runoff and peak flows from any drainage basin or basins, shall be appropriately selected based on the relative size of each basin and best engineering practice for recommended hydrologic methods and basin size limitations. See "Table of Recommended Hydrologic Methods." 
Table of Recommended Hydrologic Methods 

 
;sz=8a;Note: For estimating peak flows only. 
(3)  All portions of a drainage system, which drain areas falling within a specific category above, shall be analyzed using the same methodology. 
(4)  Runoff coefficients used for the rational method and runoff curve numbers used for the SCS method shall be consistent with those shown in the "Georgia Storm Water Management Manual," latest edition. 
(5)  Culverts carrying live streams shall extend to where the crown of the pipe intersects the roadway slope. Pipes that do not carry live streams shall extend at least 50 feet beyond the front building setback lines and may be required to extend farther, where necessary to provide an adequately protected building site on the property. The length requirement, however, shall be subject to requirements for maintaining stream buffers in accordance with Georgia law or county regulations. 
(6)  No drainage system piping shall be installed beneath or within the load bearing soil strata supporting any building or structure. 
(e)  Design criteria - cross drain culverts (Streams or major drainage channels). 
(1)  Cross drain culverts or pipe systems designed to convey water from one side of a public right-of-way to the other shall be designed to pass the fully developed peak flow associated with a 100-year storm, with at least 1.5 feet of freeboard between the 100-year ponding elevation and the centerline of the road, without raising the 100-year flood elevation on upstream properties. Fully developed flows shall be based on the future land use plan adopted by the board of commissioners. See chapter 320 for more information. 
(2)  The 100-year ponding limits at and upstream of the culvert shall be shown on the development plans and on the final plat (if applicable). 
(3)  The minimum allowable culvert diameter shall be 18 inches. Culvert design shall include a thorough analysis of both inlet and outlet control conditions. 
(f)  Design criteria—longitudinal storm sewer piping. 
(1)  The preliminary design (initial pipe sizing and profile design) of longitudinal pipe collection systems shall be based upon conveyance of the peak flows associated with a fully developed 25-year storm with the hydraulic grade line (HGL) being one foot or more below the top of each structure, gutter line or proposed final ground surface elevation, whichever is lowest. All longitudinal piping within a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)-identified floodplain shall be sized to adequately convey the 100-year frequency storm event. 
(2)  The minimum allowable pipe diameter shall be 18 inches. 
(3)  Storm sewer inlets or catch basins shall be provided and spaced so that the gutter spread for a ten-year design flow shall not exceed the following, as measured from the face of the curb: 
a.  Four feet or less based on the requirements of the GDOT Drainage Manual, if the street is classified as a principal arterial or minor arterial. 
b.  Six feet, if the street is classified as a collector street. 
c.  Fourteen feet at any given section, but in no case greater than eight feet on one side of the street, if the street is classified as a local street. 
(4)  Gutter spread calculations shall be included in the hydrology study and on the development plans. 
(5)  Complete pipe sizing, flow, velocity and hydraulic grade line computations shall be provided for all portions of a piped collection system. Hydraulic grade lines shall be shown on the storm drainage profiles contained with the development plans for the 25-year storm. A storm drainage pipe chart shall be provided with the construction drawings showing pipe identification, type, size, length, Qdesign, Q max, HGL at each end and velocity at the discharge point. 
(6)  Where open drainage channels are proposed, flow, typical sections, velocity and specifications for non-erodable linings shall be provided. Calculations are to be based on the 25-year storm event. 
(g)  Energy dissipation - piped systems and culverts. 
(1)  Energy dissipation devices, such as splash pads, rip-rap, stilling basins, etc., shall be provided at the outlet of every culvert and piped collection system. Outlet protection shall be in accordance with the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," latest edition and Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(2)  Energy dissipation devices shall be located entirely within the project site, no closer than 20 feet from any property line, and shall not encroach upon any required buffer. 
(3)  When uniform, graded stone rip-rap is used for energy dissipation, ultraviolet resistant filter fabric (200-pound test) shall be used between the stone layers. 
(h)  Pipe material specifications. Pipe materials shall be provided in accordance with the Selection Guidelines for Storm Sewer Piping, based on application, traffic and flow conditions (See Standard Design and Construction Details). 
(1)  Corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M-36, and shall be Aluminized Type II. 
a.  Aluminized Type II coated steel pipe shall comply with AASHTO M-274 for coating requirements and AASHTO M-36 for the pipe fabrication 
b.  No corrugated steel pipe may be utilized in a flowing stream application. 
c.  The gauge, diameter, and corrugation configurations for corrugated steel pipe and pipe arches shall be in accordance with GDOT Standard 1030-D. 
d.  Each end of each pipe section, to be joined by a coupling band, shall have a minimum of two annular corrugations. Coupling bands shall be so constructed as to lap on an equal portion of each of the pipe sections to be connected. The connecting bands shall have a minimum of four annular corrugations and shall fully engage, over the entire pipe periphery, two corrugations on each pipe end. Bands shall be fabricated from the same material as is the pipe, and the gauges shall be as specified in section 9.2 of AASHTO M-36. 
e.  Gaskets may be required, as determined by the county inspector in the field, and shall be either sleeve type or O-ring type, and shall meet the requirements for gaskets as specified in section 9.3 of AASHTO M-36. 
f.  Corrugated steel pipe shall not be laid at slopes of less than one percentage of paved invert. 
(2)  Reinforced concrete pipe joints shall be not less than eight feet in length, unless approved by the director for the installation of very large diameter pipe. All joints shall be bell and spigot-type, using an O-ring gasket conforming to ASTM C-443. Pipe shall be manufactured in accordance with AASHTO M-170 and/or ASTM C-76. Class of pipe and wall thickness shall be in accordance with GDOT 1030-D. 
(3)  Corrugated aluminum alloy pipe shall comply with AASHTO M-196 for material and fabrication. 
a.  The gauge, diameter and corrugation configurations for corrugated aluminum alloy pipe and pipe arches shall be in accordance with GDOT Standard 1030-D. 
b.  Each end of each pipe section, to be joined by a coupling band, shall have a minimum of two annular corrugations. Coupling bands shall be so constructed as to lap on an equal portion of each of the pipe sections to be joined. The connecting bands shall have a minimum of four annular corrugations and fully engage, over the entire pipe periphery, two corrugations on each pipe. Bands shall be fabricated from the same material as the pipe. The minimum band gauges for aluminum alloy pipe shall be as specified in AASHTO M-196, Section 19. 
c.  Gaskets may be required, as determined by the county inspector in the field, and shall be either sleeve-type or O-ring-type and shall meet the requirements for gaskets published by AASHTO. 
(4)  Structural plate drainage structures shall conform to the following specifications: 
a.  Corrugated steel structural plate pipe, pipe arches and arches shall consist of galvanized plates, bolts and nuts of the size, shape and thickness as shown on the approved plans. These structures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M-167. 
b.  Corrugated aluminum alloy structural plate pipe, pipe arches and arches shall consist of aluminum plates and galvanized bolts and nuts of the size, shape and thickness as shown on the approved plans. These structures shall conform to the requirements of AASHTO M-219. 
(5)  Corrugated high-density polyethylene pipe - Smooth lined Type "S". 
a.  This specification is applicable to nominal sizes 18 inches in diameter or larger. Requirements for test methods, dimensions and markings of pipe sizes 18 through 36 inches in diameter are those found in AASHTO Designation M-294. HDPE pipe manufacturers shall be approved by the GDOT. HDPE pipe larger than 36 inches in diameter shall be subject to approval by Rockdale County. 
b.  Pipes and fittings shall be made of polyethylene compounds that meet or exceed the requirements of Type III, Category 4 or 5, Grade P33 or P34, Class C per ASTM D-1248, with the applicable requirements defined in ASTM D-1248. Corrugated fittings may be either molded or fabricated by the manufacturer. Fittings supplied by manufacturers other than the supplier of the pipe shall not be permitted without prior approval from Rockdale County. 
c.  Joints shall be made with split couplings, corrugated to engage the pipe corrugations, and shall engage a minimum of four corrugations, two on each side of the pipe joint. Where required by Rockdale County, a neoprene gasket shall be utilized with the coupling to provide a soil-tight joint. Gaskets shall conform to ASTM F-477. 
d.  Installation shall be in accordance with ASTM Recommended Practice D-2321 or as specified by Rockdale County. Certification from the manufacturer that the product was manufactured, tested and supplied in accordance with this specification shall be furnished to Rockdale County upon request. 
(i)  Pipe installation standards. Reinforced concrete pipe, corrugated steel and aluminum alloy pipe shall be bedded and backfilled in the same manner. Corrugated high-density polyethylene pipe shall be bedded and backfilled in accordance with the GDOT Standard Specifications. In addition, prior to approval of a final plat, the county may require the submittal of certification from a mandrel testing agency indicating that any HDPE pipe installed does not exceed 5.0 percent deflection. 
(1)  Pipe bedding. All piping and structures shall be placed on stable earth, fine granular foundation, or rock backfill, the characteristics of which would be expected to provide long-term stability and allow for the pipe to be laid accurately. In all live stream pipe installations, in areas of low-bearing solid or non-uniform foundations, in areas where rock is encountered at the foundation level or in other locations where conditions warrant, a minimum of six inches of crushed stone bedding is required, (maximum size of stone shall be ¾-inch). Geo-textiles or geo-grids also may be required by the county inspector in unstable materials. 
(2)  Backfilling. Backfill on all pipe installations shall be constructed using rock backfill material, as specified in GDOT Standards 812.01 and 812.02, respectively. These materials shall be placed in layers of not more than six inches loose. Compaction of these materials shall be accomplished by hand tamping or machine tamping. Required compaction levels are as follows: 
a.  Backfill within all street rights-of-way shall be compacted to 98 percent maximum. 
b.  Backfill in all other areas shall be compacted to 95 percent maximum density, tested using the AASHTO Method T-99. 
(3)  Construction loads and minimum cover. The minimum cover for any pipe or culvert shall be two feet. Minimum cover shall be measured from sub-grade elevations, to ensure adequate pipe protection from construction loads. 
(4)  Inspection of pipe installation. All pipe shall be installed in a straight approach in strict accordance with the lines and grades shown in the approved construction drawings. The county inspector shall provide periodic inspections of all drainage system installation, to insure compliance with these regulations. No cross drain piping or piping under the proposed paved surface shall be completely backfilled prior to the inspection of all pipe joints, bedding, initial backfill and compaction up to the pipe center line. A final inspection and approval of all pipe installation shall be required at the completion of construction activities, and prior to final plat approval. 
(j)  End finish. Headwalls or other end treatments are required on all culverts (except under residential driveways) and at the outlet of all piped collection systems. 
(1)  Headwalls shall be pre-cast concrete or poured-in-place, with adequate steel reinforcement and concrete footings. Headwalls shall be required at any pipe inlet where erosion protection and slope stabilization is required. 
(2)  Flared end sections shall be concrete or aluminized coated metal only, in accordance with GDOT Standard 1120. Tapered end cuts on metal pipe may be permitted in lieu of flared end sections, at the discretion of the department. 
(3)  Safety end sections shall be concrete in accordance with GDOT Standard 1122. 
(k)  Junction boxes and catch basin. 
(1)  General requirements. A junction box, catch basin or other approved drainage structure shall be provided at all points where a change in the horizontal or vertical alignment of any pipe segment occurs, or at intervals not to exceed 300 feet. The change in directional flow in any junction box or catch basin shall not be greater than 90 degrees. 
(2)  Junction boxes, catch basins, inlets and all other accessible drainage structures shall be constructed of pre-cast, reinforced concrete, minimum four feet in diameter or larger. Structures shall be properly sized (diameter) and pre-cored (inlets and outlets) based on the diameter(s) of piping to be connected. All pre-cast drainage structures with a finished depth greater than four feet shall be provided with accessible polypropylene composite steps spaced at not more than 12 inches vertically on center. All pre-cast drainage structures shall include a metal ring and cover, to provide access for maintenance personnel. Junction boxes shall require a Standard 310 (traffic rated) ring and cover, which shall either be cast in or grouted to the cone section. 
(3)  Catch basins shall be constructed in accordance with GDOT Standards 1033D (Single Wing) or 1034D (Double Wing). All catch basins located along the radius of any cul-de-sac shall be constructed in accordance with GDOT Standard 1033F or 1034F (Offset). Catch basins shall require a reinforced pre-cast "round-to-square" adapter set at a depth of not less than six inches below the gutter elevation, to provide additional gutter clearance and throat support. The throat and top of each catch basin shall be cast-in-place, and the edge of the top facing the travel lane shall include chamfered edges to prevent possible tire damage. The vertical opening of any catch basin, measured at the gutter line, shall not be less than 5½ inches or greater than eight inches. Each catch basin top shall include a metal ring and cover (Standard 1033) to provide access for maintenance personnel. 
(4)  Curb inlets. The use of hood and grate curb inlets, in accordance with GDOT Standard 1019, may be used along curb radii less than 25 feet, but shall not be used in any cul-de-sac turnaround or at the low point of any sag vertical curve draining more than 300 linear feet of road surface. 
(5)  Finish. Drainage structures shall be set at the proper location and installed plumb. The tops of all drainage structures shall match final grade. The pipe end at the connection to any drainage structure shall not extend more than six inches past the interior wall of the structure, when measured at the centerline of the pipe. All pipe end connections shall be adequately sealed with a non-shrink grout. Both sides of pipe shall be grouted (inside and outside) for erosion and sediment control and to ensure complete seal of structure. All sediment and debris shall be removed from each structure prior to final inspection and approval. All drainage structures that are damaged during construction activities shall be repaired and or replaced, at the discretion of the county inspector. 
(l)  Special structures. The use of special structures such as natural bottom arches and box culverts, are subject to the review and approval of the director. Special structures may be permitted in accordance with the latest "Georgia Department of Transportation, Standard Specifications, Construction of Transportation Systems," latest edition. Additional fees for review and inspection may be charged to the developer. In addition, a separate maintenance bond may be required for the approved special structure. 
(m)  Drainage ditches and swales. 
(1)  Ditches, swales or channels shall be designed and constructed to convey at least the fully developed 25-year storm, with freeboard equal to 20 percent of the design flow depth, or one foot, whichever is greater. All channels that lie within a FEMA-indicated floodplain shall be designed to adequately convey the 100-year frequency storm event. 
(2)  Transition channels shall be provided at the inlet and outlet ends of all culverts and pipe systems, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(3)  The maximum flow rate and velocity at the project site's downstream property line shall not exceed the pre-developed flow rate and velocity. 
(4)  In cases of potential erosion due to irregular channel alignment, extreme velocities or excessive slopes, a paved ditch or concrete valley gutter may be required. However, if, in the opinion of the director, the expected long-term maintenance of an open or surface drainage system could prove impractical; a closed or piped drainage system design may be required. 
(5)  The cross-sectional shape of channels shall be as found in the standard design and construction details. "V"-shaped cross sections are not permitted in grassed channels. 
(6)  If the channel will be affected by backwater from culverts, bridges, other structures or floodplains; backwater curves shall be shown in profiles of the channel. 
(7)  Construction standards. Ditches and channels shall be constructed to the line, grade and cross section specified on the approved plans and shall be free of gullies or other irregularities. Protective cover in grassed channels shall be installed as soon as practical, to prevent possible erosion. All ditches or channels constructed in fill material shall be lined with appropriately sized coarse aggregate or other approved materials, based on design velocities. 
(n)  Easement requirements. 
(1)  Easements, where required shall have a minimum width of ten feet on either side of the lot line where pipes outlet between lots. 
(2)  Drainage easements for improved ditches, pipe construction and detention facilities shall be cleared, opened and stabilized at the time of development to control surface water run-off. Easements may not have a cross slope greater than 4:1 (horizontal:vertical). 
(3)  Run-off slope and side slopes are to be specified by the developer's engineer, according to good engineering practice. Drainage easements shall be provided according to the minimum requirements found in the "Table of Easements for Storm Drain Pipes and Systems" and shall conform to county standards. 
Table of Easements for Storm Drain Pipes and Systems 

 
(4)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream or other state waters, a stream buffer is required in conformity with subsection 306-4(c)(15). 
(5)  Where a subdivision is traversed by a drainage way or channel other than state waters there shall be dedicated an access and maintenance easement measuring not less than 20 feet in width or at least ten feet on each side of the top of bank, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-17. - Bridges and concrete box culverts. 
(a)  The design and construction of bridges and concrete box culverts shall comply with all applicable standards of the GDOT and AASHTO. 
(b)  The review and inspection of bridge and concrete box culvert design and construction are subject to additional fees, as imposed by the department. Said fees shall cover the costs of an independent structural review and supplemental inspections, performed on behalf of the county at the discretion of the director, by an independent registered professional engineer. 
(c)  At the completion of bridge and/or concrete box culvert construction, the designer and engineer of record shall provide written certification that the structure was constructed in accordance with the approved plans, all applicable standards of the GDOT and that the bridge or concrete box culvert is complete, structurally sound and safe to accommodate traffic. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-18. - Walls. 
(a)  No fence (other than subdivision entrance walls, noise abatement walls or walls used as a required buffer between two dissimilar zoning densities) shall be more than eight feet in height or be constructed on public right-of-way or future street right-of-way. If a wall is to be located adjacent to a public road and within the required yard within a zoning district, the wall shall not exceed four feet in height and should not obstruct sight distance for motorists. Should a wall be erected in error within the right-of-way, Rockdale County shall not be responsible for replacing or repairing the nonconforming structure. 
(b)  When permanent grades are proposed with a resulting slope steeper than one foot vertical for every two feet of horizontal displacement (2:1), an appropriate retaining structure shall be designed by a registered professional engineer to be constructed of reinforced concrete or other masonry materials designed by a registered professional engineer in compliance with applicable regulations of the U. S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration. An engineered design may be substituted for the reinforced concrete design, if the specific vendor has a pre-qualified acceptance from the building official. All structural components of the wall shall meet the minimum building codes for the proposed use. 
(c)  When the necessity for an earth retaining structure is required for a vertical displacement of 30 inches or less, appropriate landscaping timbers, or approval equal, may be employed if no permanent structure is supported by the soil retained by the retaining wall. The use of railroad cross ties or other timber product will be allowed only in these instances as per detail. 
(d)  All wall designs must demonstrate complete dimensions for line and grade. Wall design will consider foundation drainage and select backfill material for the proposed conditions. 
(e)  Walls shall be located in such a fashion as to not encroach upon existing or proposed drainage easements or drainage courses or floodplains to encumber the natural flow of surface runoff of stormwater. Walls shall be located at a distance from such water courses to allow for anticipated future maintenance of the easement to prevent a safety hazard to maintenance workers or to jeopardize the structural integrity of the wall. 
(f)  Walls that are not attached to the permitted structure and require a foundation shall be permitted as a free-standing structure and shall be inspected, as prescribed by the permitting procedure. Walls will be inspected for conformance with the approved design. Any deviation from the approved design will require the engineer of record to submit a certification of the nonconforming structure along with supporting calculations to indicate that the construction is consistent with the initial design parameters. In the event the inspector has not been provided ample opportunity to inspect the structure, the contractor must provide a certification of the construction by the engineer of record and geotechnical reports for concrete testing for strength and reinforcing steel specifications. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section will require that the remaining work cease and/or removal of non-conformance until the adequacy of structural integrity is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director. 
(g)  Retaining walls that are proposed for the purpose of stormwater retention must be designed in such a way that the walls are capable of a hydrostatic load, as measured from the top of the foundation footing to the highest elevation along the top of the wall. The hydrological design must allow for a free board dimension of one foot and an emergency overflow capacity equal to the allowable peak discharge for the 100-year storm event. The routing calculations should not take into account the existence of the emergency overflow. Place the overflow device above the projected 100-year flood elevation within the detention area. 
(h)  Any construction that may impact or be within the right-of-way of an existing or proposed water or sanitary sewer easement must be approved by the utility providing service. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-23, § 12, 10-9-2007) 
Secs. 332-19—332-23. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC UTILITIES INSTALLATION 

Secs. 332-24—332-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREET LIGHTING 

Sec. 332-40. - Authority and responsibility. 
(a)  The board of commissioners hereby declares that the cost and service for creation of street light districts or street lighting hereafter created shall be a service and not a tax, as authorized by Georgia Constitution Article IX, Section IV, Paragraph II. 
(b)  The board of commissioners may contract with public utilities for the purpose of carrying out the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-41. - Applicability. 
(a)  The owner, developer or other person developing a subdivision shall be required to provide street lights that conform to all of the standards provided for in this article and, in addition thereto, shall be required to obtain approval of the street light layout from the department prior to the construction of any street light facilities. Approval or final acceptance of the subdivision requires compliance with this article. 
(b)  The owner, developer or other person developing a shopping center, industrial park, office park, apartment complex or like development within a designated street light district shall provide street lights along public rights-of-way adjoining that property that conform to all standards provided for in this article; and the owner or developer shall obtain approval of the street light layout from the department prior to commencing any construction of any street light facilities. 
(c)  The department shall not recommend the acceptance of any public streets or roads proposed to be dedicated to the county for perpetual ownership and maintenance until such time as the street lights conform to the approved street light layout. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-42. - Procedures. 
(a)  Street lights. Street lights shall be required to be provided by the developers of all new subdivisions or other developments utilizing new streets or roads to be dedicated to the county or existing county roads or any combination, unless waived by the board of commissioners. Unless so waived, the developer, at the time of submitting the final plat to the department shall: 
(1)  Submit a final street light layout prepared by the utility company, which will provide the lighting service showing exact location of street lights within the development or subdivision. For residential and non-residential subdivisions, this drawing must be approved by the department prior to obtaining any building permit within the subdivision. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the utility company, which will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities, and by the department. The fixtures shall be mounted a minimum of 25 feet above the ground, and each fixture shall have appropriate arm length to illuminate the street. The department may require, in additional to other requirements, a light to be located at any or all street intersections within the subdivision or other development. 
(2)  Pay all costs for standards/poles, fixtures and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation. 
(3)  Submit proof of payment for complete installation to the Rockdale County Department of Transportation. 
(4)  Submit a copy of an executed agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. 
(b)  Underground cable for electric service. In subdivisions utilizing underground cable for electrical service, the developers shall be required to accomplish the same items listed in subsection (a) above. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-43. - Creation of district. 
(a)  Petition by lot owners. 
(1)  Any lot owner in any unincorporated area of the county may present a request for the creation of a street light district to the director. Upon receipt of the request, the department shall determine the appropriate boundaries for a street lighting district that will serve the lot owner presenting the request and neighboring lot owners. The department then shall prepare a plat showing this proposed street lighting district, and a petition for the creation of the proposed street lighting district then shall be circulated among the lot owners in the proposed district. That petition shall provide space for the lot owners in the proposed district to sign, showing whether it is their preference that the proposed district be created. Once a petition has been returned to the department, there shall be no changes in the preferences recorded thereon, and the petition shall clearly state the same. If more than 50 percent of the lot owners in the proposed district sign the petition approving the creation of the street lighting district, notices shall be posted in the proposed district stating that: 
"Notice: Rockdale County has received a petition for street lights. A public hearing is not required unless requested in writing by (date). For information call (telephone number)." 
(2)  If such hearing is requested, the person requesting that hearing shall be notified of the date and time of the hearing, and a legal advertisement announcing the public hearing shall be published once in the official legal organ of the county. At any such hearing, the board of commissioners shall determine whether to create the proposed street lighting district. Safety and economic factors shall be the prime consideration in making such determination. If there is no request for a hearing or if 100 percent of the lot owners have signed the petition, the street lighting district shall be created, upon approval of the board of commissioners. The department will take no action on petitions with less than a majority of the lot owners' approval. 
(3)  The petition for creation of the proposed street lighting district must be returned to the department within 90 days after it is obtained from the department, however, the director may, in his discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time for the return of the petition an additional 30 days, for a total of 120 days, when a request for such extension is made to the director before the expiration of the original 90 days. 
(b)  Special conditions. In areas where special conditions as to safety, security, land topography, economic and other factors may be involved; the board of commissioners may create special street lighting districts and provide for special street lighting under such terms and conditions as may be determined by the board of commissioners, any other provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding; provided, however, that in such instances, a public hearing shall be held by the board of commissioners after advertisement in the official organ of the county, one time at least ten days before conducting such public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-44. - Costs and assessments. 
(a)  The cost of providing and maintaining street light service in existing street light districts and in street light districts hereafter created shall be borne by the lots and lot residents within the street light districts who are billed for utility services provided to the lots by utility providers who, by agreement with the county, will bill for street light service, whether or not the lot is located within the boundaries of a particular subdivision, so long as the lot is located within the boundaries of a street light district. 
(b)  The charge, therefore, shall be determined by the department and approved by the board of commissioners and shall be posted and open for public inspection in the offices of the department and the clerk of the board of commissioners. The initial charge for each proposed street lighting district created by petition also shall be included on the petitions circulated through the proposed district. In the event of excessive vandalism to street lights within a district that results in the county being billed for repairs, the county may prorate those repair bills and add a pro rata share of those bills to the charge. 
In those districts in existence as of the date of adoption of this UDO or that may hereafter be created in which there is construction cost, the same shall be retired as per agreement or contract with the public utility or other person to whom the indebtedness is owed and shall be accordingly per lot. 
(c)  Payment date. The due date for the payment of the services and sums provided in this article shall be the same date of each month as the utilities are due to the utility provider that bills for lighting service on behalf of the county, and subject to the same penalties for late payment and for failure to pay. Any utility service provided by the utility provider may be discontinued for late payment or non-payment. 
(d)  Responsibility for collection of money. The billing, accounting, collecting and receiving of the money provided for in this article shall be performed by Rockdale County Water Resources, which will, by agreement with the county, perform those functions on behalf of the county. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 332-45. - Standards of installation and operation. 
(a)  In order to ensure adequate illumination of public rights-of-way and promote safety and security, the American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1983), as from time to time amended, is hereby adopted as the standard for the installation and operation of lighting in the unincorporated areas of the county, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Except for principal arterials, lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be as shown in "Table of Minimum Average Street Illumination Levels" 
Table of Minimum Average Street Illumination Levels (footcandles) 

 
*Note: Illumination of Principal Arterials shall be determined by GDOT. 
(2)  The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may be no less than one-sixth of this average. 
(3)  Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the director for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards, and no lighting shall be installed or operated without this approval. 
(4)  Should the director disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any public right-of-way, he shall communicate the disapproval in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. 
(5)  Any disapproval of a light or lighting system by the director may be appealed to the board of commissioners. If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the director, a notice of appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date following the written notice of disapproval. It shall be the responsibility of the director to transmit forthwith to the board of commissioners all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The board of commissioners may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination being appealed. 
(6)  Roadway or street lighting luminaries or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as security lights or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public streets shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from the street, and shall be oriented in such a manner to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street and the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. The approval of the department shall be obtained before installation of these lights. 
(7)  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way, for whatever purpose, shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Chapter 336 - IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 336-1. - Short title, authority, and applicability. 
(a)  Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fee Ordinance of Rockdale County, Georgia," or, for brevity, the "Impact Fee Ordinance." 
(b)  Authority. This chapter has been prepared and adopted by the Rockdale County Board of Commissioners in accordance with the authority provided by Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-71-1 et seq. as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of Rockdale County, Georgia, to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this chapter. 
(2)  This chapter shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of Rockdale County, Georgia, and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 336-2. - Findings, purpose, and intent. 
(a)  Findings. The county board of commissioners finds and declares: 
(1)  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Rockdale County. 
(2)  That certain public facilities as herein defined have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development. 
(3)  That it is fair and equitable that new growth and development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. 
(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this chapter is to impose impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined. 
(2)  It is also the purpose of this chapter to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in Rockdale County and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
(c)  Intent. This chapter is intended to implement and be consistent with the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan, as it may be adopted or amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-8-1 et seq.); and the applicable Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning and the Development Impact Fee Compliance Requirements, both as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 336-3. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Rockdale County. 
(1)  Rules of construction. Unless otherwise stated in this chapter, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this chapter: 
a.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between words or phrases as used in this chapter and as used in other codes, regulations or laws of Rockdale County, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this chapter. 
b.  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
c.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
d.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
e.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other legal or similar entity. 
f.  The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
g.  The conjunction "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
h.  The use of "either . . . or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
i.  The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
j.  The chapter, section, and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this chapter are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this chapter. 
(2)  Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below. 
Administrator: The director of public services and engineering of Rockdale County, Georgia, or the director's designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this chapter. 
Building permit: The permit required for new construction, completion of construction, or an interior finish pursuant to the applicable building code. As used herein, the term shall not include permits required for remodeling, rehabilitation, or other improvements to an existing structure provided there is no increase in the demand placed on those public facilities as defined herein. 
Capital improvement: An improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
Capital improvements element: That portion of the Rockdale County Comprehensive Plan that sets out projected needs for system improvements during the planning horizon established therein, which provides a schedule that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and which provides a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement, as most recently adopted or amended by the county board of commissioners. 
Commencement of construction, for private development: Initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development or building permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project. 
Day: A calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
Development: Any action which creates demand on or need for public facilities, as defined herein, and includes any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use; any change in use of land, a building, or structure; or the connection of any building or structure to a public utility. 
Development approval: Written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, land disturbance permit or other approval for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation prior to commencement of construction. 
Development impact fee: The payment of money imposed upon and paid by new development as a condition of development approval as its proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve it. 
Encumber: To legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of Rockdale County, Georgia. 
Excess capacity: That portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level-of-service standard. 
Feepayor: That person or entity who pays a development impact fee, or his or her legal successor in interest when the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this chapter has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. 
Individual assessment determination: A finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this chapter or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
Individual assessment study: The engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
Level of service: A measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by Rockdale County, Georgia in terms of demand to capacity ratios or the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities or both. 
Present value: The current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using accepted methods of financial analysis for determination of "net present value." 
Project: A single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or other development approval, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
Project improvements: Site-specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. A project improvement may provide no more than incidental service or facility capacity to persons other than users or occupants of the particular project they serve. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by Rockdale County, Georgia shall be considered a project improvement. 
Property owner: That person or entity that holds legal title to property. 
Proportionate share: That portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
Public facilities: (A) Parks, open space, and recreation areas and related facilities; and (B) Public safety facilities, including sheriff, inmate housing, fire, emergency medical, and rescue facilities; (C) Libraries and related facilities; and (D) Roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping, and any other components of state or federal highways. 
Service area: A geographically defined area as designated in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan in which a defined set of public facilities provide or are proposed to provide service to existing or future development. 
System improvement costs: Costs incurred to provide public facilities capacity to serve new growth and development, including the costs of planning, design, engineering, construction, land acquisition, and land improvement for the construction or reconstruction of facility improvements or expansions. System improvement costs include the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvements element, and administrative costs of up to three percent of the total of all other system improvement costs. Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued to finance system improvements, but such costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements: Capital improvements that are public facilities designed to provide service to more than one project or to the community at large, in contrast to "project" improvements. 
Unit of development: The standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc. 
Unused or excess impact fee: Any individual impact fee payment from which no amount of money or only a portion thereof has been encumbered or expended according to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 336-4. - Imposition of development impact fees. 
Any person who, after the effective date of this chapter, engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this chapter. 
(a)  Construction not subject to impact fees. The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this chapter, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
(1)  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development as defined in this chapter that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property. 
(2)  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
(3)  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
(4)  Placing or replacing a manufactured home in a manufactured home park on a prepared manufactured home pad in existence and operation prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
(5)  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
(6)  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential housing unit that does not increase the number of housing units. 
(7)  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool. 
(b)  Grandfathered projects. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
(c)  Method of calculation. 
(1)  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, shall be calculated on the basis of the establishment of service areas, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of credits for the present value of ad valorem taxes or other revenues as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan, and which: 
a.  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new growth and development; and 
b.  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category and in the same service area for which an impact fee is imposed. 
(3)  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this chapter shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of Rockdale County, Georgia, and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
(4)  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee may also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities, as established in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(5)  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 336-5. - Fee assessment and payment. 
(a)  Fee schedule. 
(1)  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule, section 336-13, for a property located inside of Rockdale County, shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by Rockdale County, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. 
(3)  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
a.  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use designation and the appropriate development impact fee. 
b.  In making such determination, the administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the impact fees shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
c.  If a land use designation is not in a category contained in this chapter, then an appropriate new category may be added by the administrator and an appropriate fee established under the county's current impact fee methodology, subject to annual confirmation by the county board of commissioners. 
d.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the county board of commissioners in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this chapter. 
(b)  Timing of assessment and payment. 
(1)  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time of application for a building permit. 
(2)  All development impact fees shall be collected no later than the time of issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction or to commence use of a property. 
(4)  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to assess a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the actual use prior to issuance of an interior finishes permit or approval of a certificate of occupancy. An adjustment may result in a refund to the feepayor or payment of the marginal increase of the adjusted fee over the amount already paid. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any future change in demand for public facilities in excess of the average demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the building permit shall be assessed such additional fee as would otherwise have been due. Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined herein), or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
(c)  Individual assessment determinations. Individual assessments of development impact fees may be established as follows: 
(1)  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project in lieu of the fee established on the fee schedule, section 336-13. 
(2)  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. Each individual assessment study shall: 
a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or, 
b.  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in Rockdale County or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to accepted methodology; and, 
c.  Provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. 
(3)  The administrator in his or her sole discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this chapter. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the county board of commissioners in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this chapter. 
(4)  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by Rockdale County, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Fee certification. Upon application to the administrator, a developer may receive a certification of the development impact fee schedule, section 336-13, or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. Such certified schedule or fee shall establish the development impact fee due for a period of 180 days from the date of certification, even if new or revised rate schedules are adopted in the interim. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 336-6. - Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
(a)  Maintenance of funds. 
(1)  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this chapter shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until encumbered or expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. 
(2)  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements within each service area wherein fees are collected. 
(3)  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this chapter. 
(b)  Expenditures; restrictions. 
(1)  Expenditures from the impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements within the service area for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
(2)  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, the following shall be considered general revenue of Rockdale County, and may be expended accordingly: 
a.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
b.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Rockdale County for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and, 
c.  Any portion of the impact fee (but not to exceed three percent of the total) collected and allocated by the administrator for administration of the impact fee ordinance, and such additional amount assessed for repayment of the cost of preparing the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Annual report. 
(1)  The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the county board of commissioners as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility and service area. 
(2)  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), and submitted to DCA in conjunction with the annual update of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 336-7. - Credits. 
(a)  When eligible, feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. 
(1)  Credits; restrictions. 
a.  Except as provided in subsection b. below, no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this chapter. 
b.  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his or her predecessor in title or interest) prior to the effective date of this chapter for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive land use plan, is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this chapter, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of Rockdale County, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements within the same service area. 
c.  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements, or for system improvements not included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Granting of credits. 
a.  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category and in the same service area for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
1.  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive land use plan. 
2.  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the capital improvements element. 
3.  The county board of commissioners shall have explicitly approved said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
b.  The credit allowed pursuant to this section shall not exceed the impact fee due for such system improvement unless a greater credit is authorized under a private agreement executed under the provisions of section 336-13. 
(3)  Guidelines for credit valuation. Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
a.  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the administrator of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
b.  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal at the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
c.  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the county, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that Rockdale County, Georgia would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
d.  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest accepted by the county, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
e.  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the net of the interest returned on a State of Georgia, AA rated or better municipal bond less average annual inflation, or such other discount rate as the county board of commissioners in its sole discretion may deem appropriate. 
(4)  Credits; application. 
a.  Credits shall be given only upon written request of the developer to the administrator. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the administrator at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
b.  The administrator, in his or her sole discretion, shall review all claims for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
c.  Any credit approved by the administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
(5)  Credits; abandoned building permits. In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land, upon submission of adequate evidence to the administrator that an impact fee was received by the county, the amount paid, and that the building permit was abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 336-8. - Refunds. 
(a)  Eligibility for a refund. 
(1)  Upon the request of a feepayor regarding a property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the development impact fee shall be refunded if: 
a.  Capacity is available in the public facilities for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied. 
b.  The development impact fee has not been encumbered or construction has not been commenced within six years after the date the fee was collected. 
(2)  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(b)  Notice of entitlement to a refund. When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber the development impact fees, the administrator shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given adequate notice to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right to entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Rockdale County within 30 days after the expiration of the six-year period after the date that the development impact fee was collected and shall contain a heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund." No refund shall be made for a period of 30 days from the date of said publication. 
(c)  Filing a request for a refund. All requests for refunds shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. 
(d)  Payment of refunds. 
(1)  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
(2)  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
(3)  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, for any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by Rockdale County for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of the impact fee ordinance or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 336-9. - Private contractual agreements. 
(a)  Private agreements; authorized. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the county and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for system improvement costs incurred by a developer, including inter-project transfers of credits or providing for reimbursement for project improvement costs which are used or shared by more than one development project, provided that: 
(1)  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element of the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  The amount of any credit or reimbursement granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
(b)  Private agreements; provisions. A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions which: 
(1)  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement shall allow the county to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to schedules set forth in this chapter. 
(2)  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in the same service area in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees. 
(3)  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this chapter, provided that acceptable security is posted ensuring payment of the development impact fees. Forms of security that may be acceptable include a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit from a bank authorized to do business within the State of Georgia, a surety bond, or lien or mortgage on lands to be covered by the building permit. 
(c)  Private agreements; procedure. 
(1)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review, negotiation, and submission to the county board of commissioners. 
(2)  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the county board of commissioners of Rockdale County, Georgia prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(3)  Any such agreement shall provide for execution by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 336-10. - Periodic review and amendments. 
(a)  Amendments. 
(1)  This chapter may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. 
(2)  Interim amendments to the impact fee schedule regarding the establishment of new land use categories by the administrator under subsection 336-13(b) are expressly authorized, and shall be confirmed by the county board of commissioners when this chapter is subsequently amended. 
(b)  Capital improvements element periodic review. 
(1)  Update. At least once each year, the county board of commissioners shall review and may update the capital improvements element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The capital improvements element update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the list or scheduling of projects. The capital improvements element update shall be submitted to the regional development center for their review, in accordance with the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Amendment. In conducting a periodic review of the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, the county board of commissioners may determine to amend the capital improvements element. Amendments to the capital improvements element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the State of Georgia, and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: 
a.  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; 
b.  Add new public facility categories for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas or make changes to system improvement projects; 
c.  Change service levels established for an existing impact fee service area; or 
d.  Make any other revisions needed to keep the capital improvements element up to date. 
(c)  Continuation of validity. Failure of the county board of commissioners to undertake a periodic review of the capital improvements element shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule and other data. The failure to periodically review such data shall not invalidate this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 336-11. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Eligibility to file an appeal. Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the county or who have already received a written determination of individual assessment, refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. 
(b)  Appeals process. 
(1)  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor (hereinafter, the "appellant") must file a written appeal with the administrator within 15 days of the decision or receipt of written determination from which the appeal is taken. 
(2)  Such written appeal shall constitute an application for relief, shall be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought, and shall include: 
a.  The name and address of the appellant. 
b.  The location of the affected property. 
c.  A copy of any applicable written decision or determination made by the administrator (from which the appeal is taken). 
(3)  Within 15 days after receipt of the appeal, the administrator shall make a written final decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. 
(4)  Appeals from the final decision of the administrator shall be made to the board of adjustment in accordance with the procedures set forth in UDO section 238-8. Appeals from final decisions of the board of adjustment shall be as provided in UDO section 238-13. 
(c)  Payment of impact fee during appeal. 
(1)  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. 
(2)  A developer may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a development approval, and by making such payment shall not be [stopped] from exercising this right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 336-12. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement authority. 
(1)  The enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel as the administrator may designate from time to time. 
(2)  The administrator shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this chapter and shall have the right to issue a written notice, a stop work order or citation for violations, as the administrator in his or her sole determination may deem appropriate to the circumstances. Refusal of written notice of violation, stop work order or citation under this chapter shall constitute legal notice of service. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person performing the work. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. 
(3)  The administrator may suspend or revoke any building permit or withhold the issuance of other development approvals, if the provisions of this chapter have been violated by the developer or the owner or their assigns. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this chapter shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(2)  Proceeding with construction of a project that is not consistent with the project's impact fee assessment, such as the use category claimed or units of development indicated, shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(3)  Failure to take corrective action following the receipt of a citation shall constitute an actionable violation. 
(4)  A violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law, including the general penalty provisions of the Rockdale County Code of Ordinances, Part II, Subpart A, section 1-11. In addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the county board of commissioners shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this chapter, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this chapter and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-14, § 21, 7-24-2007) 
Sec. 336-13. - Fee schedule. 
(a)  Land use. 

 
(b)  Other uses. Impact fees for other uses not included shall be determined in accordance with the methodologies contained in the capital improvements element of Rockdale County, GA, or other methodologies as approved by the county. 
(Ord. No. 0-2006-32, §§ 1—3, 11-28-2006; Ord. No. 0-2007-19, § 1, 9-25-2007) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1978 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1978 Code, as updated through May 13, 1997, which are included herein. Sections of the 1978 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1978 Code, as updated through May 13, 1997, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1978 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances adopted since May 13, 1997, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 