THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA ____________ Published by Order of the Board of City Commissioners 2009 ____________ > OFFICIALS of the CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Willie Adams, Jr., M.D. Mayor ____________ Jon Howard Dorothy Hubbard Morris Gurr Roger Marietta Bob Langstaff, Jr. Tommie Postell City Commissioners ____________ Alfred D. Lott City Manager ____________ C. Nathan Davis City Attorney ____________ Sonja Tolbert City Clerk PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented through Ord. No. 07-111, adopted April 24, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of city commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Shelly Hayes, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Alfred D. Lott and city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. © Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. 2009. AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED 09-141 AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Albany, Georgia and it is hereby ordained by authority of same:     Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 64, each inclusive, is adopted.     Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 22, 2009 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.     Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.     Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of City Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.     Section 5. Ordinances adopted after September 22, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.     Section 6. The last sentence of Section 38-69(d) of the Code is changed to read "within five business days."     Section 7. The reference at lines 2 and 3 of Section 52-33 of the Code "but not less than semiannually" is deleted.     Section 8. There is added in alphabetical order to Section 60-127 of the Code "PTP means Pilot Testing Program."     Section 9. To the list of priority pollutants at Section 60-196(c) of the Code, there is added "Bis (2-chloroisopropyl) ether" and "1, 12-Benzofluoranthene" is deleted and in its place is "11, 12-Benzofluoranthene."     Section 10. The penultimate sentence of Section 60-131 (f) of the Code is changed to read "If no building permit is required, the appropriate charge shall be paid to the city at the time the water meter is installed or the size changed."     Section 11. The last sentence of Section 60-949(1) of the Code is changed to read "For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utility facilities is defined as a strip of land at least four (4) feet wide, but not wider than the width of the utility facility plus two (2) feet on either side thereof."     Section 12. This ordinance in no way changes any provisions of the City Charter and shall become effective upon its adoption. /s/         Dorothy B. Hubbard       Mayor Pro Tem   ATTEST: /s/         Sonja Tolbert       City Clerk   Adopted: December 15, 2009 Introduced by Commissioner:  Postell                       Date(s) read:  Dec. 15, 2009       
Chapter 22 - COURT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish, maintain and operate a municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; city courts generally, O.C.G.A. § 15-8-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 22-1. - Jurisdiction, authority and powers generally.     There shall be a court under this chapter named the municipal court of Albany. The municipal court shall have jurisdiction and power within the corporate limits of the city, to: (1)  Try and punish all violations of this chapter, all violations of the city ordinances, and other violations as provided by law granted to municipalities by this state; (2)  Try, hear, and abate nuisances as provided by city ordinances or by laws of this state; (3)  Hear, try, and determine as a committing court all warrants for the violation of any state law and while acting under the authority of the laws of the state, to bind over such persons to an appropriate higher court for the eventual disposition of said case; (4)  Shall establish a schedule of fees/fines (by the chief judge with the approval of the board of commissioners) to defray the cost of operation of the court; (5)  Punish those in its presence for contempt violations, provided that such punishment shall not exceed 25.00 per contempt violation or ten days in jail or both; (6)  Shall establish a schedule of fees (by the chief judge with the approval of the board of city commissioners) to defray the cost of the operation of the court for the filing of motions, pleadings and orders as appropriate with charges for the clerk of court service in the same manner administrated by the county clerk of court; (7)  Punish violations within its jurisdiction with a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 180 days or by both fine and imprisonment or labor, or the fine may be imposed with an alternative of such imprisonment or compulsory labor, for each separate violation; provided further, that for violations of the Sewer and Pretreatment Ordinance $1,000.00; for all fixed punishment under state law the higher of the two must be used for both fine, and imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law; (8)  Establish bail and recognizance to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court; (9)  Probate, revoke, amend, remit, modify, alter, or suspend sentences imposed, commute penalties, and remit any part of a sentence following defendant's request thereof to the court; (10)  Compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence in the possession of any party with the same authority as a magistrate of the state; (11)  Compel the presence of witnesses or all parties necessary to properly disposal of each case by issuance of summonses, subpoenas, warrants, orders, and all other processes in cases within its jurisdiction arising under the laws of the state, the city Charter, or this Code with full power to enforce the same; (12)  Enforce obedience to all orders, judgments, and sentences of this court with the same authority as a magistrate of the state; (13)  Administer all oaths as are necessary with the same authority as magistrates of the state and take affidavits and attest other papers; (14)  Issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate judge of the state to issue warrants for offenses applicable to cities on state laws committed against the city or the state and within the corporate limits of Albany; and (15)  Such other powers and duties as shall be provided by state law or city ordinances. (Code 1985, § 10-1; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-2. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Attorney or counsel refers to any person admitted to practice law in the superior courts of the state.     Bailiff means a sworn officer duly appointed.     Clerk of court. The term "clerk of court" as used in this chapter refers to the person whom duties shall be defined as the keeper of the Albany Municipal Court Seal and must be an employee the city. The clerk of court shall be in charge of all the records of the court and responsible for developing a system to keep the court in order.     Magistrate court means the Dougherty County Magistrate Court.     Party or parties. The term "party" or "parties" in the chapter shall refer to the defendant and includes accused and vice versa, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. (Code 1985, § 10-2; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-3. - Appellate review.     The orders, verdicts, judgments, and sentences of the court shall be subject to appellate review by writ of certiorari in the appropriate the county superior court or as otherwise provided by general state law. (1)  Any person who has been convicted of any criminal or quasi-criminal offense or violation of any ordinance, in any inferior judicatory by whatever name called, who desires a writ of certiorari to review and correct the judgment of conviction in the case shall be entitled to a supersedeas of the judgment, if such person or his or her attorney files with the clerk of the court the proper papers, and, a bond payable to the municipality, in amount and with security acceptable to, and to be approved by the clerk of court, or chief judge as a condition that the defendant will personally appear and abide the final judgment, order, or sentence upon such person in the case. (2)  All bonds must be paid to the city treasury department. The bond may be forfeited in the same manner as any other criminal or civil bond in any other court having jurisdiction. A bond may be forfeited according to the procedure prescribed in any of the municipal ordinances, or any provision of this chapter, or any state law granted to local municipalities. Alternatively, an action may be brought on the bond in any court having jurisdiction. Upon the giving of a bond the defendant shall be released from custody in the same manner as defendants are released upon supersedeas bonds in criminal cases where a notice of appeal has been filed. (3)  If the defendant is unable because of his or her indigence to make bond and makes this fact known by affidavit to be filed with the judge or clerk of court, as the case may be, the same shall operate as a supersedeas of the judgment; provided, however, that the defendant shall not be set at liberty unless the defendant gives a bond as prescribed in subsections (a) and/or (b) of this section. (4)  The supersedeas provided for in this section shall operate to suspend the judgment of conviction until the case is finally heard, and determined in the county superior court, to which it is taken by certiorari, or by the court of appeals upon appeal, provided that within the time prescribed by law the defendant shall apply for and procure the writ and remedies provided by law for reviewing the judgment complained of. The supersedeas shall be equally applicable whether the judge of the county superior court to whom the petition for certiorari is presented sanctions it or refuses it, provided that within the time provided by law the defendant diligently files a notice of appeal. (5)  The object of this section is to provide a method by which a defendant may obtain a supersedeas so long as the defendent is prosecuting or is entitled under the law to prosecute the proceeding brought or to be brought to review the conviction of which he or she is complaining, or any intermediate appellate judgment rendered thereon, in order that the defendant shall not be deprived of his or her right to apply to the courts by being compelled to serve his or her sentence or pay a fine before he or she has had the full opportunity allowed him or her by law of taking the necessary appeal under certiorari. (Code 1985, § 10-3; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-4. - Transfer to state court for jury trials. (a)  Motions required to be in writing/order attached. Any party desiring to transfer a pending charge to state court for a jury trail must file an original written motion and order which substantially comply with the form of motion attached to these rules. Such motion and order shall comply with the preparation and pleading requirements specified in this chapter. (b)  Motion when trial has been scheduled. Once a case is set for trial, a motion to transfer to state court will be heard only if the city solicitor is present. The court may grant or deny such motion as the ends of justice may require, consistent with the discretion given inferior court judges under state law regarding the transfer of matters for jury trial. No such motions are to be made for delay purposes. (Code 1985, § 10-4; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-5. - Recusal.     No officer of the court shall be allowed to adjudicate or prosecute anyone on the behalf of the city while serving as an officer of the court, if the party before the court has been represented by that officer of the court as a client within the past six months. When such a matter occurs the officer of the court must voluntarily notify the court and recuse themselves immediately. The chief judge shall have the authority to assign an attorney who meets the minimum requirement as an officer of the court set forth in this chapter to handle that case and that case only. When the matter entails the chief judge, the case shall be set aside and rescheduled for the other municipal court judge to hear. When the offender or the offender's attorney know in advance of the situation, the following applies: (1)  Motions. A motion to recuse a presiding judge in a particular case or proceeding shall be in writing, accompanied by an affidavit asserting the facts, upon which, the motion is founded. The motion should be filed with the clerk of court and a copy presented to the presiding judge not later than five days after the offender first learned of the asserted grounds. (2)  Duty of the presiding judge. When the presiding judge is presented with a motion to recuse, accompanied by an affidavit, the presiding judge shall temporarily cease to act upon the merits of the matter and shall immediately determine the timeliness of the motion and legal sufficiency of the affidavit, and make a determination, assuming any of the facts alleged in the affidavit to be true, whether recusal would be warranted. If it is found that the motion is timely, the affidavit sufficient and the recusal would be authorized if some or all of the facts set forth in the affidavit are true, the motion to recuse shall be heard by a Magistrate Court Judge of Dougherty County, as designated by the Chief Judge of Dougherty County State Court, or if not, a Superior Court Judge of Dougherty County Judicial Circuit. (3)  Procedure upon a motion for recusal. If the recusal motion is sustained, the presiding judge shall be recused and another judge shall be assigned to preside. In the absence of another municipal court judge, a state court judge (other than the judge who heard the motion) shall be appointed by the chief judge of state court to sit in the place of the recused judge on that case only. (4)  Voluntary recusal. If the presiding judge either on his or her own motion or that of one of the parties, voluntarily recuses himself, another judge shall be assigned to hear the matter involved. If another municipal court judge is not available to preside, or for any reason cannot preside, a state court judge (other than the judge who heard the motion) shall be appointed by the chief judge of state court to sit in the place of the recused judge. (5)  Selection of judge. Any municipal court judge involved in a recusal motion shall not communicate on the subject or on the matter to any of his or her associate judges of the municipal court of Albany, State Court Judges of Dougherty County or, Superior Court Judges of Dougherty County Judicial Circuit until such matter has been properly disposed of. In the instance of any hearing on a motion to recuse, the challenged judge shall neither select nor participate in the selection of the state court judge to hear the motion. (Code 1985, § 10-5; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Secs. 22-6—22-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
Sec. 22-29. - Office of chief judge created.     There is hereby created an office of the city government to be known as the Chief Judge of the Municipal Court of Albany position, hereinafter to be known as the chief judge. (Code 1985, § 10-6; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-30. - Judges; qualifications; term of office; appointment; oath; compensation. (a)  Number of judges. The municipal court shall have a sufficient number judges appointed by the board of commissioners of the city. There shall be a chief judge of the municipal court. The total operation of the court shall be the responsibility of the chief judge who shall be appointed and named by the commissioners every two years as Chief Judge of Albany Municipal Court. The other judges shall be called interim municipal court judges and shall be appointed every two years by the commissioners to perform duties as assigned by the chief judge. Before the city budget is adopted each year, the chief judge shall be granted a sufficient number of interim municipal judges to operate the court. If the judges' positions are funded by the commissioners in the city budget the judges will be appointed at the appropriate time in January. (b)  Qualifications. To qualify for appointment as a judge of the municipal court, a person must be at least 30 years of age, a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and a practicing attorney with a minimum of five years' experience in the state. To hold office as a judge after such appointment, a person shall continue to possess said qualifications and shall not hold or qualify for a city or county elected office. (c)  Term of office. A judge of the municipal court shall be appointed for a term of two years as provided herein. However, all appointees shall serve at the will and pleasure of the board of commissioners of the city. (d)  Oath. Before assuming office, each judge shall take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation, before the Probate Judge of Dougherty County who is authorized to administer an oath, faithfully to discharge the duties as judge. The oath shall be filed in the office of city clerk within five working days after the appointment for each term of the office. (e)  Vacancies. In the event of any vacancy in the office of a municipal court judge for any cause, whether by death, resignation, sickness, or removal, the board of commissioners shall appoint only a person who meets the qualification requirements to fill such vacancy in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (f)  Compensation. The annual salary of municipal court judges shall be as authorized by the board of commissioners. Appointed officers of the court shall be given the opportunity to participate in the city insurance plan. (g)  No part-time appointees shall be eligible for paid vacation or sick leave. (Code 1985, § 10-7; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-31. - Chief judge. (a)  Selection. The municipal court judges shall be appointed by the mayor and board of commissioners as described in section 3(i) of the Charter. (b)  Duties. The chief judge shall be responsible for the general supervision of the municipal court and shall promulgate all rules necessary for the supervision, conduct, and administration of the court, including but not limited to the number of divisions of the court to which the court may be divided, assignment of interim judges and their duties, the hours of operation of the court, the preparation of calendars deemed necessary and proper, and a system to keep court records and shall require reports from the judges, solicitor, public defender, clerk of court/administrator, and other court personnel as deemed necessary and proper. All rules promulgated by the judge shall be reduced to writing and approved by the board of commissioners. The chief judge shall be responsible also for the preparation and submitting of budgets of the said court to the city manager and board of commissioners. The chief judge shall further perform other duties as the council may provide by ordinance or as required by state law. (c)  Vacancy. In the event of the inability of the chief judge for any cause to perform his or her duties, whether by death, resignation, sickness, or removal, the board of commissioners shall appoint an attorney who meets the qualification requirements to fill such vacancy in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (d)  Removal of judges. The Charter, this Code and the Georgia Code of Judicial Conduct, 1998 as amended, shall govern the conduct of the judges of the municipal court. (Code 1985, § 10-8; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-32. - Solicitor and public defender. (a)  Selection. The municipal court solicitor and the municipal court public defender shall be appointed by the board of commissioners. (b)  Qualifications. To qualify for appointment as a municipal court solicitor or as a municipal court public defender, a person shall be at least 30 years of age, a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and a practicing attorney with a minimum of five years experience in the state. A municipal court solicitor or a municipal court public defender after the appointment, a person shall continue to possess said qualifications and shall not hold or qualify for a city or county elected office. (c)  Duties of the solicitor. The solicitor shall be the prosecuting officer of the municipal court, when applicable, in all criminal and noncriminal cases, including all water, gas and light cases. Additionally the solicitor may prosecute nuisance abatement and animal control cases. The solicitor shall perform such duties as prescribed by ordinance and required by law. (d)  Duties of the public defender. The public defender shall represent all indigent defendants appearing in municipal court. The presiding judge shall assign each defendant to the public defender depending on the circumstances. (e)  Terms of office. The municipal court solicitor and municipal court public defender shall be appointed for a term of two years as provided herein. However, all appointees shall serve at the will and the pleasure of the board of commissioners. (f)  Vacancies. In the event of the disability of the solicitor or public defender for any cause, whether by death, resignation, sickness, or removal, the board of commissioners shall appoint a person who meets the qualification requirements to fill such vacancy in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (g)  Compensation. The annual salary of a municipal court appointee shall be as authorized by the board of commissioners. Each appointed officer of the court shall be given the opportunity to participate in the city insurance plan. (h)  Parttime appointees ineligible for vacation, etc. No parttime appointee shall be eligible for paid vacation or sick leave. (Code 1985, § 10-9; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Secs. 22-33—22-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RULES OF THE COURT 
Sec. 22-53. - Reference to rules.     The following rules shall be known as "municipal court rules." (Code 1985, § 10-15; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-54. - Amendments.     Court rules may be amended from time to time by the board of commissioners as the need arises. Advance notice of at least 30 days shall be given to the members of the local bar of any changes. The Dougherty Circuit Bar shall be given a copy of all changes in the rules and any proposed amendments and the opportunity to offer changes and comments on the changes. It shall be the duty of the chief judge to recommend changes as needed to the board of commissioners. (Code 1985, § 10-16; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-55. - Hours of courts/day or night sessions.     In accordance with the authority given in Charter section 24 of the city, the official starting hour of this court shall be 8:30 a.m. with the exception of jail arraignment sessions which shall start at 7:30 a.m. on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays. (1)  Day sessions. Day sessions court will be held each day of the week Monday through Friday, with the exception of the second Tuesday of the month and, except legal holidays reconciled by the city's personnel management system policies. The hours of day sessions shall commence at 8:30 a.m. and continue until concluded. (2)  Night sessions. The court, may in its discretion, hold evening sessions of court in addition to the day sessions of court. However, before any such court begins, the chief judge must notify in writing to the city commission, city manager, chief of police, the Dougherty Circuit Bar, and the general public in the legal organ of the county, at least 30 days prior to convening of evening sessions of court. The hours of night sessions shall commence at whatever time set by the court and continue until conclusion of the docket. (3)  Special sessions. The chief judge may, at any time and in the chief judge's discretion, call and order a special session of the municipal court for a trial in any case by notifying the parties in writing, the city commission, city manager, chief of police and the general public in the legal organ of the county. (4)  Cancellation of court. The chief judge shall have the authority to cancel court at any time for any reason. It shall be the obligation of the court to reschedule all cases and re-summon all parties within a reasonable time. Should the presiding judge fail to appear within one hour after the session has been scheduled for that day, court shall be considered to be canceled and all parties shall be rescheduled. When the court knows in advance of its intent to shut down for any number of days, the chief judge shall notify the city commission, city manager, and the chief of police in writing of the chief judge's intent within 30 days prior to the date scheduled for shut down. The chief judge shall not require the approval of anyone to shut down or cancel court. (Code 1985, § 10-17; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-56. - Designated days of court for certain matters. (a)  Abatement of nuisance. These cases are usually scheduled for the fourth Thursday of each month commencing at 8:30 a.m. The city solicitor or city attorney will represent the city in all abatement of nuisance cases, and in the absence of the city solicitor, the city attorney shall represent the city as in all the other cases for the city. (b)  Contempt of court, indigent payment of fines. These cases are usually scheduled for Wednesday morning. The public defender is usually appointed to represent each person appearing before the court for failure to pay an installment of a fine or the balance of a fine. Persons wanting specific information should contact the clerk of court in the Albany-Dougherty County Judicial Building. (c)  Contempt of court, community service. These cases are usually scheduled for Thursday morning. The public defender is usually appointed unless the defendant is not indigent or unless appointment of counsel is waived. (d)  Contempt of court, failure to appear. A person who misses his or her designated court date may: (1)  Contact the municipal court clerk of court in person, in the Albany-Dougherty County Judicial Building to get the case rescheduled on a particular date providing a bench warrant has not been issued; or (2)  Appear in municipal court on the next court date following the designated court date. Whichever option the defendant chooses, the defendent should be prepared to offer a legal excuse for the failure to appear as originally scheduled. The presiding judge may or may not accept excuses less than legal excuse. See punishment for contempt in section 22-1. (Code 1985, § 10-18; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-57. - Community service.     It shall be the responsibility of the chief judge to decide the level of community service, if any, performed by individuals sentenced by the court. (Code 1985, § 10-19; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Secs. 22-58—22-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COURT PROCEDURES, SERVICES OF PROCESSES AND ORDERS 
Sec. 22-88. - Court procedures.     Criminal prosecutions in this court may be instituted by warrants, summons, written information, or accusation specifically setting forth the offense charged. Such information, accusation, or summons may be signed by the judge, the solicitor, any sworn member of the city police department or the code enforcement department, other law enforcement officers or such officers as may be specifically authorized by city ordinance to operate within the corporate limits of the city. The judges of this court may issue warrants in all cases applicable to matters of the court granted under state law either on their own knowledge or with information given under oath, except in capital cases, or other cases prohibited by law. (1)  Copies of documents and records. All copies of documents and records of the court certified by the clerk of court/administrator, or such deputy clerk of court under the seal of the court shall be admissible in all proceedings in the same manner and to the same extent as documents bearing the certificate of the clerks of the superior courts of the state and the seals of such courts. (2)  Authority to serve processes and orders. The chief of police and sworn members of the police department of the city, the code enforcement department director and members of that department, employees of the court designated by the judges, contract probation officers, contract probation services and other officials or persons authorized by law, shall have the authority to serve all processes and orders of the municipal court in the absence of sufficient designated employees of the court, and members of the police department shall have the authority to serve as bailiffs or constables at the discretion of the chief judge. (3)  Ministerial officers. It shall be the duty of the director of the code enforcement department or someone appointed for the purpose of serving as bailiffs, to attend every session, both regular and special, of the municipal court and to see that all witnesses and parties and a sufficient number of police officers to assist in the dispatch of the court's business are present. The bailiff shall be present at the arraignment of all city prisoners. (4)  Bailiffs. There shall be at least two bailiffs assigned to the court at all times. Under no circumstances shall the courtroom of this court be unattended by a bailiff while court is in session. It shall be the responsibility of the bailiffs to announce the arrival and departure of the judge. (5)  Docketing cases. In all cases it is hereby made the duty of the arresting officer or the chief of police to report the case as early as practicable and have the same information entered on the docket in conformity with the law. It is hereby made the duty of the clerk of court to see that all cases are listed on the docket and the clerk of court is charged with keeping the court dockets and with the entering, either by himself or some member appointed by the court for such purposes of all cases reported on the dockets as required by law. (6)  First appearance. All parties will be scheduled for initial appearance within 30 days following the date a party is cited for a violation, unless such a date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or other legal holiday, and in such an event, the appearance date is the next available court date. (7)  Arraignment date. The first appearance is the arraignment date, unless the party requests a continuance to consult with counsel. The court in most cases will always grant a request for a continuance to seek counsel and the party's next appearance will be considered arraignment. (8)  The public defender. The presiding judge shall assign the public defender to each party who is incarcerated and lacks representation upon appearance before the court. The public defender shall always explain to the accused all rights furnished to the accused under the state and the federal constitutions and the laws, particularly one's right to a jury trial. (Code 1985, § 10-26; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-89. - Convening and adjourning.     All adjournments of any session of the municipal court shall be announced in open court by the presiding judge. In the event of failure of any judge to appear at such a session within one hour after the opening of the same, unless ordered otherwise, it is hereby made the duty of the solicitor and public defender or a designated officer of the court, at the hour set for such sessions, to announce the adjournment of the same until the next regular session. The municipal court shall always be formally opened by the bailiff, by a calling to order with the statement:     "THIS COURT IS NOW IN SESSION." (Code 1985, § 10-27; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-90. - Summons, issuance, information required, service.     A summons or copy of charges, when employed, may be issued by the chief of police or any member of the police force, the director of the code enforcement department or any member of that department, and shall bear the test in the name of the presiding judge. They shall be directed to the defendant, state the date and hour the defendant is to appear and shall contain a summary or simple statement of the offense charged. Summonses shall be in duplicate, the original to be returned by the officer or police officer issuing the same and filed with an entry of service thereon with the clerk of court who shall have the charge entered on the docket. The duplicate shall be served on the defendant. (Code 1985, § 10-28; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-91. - Return of summons.     All summonses or warrants issued relative to cases in the municipal court shall be returnable on the date specified therein. (Code 1985, § 10-29; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-92. - Privileges of accused; right to subpoena, etc. (a)  The accused shall always be given the privilege of facing his or her accusers and the witnesses testifying against him or her, and either the accused or the accused's attorney shall be allowed full opportunity to cross-examine such witnesses. On application of the accused, made no later than ten days prior to any scheduled trial or hearing, it shall be the duty of the chief of police, the chief of police's deputy or any member of the police force of the city, or the director of the code enforcement department or any member of that department, to summon all witnesses residing within the city to appear on behalf of the accused at the time of the accused's trial, by regular subpoena. (b)  Where the accused is charged with an offense which has been adopted into this Code O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq., pertaining to motor vehicles and traffic, rules of the road, the accused shall have the option of having his or her case heard in the municipal court or demand a trial in state court. (Code 1985, § 10-30; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-93. - Pleadings by defendant. (a)  Alternatives. The following shall be the alternative pleads for defendants: (1)  A defendant may plead guilty, not guilty, or in the discretion of the court, nolo contendere. A plea of guilty or nolo contendere should be received only from the defendant personally in open court, except when the defendant is a corporation, in which a case plea may be entered by counsel or a corporate officer. (2)  A defendant may plead nolo contendere only with the consent of the court. Such a plea should be accepted by the court only after due consideration of the views of the parties and the interest of the public in the effective administration of justice. Procedurally, the plea of nolo contendere should be handled under these rules in a manner similar to a plea of guilty. (b)  Plea in absentia. Upon the request of a defendant who has made a knowing and intelligent waiver of his or her right to be present and signing a waiver form, and provided the defendant has tendered a cashier's check, bank check or money order, in an amount equal to the recommended bond, the clerk of court may accept pleas of guilty or nolo contendere with the approval of the chief judge. To be sure that the aforementioned waiver is knowing and intelligent, it must be in writing and attested to by counsel. (Code 1985, § 10-31; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-94. - Preparation of pleadings. (a)  Pleading from attorneys. All pleadings presented to the court or the clerk of court shall be typed, and shall be the originals, on opaque white paper measuring 8½" × 11" of a good quality, grade and weight. This court will accept facsimiles of pleas for the purpose of speed in pending cases, however the original plea must be received by the court or the clerk of court no later than five court working days to avoid the rejection of the facsimiles. (b)  Pro se pleading. The court will accept handwritten pleadings from anyone who is not represented by counsel, proved, such writing is printed legibly, in black ink, suitable for reproduction, on same size, grade, color, weight and quality paper as aforementioned in subsection (a) of this section. (c)  Handwritten pleadings by attorneys. The court is not inclined to accept handwritten pleadings prepared by counsel. Any attorney wishing to file such a plea will have to make a showing to the court as to the necessity for not complying with the rules of subsection (a) of this section. (d)  Requirements of pleadings. All pleadings filed by attorneys shall be signed by the attorney representing the accused and by the attorney who prepared the documents or pleadings, with the same information as required for pleadings filed in the state and superior court of the county under the uniform rules of said courts. (Code 1985, § 10-32; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Secs. 22-95—22-116. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - APPEARANCES BY ATTORNEYS IN COURT 
Sec. 22-117. - Transfer. (a)  Petitions for nolo contendere. No petitions for nolo contendere will be accepted by this court regarding driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI), driving under the influence of drugs or any other intoxicating substances. Any attorney representing a person in such a matter appearance shall be prepared to enter a plea of guilty, or not guilty before this court. (b)  Charges necessary for an attorney's appearance. An attorney who represents an individual charged with the following: (1)  Disorderly conduct; (2)  Driving under the influence of alcohol (DUI); (3)  Driving under the influence of drugs or any other intoxicating substances; (4)  Discharge of a firearm; (5)  Possession of marijuana; (6)  Shoplifting; (7)  Furnishing alcohol to a minor; (8)  Minor in possession or consumption of alcohol; (9)  Sniffing toxic [substance]; or (10)  Violation of any local ordinance or code provision; and who desires to file a motion to transfer to state court for jury trial must appear before the court using the same information as required for pleadings filed in the state and superior court of the county and present a prepared motion to transfer. The presiding judge of this court shall have the discretion to grant all motions. The court will rule on all motions to transfer to state court for jury trial within 15 days of the date received. (Code 1985, § 10-38; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-118. - Discretionary appearances.     Charges other than those listed in section 22-117 may be transferred without the attorney's personal appearance. The attorney should prepare an appropriate motion and order. The defendant may bring such motion and order to the clerk of court. (Code 1985, § 10-39; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-119. - Transfer after trial has been scheduled.     A motion to transfer after a written waiver of trial by jury has been properly executed shall be considered in the discretion of the chief judge of this court, provided the accused or the accused's attorney has complied with the rules applicable on pre-trial motions or transfer to state court for jury trials. (Code 1985, § 10-40; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-120. - Prohibition on ex parte communications.     All communications to the court pertaining to the matters of this court shall be addressed to the clerk of this court. No attorney shall contact the chief judge or interim judge on a pending matter out of the presence of the city solicitor, the city attorney or any other legal body assigned to represent the city on such a matter, especially when the particular matter is scheduled or will be scheduled for trial. However, an attorney is not prohibited from communicating with the solicitor or the city attorney for sake of clarity and time on a matter of the court. (Code 1985, § 10-41; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-121. - Appearance by attorney.     In all matters for consideration by this court, wherein a written plea is required by state law or the rules of this court, a personal appearance shall be made by the attorney representing the party unless otherwise excused by the presiding municipal court judge. Attorneys shall refer to these rules to determine when a personal appearance is required. When a personal appearance is required, it may be made by the attorney or any member of the attorney's law firm or professional corporation. (Code 1985, § 10-42; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-122. - Attorneys; right of appearance; restriction as to time of argument.     All attorneys appearing in behalf of any person summoned or being brought before this court, shall notify the clerk of court of such fact and have their names entered on the docket as counsel. Any failure or refusal on the part of any attorney to do so shall deprive him or her of the right to have notice of any other writs served upon him or her as such counsel. Counsel shall be given full opportunity to be heard on behalf of their clients; provided, that no arguments, whether of one counsel or more, shall exceed in the aggregate 30 minutes to the side. (Code 1985, § 10-43; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-123. - Withdrawal by an attorney.     After an attorney makes an appearance in this court, either in person or by written pleading filed of record to the court, the attorney shall comply with the requirement of Uniform Superior Court Rules regarding any effort to withdraw. (Code 1985, § 10-44; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-124. - Failure of attorney to comply.     The judge of this court shall perform the same guidelines with an attorney for failure to comply as summarized in the Uniform Superior Court Rules. (1)  Nonconformity of pleadings. Any attorney who fails to comply with the rules of this court in a substantial manner, when filing a petition or motion with the court is subject to a rejection of his or her pleading presented to the court. (2)  Contempt powers. The failure of an attorney to comply with the rules of this court or other required responsibilities of an attorney representing a client before the court shall subject the attorney to the contempt power of the court. (Code 1985, § 10-45; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-125. - Leaves of absence. (a)  Written motion required. Requests for leaves of absence of the defendant or counsel shall be submitted in writing to the chief judge or the presiding judge in the absence of the chief judge, accompanied by a listing of cases by case number, or citation number, name, and hearing date for which protection is required. (b)  Proposed order to be attached. Such request shall be accompanied by an appropriate order for signature if the petition is granted. The request must be filed at least seven business days prior to the date the leave is to commence, unless upon showing of exigent circumstance, such time should be shortened. (c)  Order is required. Leave will not be granted merely by stipulation or agreement of counsel and the solicitor. An order is required to be signed granting the leave by the chief judge or the presiding judge in the absence of the chief judge. (Code 1985, § 10-46; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-126. - Pre-trial motions. (a)  Filing with municipal court clerk of court. Any attorney desiring to file pre-trial or pre-arraignment motions in this court shall do so as soon as possible after being retained or as soon as practicable after the initial appearance in this court. Such motions shall be filed with the clerk of court. (b)  Discretionary filing with court. If the party has already been arraigned and scheduled for a trial, pre-trial motions may be filed only with special leave of the court, and only then after reasonable prior notice has been given to the solicitor of the court. As part of such filing, counsel must certify that contact has been made with the solicitor and that the solicitor does or does not object to such filing. (c)  Place of filing. Any motion not filed with the court in an open session of the court shall be filed with the office of clerk of this court. (d)  Location of the recording office of clerk of court. The office of the clerk of court is presently located in the Albany-Dougherty Judicial Building. Any future relocation of the said office shall be posted by the chief judge with notice to the city commission, city manager, chief of police, the Dougherty Circuit Bar, and the general public in the legal organ of the county twice a week for at least 30 days prior to moving the said office. (e)  Hearing on motions. Each motion that requires a hearing shall include an attached rule nisi and shall show an appropriate certificate of service to the solicitor. (Code 1985, § 10-47; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-127. - Conduct of trial.     All trials in the municipal court shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by the presiding judge; provided, however, that in all cases the city or the accuser shall first be required to make out or substantiate the charges brought. The accused shall then have the full opportunity to present his or her defense, with the right of the city or the accuser to follow the defense with any testimony, which shall be only in rebuttal of such defense. After either side has closed its argument, the case will not be reopened, except in the discretion of the court, for the purpose of introducing further testimony. If there is to be argument in the trial of any case, the city or accuser shall have the opening and closing argument, except where the accused offers no defense other than the accused's statement, in which event the accused shall be allowed the opening and conclusion. (Code 1985, § 10-48; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-128. - Subpoenas; issuance; information required; service.     All subpoenas issued by the municipal court shall bear test in the name of the chief judge. They shall be directed to the witness, shall contain a brief statement of the case, the time set for trial and the time the witness shall appear. All subpoenas shall be served personally on the parties or the court shall have the authority to serve subpoenas or summons by return receipt certified U.S. postal mail. (Code 1985, § 10-49; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-129. - Attachments for contempt.     In all cases of contempt by disobedience of summons or subpoenas, the presiding judge of the court shall issue an attachment or bench warrant, to be served by any officer or member of the police force of the city, for the arrest of the party offending to be brought before the court to show cause why he or she should not be held in contempt. (Code 1985, § 10-50; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-130. - Continuance.     If it shall be made to appear to the presiding judge at any session of the municipal court that the defendant has been, for sufficient reason, unable to prepare his or her defense and the court in its discretion deems such reason sufficient, such case or trial of the same may be continued to such future hours or date as the court may deem proper. (Code 1985, § 10-51; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-131. - Trials. (a)  Trial date. All trials are scheduled on a day certain at the arraignment. The court will rely on counsel to promptly notify this court of any conflicts in their schedule. (b)  Continuance after trial has been scheduled. Continuances will not be granted merely by agreement of the counsel and the solicitor. Any party seeking a continuance after a trial has been scheduled, may do so by written motion to the chief judge or the presiding judge in the absence of the chief judge, only after prior notice to the solicitor, and such continuance may be granted at the court's discretion. (c)  Special settings of the court. Special settings of action for times and dates that the court does not regularly meet are not favored but may be granted in special circumstances. (Code 1985, § 10-52; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Secs. 22-132—22-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BAIL, BOND, AND FINES 
Sec. 22-161. - Bail/bonds. (a)  Appearance bonds—Generally. All persons arrested by authority of the city, under warrant, attachment or other writ, shall, before being released from custody, be required to give a bond in such amount and such solvent security, either personal, property, or cash, as shall be approved by the chief judge or chief of police, with the express consent of the board of commissioners of the city, conditioned for the appearance of the accused at the session of the municipal court to which the case may be returnable and from session to session thereafter until the case is disposed of. Such a bond shall be filed with the city treasury department to be safely kept and, upon a breach thereof, such bonds shall be forfeited as is provided in Charter section 24(9); provided, that no cash deposit shall be returned to the principal or the owner except upon written order of the presiding judge. (b)  Same—Proceedings to forfeit; scire facias. Upon call of the case where a bond for personal appearance has been given and the defendant, after being called into court, does not appear, the surety shall be notified to present the body of his or her principal. If not presented, the surety shall be in default, whereupon it shall be the duty of the presiding judge to have the bond adjudged forfeited and scire facias issued, in terms of the law. (c)  Execution of bail or bond. Any person for whom bail or bond has been set may execute the bail or bond with or without sureties. (d)  Release from jail. Municipal court offenders, charged with bondable offenses, may be released from jail after executing an appearance bond in one of the three prescribed methods: (1)  Cash; (2)  Surety (bonding company); and (3)  Property. Recognizance is a method of release but shall not be considered as a bond. a.  Cash bonds. The principal will be required to pay the bond amount and sign the bond agreement. b.  Surety bonds. Sureties will be required to sign the appearance bond. c.  Property bonds. The principal will be required to produce photographic identification and a tax receipt for the property intended to secure the bond. d.  Investigation of property bonds. The municipal court clerk will research the property on the tax digest and the amount of the bond to determine that the tax assessed value of the property, as indicated in the tax digest, is sufficient to cover the amount of the bond. Property bonds in excess of $5,000.00 shall not be approved without the prior approval of the city attorney or the city attorney's designee. e.  Appearance bond and security deed. If a property bond is approved, the principal will be required to execute the appearance bond and a security deed. The treasurer's office or the code enforcement department shall prepare the security deed by including the brief description of the property found on the tax digest (lot, block, and subdivision) on the deed along with pertinent information. f.  Filing. The original appearance bond and the security deed are to placed in a separate file marked "Municipal Court Appearance Bonds" and placed with the municipal court jail paperwork. (Code 1985, § 10-53; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-162. - Municipal court procedures for bonds. (a)  The municipal clerk of court will file the appearance bond documents in a calendar file. The bonds will be retrievable according to the defendant's scheduled court date. The security deed will be given to the court solicitor for review, and then forwarded to the clerk of superior court for filing. Deeds returned by the clerk of court office's will be stored in an office vault. (b)  At the conclusion of each court session, prior to the issuance of bench warrants for failure to appear, the clerk will identify all cases in which appearance bonds have been made. In addition to issuing a warrant, the clerk shall forward a "notice failure to appear" to the named principal/surety. (c)  Service upon the principal/surety will be made by certified mail. (d)  At the conclusion of each court session, prior to re-filing cases where a final disposition has been entered, the clerk shall identify all cases where the defendant was released pursuant to a property appearance bond. The clerk shall retrieve from the vault, the security deeds associated with disposed of case and present them to the city solicitor for cancellation. (e)  Should the principal/surety fail to produce the defendant when the case is sounded on the forfeiture docket, a judgment will be issued against the principal/surety. (f)  The solicitor will be responsible for recording all judgments and canceling all security deeds. (g)  All bonds are subject to final approval by the municipal court clerk. (Code 1985, § 10-54; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-163. - Conflicts with schedule by an attorney.     Attorneys who have conflicts, as determined by the conditions of Uniform Superior Court Rule, and desire a continuance based thereon shall submit a written motion to the court, with a certificate of service to the solicitor. Such continuances will be liberally granted by this court, where such conflicts exist as a result of a prior scheduled appearance in state or federal court or, where there are other circumstances warranting a continuance. (Code 1985, § 10-55; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-164. - Bonds and fines.     The amounts set for bail, bonds, and fines shall be as established by the city board of commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the municipal court clerk's office and the city treasurer's office. (Code 1985, § 10-56; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000; Ord. No. 02-114, § 1, 5-28-2002; Ord. No. 02-121, § 1, 6-26-2002; Ord. No. 08-106, 3-25-2008) 
Sec. 22-165. - Administrative fees; collected.     There shall be collected by the municipal court in every case in which a fine is levied and collected, in addition to such fine and all other costs and fees presently imposed, an additional amount for an administrative fee. The amount of the administrative fee shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the office of the municipal court clerk. (Code 1985, § 10-57; Ord. No. 03-129, §§ 1, 2, 9-2-2003) 
Sec. 22-166. - Public access to the court.     This court shall operate on the principle that the central purpose of a criminal trial is to decide the factual questions of the defendant's guilt or innocence, Delaware v. Van Arsdall, 475 U.S. 673, 681 (1986). To this end it is important that all persons have an opportunity to view the court's operation. Consequently, all school groups, church groups or other public groups are encouraged to visit the court. Upon two days written notice to the clerk of this court of a desire to visit the court, as a group, an effort will be made to reserve sufficient seating, providing the presiding judge approves the request. (Code 1985, § 10-58; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-167. - Amendment of records.     In all pending cases, the chief judge or presiding judge in open court shall have the authority at any time, to amend and have properly executed or served all subpoenas, summonses or other writs and docket entries, issued or entered in such cases, for the purpose of having the same conform to the law, city ordinances or this chapter and, to this end, is vested with the authority to have the same reissued, reserved or re-entered as the case may be; provided, that such authority conferred by this section shall not be exercised after a case is regularly called and one or more witnesses have testified therein. No such amendment or alteration shall contain or amend any charge or offense other than the original charge or offense upon which the defendant is brought or summoned before the court. (Code 1985, § 10-59; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-168. - Collection of fines.     It shall be the duty of the chief of police to promptly collect all fines when a fine has been imposed by the municipal court. The offender shall remain in the custody of the chief of police or in confinement in the jail until the fine is paid or until such person is discharged by due course of law, except as otherwise provided by law. (Code 1985, § 10-60; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-169. - Report of fines.     It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to make a written report to the city commission monthly giving the amount of the fines imposed in the court and the amount collected. (Code 1985, § 10-61; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-170. - Collection of additional cost for operation and maintenance of law library.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-15-9, as amended by the Acts of the General Assembly, and effective immediately upon the adoption of this section, there shall be collected by municipal court in every case in municipal court involving the violation of a criminal ordinance or statute in which a fine is levied and collected and, in addition to such fine and all other costs and fees, an additional amount of $2.00 to be used for the operation and maintenance of Dougherty County Law Library. (Code 1985, § 10-63; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-171. - Collection of additional cost for support of the domestic violence response team.     Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1, as amended by the Acts of the General Assembly and effective immediately upon the adoption of this section, there shall be collected by the municipal court, in every case in municipal court involving the violation of a criminal ordinance or statute in which a fine is levied and collected, in addition to such fine and all other costs and fees, an additional amount of $3.00 to be used to support the domestic violence crisis response team, provided the maximum fine allowable by law is not exceeded. (Code 1985, § 10-64; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Sec. 22-172. - Conflict to the court.     To avoid the perception, and to eliminate the slightest doubt of bias in the eyes of the public, and to avoid an appearance of favoritism or the appearance of nepotism of this court, if a member of the court discovers a case of conflict exists, this court should cease to dispose of such a case. All cases involving the mayor and commissioners, city manager, chief of police, city attorney, all appointed officers of this court or any of their immediate family shall be prohibited from being heard or seeking disposition in municipal court. The immediate family shall be the husband, wife, father, mother, sister, brother, children, mother-in-law or father-in-law. Such a case must be transferred to state court for disposition on a companion charge of the same. (Code 1985, § 10-65; Ord. No. 00-133, § 1, 7-25-2000) 
Chapter 24 - ELECTIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
Sec. 24-1. - Municipal superintendent; joint county municipal board of registration and elections for the county and the city so designated.     Pursuant to the Act of the General Assembly of Georgia of 1986 creating the Joint County Municipal Board of Registration and Elections for the county and the city (1986 Ga. Laws, p. 3831), the joint county municipal board of registration and elections for the county and the city is hereby appointed municipal superintendent for the city. (Code 1975, § 10-1; Code 1985, § 11-1; Ord. No. 87-169, § 1, 8-25-1987; Ord. No. 87-187, § 1, 10-13-1987) 
Sec. 24-2. - Absentee ballot clerk; chief registrar so designated.     The chief registrar shall, by virtue of office, be the absentee ballot clerk. (Code 1975, § 10-2; Code 1985, § 11-2) 
Sec. 24-3. - Primaries; manner of defraying expenses.     The city shall defray all expenses of primaries to the maximum extent authorized by O.C.G.A. § 21-2-156. (Code 1985, § 11-4; Ord. No. 81-155, §§ 1, 6, 5-12-1981; Ord. No. 84-161, § 1, 7-24-1984) 
Sec. 24-4. - Wards.     The city proper shall be divided into six wards according to the following descriptions of each of said wards as reapportioned in accordance with the census of 2010:     Ward 1: Ward 1 shall include that eastern portion of the City of Albany, more particularly described as follows: From the point of beginning at the intersection of Clark Avenue and North Maple Street, proceed north on North Maple Street for 8,625 feet, more or less, to the intersection of North Maple Street and Cromartie Beach Drive. From the intersection of North Maple Street and Cromartie Beach Drive, continue north along the center line of a driveway and then a drainage ditch for 275 feet, more or less, to a point on the northern city limit boundary of Albany, Georgia which is also the southern bank of Lake Chehaw. From this point on the northern city limit boundary of Albany, Georgia, follow the city limit line in a generally easterly direction for 27,821 feet, more or less, to a point where the city limit boundary intersects the west bank of Piney Woods Creek. From said point on the west bank of Piney Woods Creek, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limits boundary in a southerly, then westerly direction, for 8,300 feet, more or less, to a point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary intersects the right-of-way of McCollum Drive. From said point, proceed south along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 4,310 feet, more or less, to a point on the northern right-of-way of Cordele Road. From said point on the northern right-of-way of Cordele Road, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a southeasterly direction for 500 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a northeasterly direction for 350 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a southerly direction for 686 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue due west along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 1,120 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a southerly direction for 2,050 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a westerly direction for 285 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a southerly direction for 470 feet, more or less, to a point on the south right-of-way of Clark Avenue. From said point, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 1,910 feet, more or less, to a point on the west right-of-way of Pine Bluff Road. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a southerly direction for 6,065 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in an easterly direction for 828 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a southerly direction for 645 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a westerly direction for 825 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a southerly direction for 340 feet, more or less, to a point on the north right-of-way of the Georgia Florida Railnet. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a westerly direction for 6,675 feet, more or less, to a point on the east right-of-way of South Mock Road. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a southerly direction, parallel to South Mock Road for 2,800 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a westerly direction, parallel to Cutts Drive, for 2,918 feet, more or less, to a point on the northeast right-of-way of Georgia Florida Railnet. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a northwesterly direction for 4,625 feet, more or less, to a point where the Albany, Georgia city limits boundary intersects the right-of-way for Liberty Expressway, SE. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a southerly, then southwesterly, direction for 6,512 feet, more or less, to a point on the northeast right-of-way for Moultrie Road. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a northwesterly direction, parallel to Moultrie Road, for 1,358 feet, more or less, to a point on the east right-of-way for Georgia Florida Railnet. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a southerly direction for 67 feet, more or less, to a point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary intersects the centerline of Moultrie Road. From the point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary intersects the centerline of Moultrie Road, proceed northwest along the centerline of Moultrie Road for 6,425 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Moultrie Road with Radium Springs Road. From the intersection of Moultrie Road with Radium Springs Road, proceed in a northerly direction along Radium Springs Road for 1,589 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Crawford Drive with Radium Springs Road. From the intersection of Crawford Drive with Radium Springs Road, continue for 2,175 feet, more or less, in an easterly, then southerly direction along Crawford Drive to the intersection of Crawford Drive with Mitchell Avenue. From the intersection of Crawford Drive with Mitchell Avenue, proceed east on Mitchell Avenue for 406 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Mitchell Avenue and South Street. From the intersection of Mitchell Avenue and South Street, proceed north on South Street for 608 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Street with Dunes Avenue. From the intersection of South Street with Dunes Avenue, proceed east on Dunes Avenue for 815 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Dunes Avenue and Rood Street. From the intersection of Dunes Avenue and Rood Street, go south on Rood Street for 550 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Rood Street and Mitchell Avenue. From the intersection of Mitchell Avenue and Rood Street, proceed east on Mitchell Avenue for 410 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Frotscher Street and Mitchell Avenue. From the intersection of Frotscher Street and Mitchell Avenue, go north on Frotscher Street for 615 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Frotscher Street with Dunes Avenue. From the intersection of Frotscher Street with Dunes Avenue, proceed east on Dunes Avenue for 435 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Dunes Avenue and Van Deman Street. From the intersection of Dunes Avenue and Van Deman Street, continue south along Van Deman Street for 550 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Van Deman Street and Mitchell Avenue. From the intersection of Van Deman Street and Mitchell Avenue, proceed east on Mitchell Avenue for 610 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Mitchell Avenue with Mobile Avenue. From the intersection of Mitchell Avenue with Mobile Avenue, continue in a generally northerly direction on Mobile Avenue for 1,570 feet, more or less, the intersection of Mobile Avenue with Silica Drive. From the intersection of Mobile Avenue with Silica Drive, follow Silica Drive east, then south, then east for 2,300 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Silica Drive with the Georgia Florida Railnet. From the intersection of Silica Drive with the Georgia Florida Railnet, proceed north along the Georgia Florida Railnet for 2,478 feet, more or less to the intersection of the Georgia Florida Railnet and East Oglethorpe Boulevard. From the intersection of the Georgia Florida Railnet and East Oglethorpe Boulevard, go east on East Oglethorpe Boulevard for 356 feet, more or less, the intersection of East Oglethorpe Boulevard with a rail line of the Georgia Florida Railnet. From the intersection of East Oglethorpe Boulevard with the rail line of the Georgia Florida Railnet, proceed northwest along the rail line for 1,920 feet, more or less, to its intersection with East Broad Avenue. From the intersection of the Georgia Florida Railnet with East Broad Avenue, go east on East Broad Avenue for 22 feet, more or less, to the intersection of East Broad Avenue and Old Blaylock Lane. From the intersection of East Broad Avenue and Old Blaylock Lane, proceed north, then northeast around a curb, for 1040 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Old Blaylock Lane with Blaylock Street. From the intersection of Old Blaylock Lane with Blaylock Street, proceed in a generally northerly direction along Blaylock Street for 275 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Blaylock Street and Clark Avenue. From the intersection of Blaylock Street and Clark Avenue, proceed east on Clark Avenue for 2,850 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Clark Avenue with North Maple Street, which, is also the point of beginning.     Ward 2: Ward 2 shall include that north central portion of the City of Albany, more particularly described as follows: From the point of beginning at the intersection of Clark Avenue and Maple Street, proceed North on North Maple Street for 8,625 feet, more or less, to the intersection of North Maple Street and Cromartie Beach Drive. From the intersection of Maple Street and Cromartie Beach Drive, continue north along the center line of a driveway and then a drainage ditch for 275 feet, more or less, to a point on the northern city limit boundary of Albany, Georgia which is also the southern bank of Lake Chehaw. From this point on the southern bank of Lake Chehaw, proceed in a generally northwesterly direction, following the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, for 23,565 feet, more or less, to a point on the southwest bank of Kinchafoonee Creek where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary intersects the county boundary line separating Lee and Dougherty County. From said point on the southwest bank of Kinchafoonee Creek and the Lee/Dougherty County Boundary, proceed west for 9,555 feet, more or less along the Lee/Dougherty County boundary line to a point in the right-of-way of Ledo Road, where the Lee/Dougherty County boundary line intersects Nottingham Way. From the point where the Lee/Dougherty County boundary line intersects Nottingham Way, follow Nottingham Way south for 1,900 feet, more or less, to the point where Nottingham Way intersects the south right-of-way boundary for Liberty Expressway. From said point on the south right-of-way boundary of Liberty Expressway, proceed for 2,740 feet, more or less, a southeasterly direction, to a point where Elton Street intersects the south right-of-way boundary for Liberty Expressway. From said point where Elton Street intersects the south right-of-way boundary for Liberty Expressway, proceed south on Elton Street for 1,130 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Elton Street and Stuart Avenue. From the intersection of Elton Street and Stuart Avenue, go due east on Stuart Avenue for 6,200 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Stuart Avenue with North Slappey Boulevard. From the intersection of Stuart Avenue with North Slappey Boulevard, proceed south on North Slappey Boulevard for 9,315 feet, more or less, to the intersection of North Slappey Boulevard and West Society Avenue. From the intersection of North Slappey Boulevard and West Society Avenue, continue east on West Society Avenue for 2,375 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Society Avenue and North Van Buren Street. From the intersection of West Society Avenue and North Van Buren Street, Follow North Van Buren Street in a generally southeasterly direction, around a curve to the east, for 635 feet, more or less, to the intersection of North Van Buren Street and West Tift Avenue. From the intersection of North Van Buren Street and West Tift Avenue, proceed east on West Tift Avenue for 5,090 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Tift Avenue with North Washington Street. From the intersection of West Tift Avenue with North Washington Street, go south on North Washington Street for 1,067 feet, more or less, to the intersection of North Washington Street and Norfolk Southern Railroad. From the intersection of North Washington Street and Norfolk Southern Railroad, follow the Norfolk Southern Railroad track in a northeasterly direction for 1,175 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Norfolk Southern Railroad with Georgia Florida Railnet. From the intersection of Norfolk Southern Railroad with Georgia Florida Railnet, proceed in a generally southeasterly direction along the track of Georgia Florida Railnet for 2,241 feet, more or less, to a point that is at the intersection of Georgia Florida Railnet with the center of the Flint River. From said point, proceed in a southerly direction along the centerline of the Flint River for 1,120 feet, more or less, to the point where the centerline of the Flint River intersects with the centerline for East Oglethorpe Drive. From the point where the centerline of the Flint River intersects with the centerline for East Oglethorpe Boulevard, follow East Oglethorpe Boulevard in a generally easterly direction for 8,352 feet, more or less, to a point where East Oglethorpe Boulevard intersects the eastern most line of the Georgia Florida Railnet. From the point where East Oglethorpe Boulevard intersects the eastern most line of the Georgia Florida Railnet, proceed in a northwesterly direction along Georgia Florida Railnet for 1,919 feet, more or less, to the point where the centerline of the Georgia Florida Railnet intersects the centerline of East Broad Avenue. From the point where the centerline of the Georgia Florida Railnet intersects the centerline of East Broad Avenue, continue east on East Broad Avenue for 22 feet, more or less, to the intersection of East Broad Avenue and Old Blaylock Lane. From the intersection of East Broad Avenue and Old Blaylock Lane, follow Old Blaylock Lane north then around a curve to the northeast, for 1,045 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Old Blalock Lane and Blaylock Street. From the intersection of Old Blalock Lane and Blaylock Street, continue in a generally northerly direction on Blaylock Street for 270 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Blaylock Street with Clark Avenue. From the intersection of Blaylock Street with Clark Avenue, proceed east along Clark Avenue for 2,851 feet, more or less, to its intersection with North Maple Street, which, is also the point of beginning.     Ward 3: Ward 3 shall include that central portion of the City of Albany, more particularly described as follows: From the point of beginning at the intersection of Stuart Avenue with North Slappey Boulevard, proceed south on North Slappey Boulevard for 9,315 feet, more or less, to the intersection of North Slappey Boulevard and West Society Avenue. From the intersection of North Slappey Boulevard and West Society Avenue, continue east on West Society Avenue for 2,375 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Society Avenue and North Van Buren Street. From the intersection of West Society Avenue and North Van Buren Street, go in a generally southeasterly direction, around a curve to the east, for 635 feet, more or less, to the intersection of North Van Buren Street and West Tift Avenue. From the intersection of North Van Buren Street and West Tift Avenue, proceed east on West Tift Avenue for 5,090 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Tift Avenue with North Washington Street. From the intersection of West Tift Avenue with North Washington Street, go south on North Washington Street for 1,067 feet, more or less, to the intersection of North Washington Street and Norfolk Southern Railroad. From the intersection of North Washington Street and Norfolk Southern Railroad, follow the Norfolk Southern Railroad track in a northeasterly direction for 1,175 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Norfolk Southern Railroad with Georgia Florida Railnet. From the intersection of Norfolk Southern Railroad with Georgia Florida Railnet, proceed in a generally southeasterly direction along the track of Georgia Florida Railnet for 2,241 feet, more or less, to a point that is at the intersection of Georgia Florida Railnet with the center of the Flint River. From said point, proceed in a southerly direction along the centerline of the Flint River for 672 feet, more or less, to the point where the centerline of the Flint River intersects with the centerline of East Broad Avenue. From the point where the centerline of the Flint River intersects with the centerline of East Broad Avenue, go west on East Broad Avenue for 571 feet, more or less, to the intersection of East Broad Avenue and South Front Street. From the intersection of East Broad Avenue and South Front Street, proceed in a southerly direction, then around a sharp curve to the west, for 2,609 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Front Street and Mercer Avenue, at which point, South Front Street makes a 90 degree turn to the south. From the intersection of South Front Street and Mercer Avenue, continue south, then west, along South Front Street for 4,583 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Front Street with South Jackson Street. From the intersection of South Front Street with South Jackson Street, proceed south on South Jackson Street for 702 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Jackson Street and Alice Avenue. From the intersection of South Jackson Street and Alice Avenue, go west on Alice Avenue for 2,560 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Alice Avenue with South Madison Street. From the intersection of Alice Avenue with South Madison Street, go north on South Madison Street for 390 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Madison Street and Jefferies Avenue. From the intersection of South Madison Street and Jefferies Avenue, continue west on Jefferies Avenue for 1,003 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Jefferies Avenue with Newton Road. From the intersection of Jefferies Avenue with Newton Road, proceed in a southwesterly direction for 300 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Newton Road and Lippitt Drive. From the intersection of Newton Road and Lippitt Drive, go west along Lippitt Drive for 3,360 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Lippitt Drive with South Slappey Boulevard. From the intersection of Lippitt Drive with South Slappey Boulevard, proceed north on South Slappey Boulevard for 3,555 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Slappey Boulevard and West Lincoln Avenue. From the intersection of South Slappey Boulevard and West Lincoln Avenue, go west along West Lincoln Avenue for 2,365 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Lincoln Avenue and Walnut Street. From the intersection of West Lincoln Avenue and Walnut Street, go south on Walnut Street for 280 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Walnut Street and West Gordon Avenue. From the intersection of Walnut Street and West Gordon Avenue, proceed west on West Gordon Avenue for 1,162 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Gordon Avenue and Elm Street. From the intersection of West Gordon Avenue and Elm Street, proceed north on Elm Street for 355 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Elm Street and West Lincoln Avenue. From the intersection of Elm Street and West Lincoln Avenue, go west on West Lincoln Avenue for 850 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Lincoln Avenue with South Magnolia Street. From the intersection of West Lincoln Avenue and South Magnolia Street, follow South Magnolia Street north for 2,331 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Magnolia Street with Norfolk Southern Railroad. From the intersection of South Magnolia Street with Norfolk Southern Railroad, continue along the Norfolk Southern Railroad track in a northeasterly direction for 4,645 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Norfolk Southern Railroad and North Slappey Boulevard. From the intersection of Norfolk Southern Railroad and North Slappey Boulevard, go north on North Slappey Boulevard for 765 feet, more or less, to the intersection of North Slappey Boulevard and Dawson Road. From the intersection of North Slapppey Boulevard and Dawson Road, continue along Dawson Road in a northwesterly direction for 13,160 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Dawson Road with Whispering Pines Road. From the intersection of Dawson Road with Whispering Pines Road, proceed in an easterly direction along Whispering Pines Road for 3,675 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Whispering Pines Road with Forest Glen Drive. From the intersection of Whispering Pines Road with Forest Glen Drive, go north on Forest Glen Drive for 1032 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Forest Glen Drive and Sharon Avenue. From the intersection of Forest Glen Drive and Sharon Avenue, go west on Sharon Avenue for 224 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Sharon Avenue and Elton Street. From the intersection of Sharon Avenue and Elton Street, go north along Elton Street for 1,239 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Elton Street and Stuart Avenue. From the intersection of Elton Street and Stuart Avenue, proceed east along Stuart Avenue for 6,207 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Stuart Avenue with North Slappey Boulevard which is also the point of beginning.     Ward 4: Ward 4 shall include that southwestern portion of the city of Albany, more particularly described as follows: From the point of beginning at the intersection of North Slapppey Boulevard and Dawson Road, proceed along Dawson Road in a northwesterly direction for 13,160 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Dawson Road with Westgate Drive. From the intersection of Dawson Road with Westgate Drive, proceed in a southwesterly direction along Westgate Drive for 4,799 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Westgate Drive and North Westover Boulevard. From the intersection of Westgate Drive and North Westover Boulevard, go south on North Westover Boulevard for 5,013 feet, more or less, to the intersection of North Westover Boulevard and Gillionville Road, at which point, continuing in a southerly direction the street name changes from North Westover Boulevard to South Westover Boulevard. From the intersection of South Westover Boulevard and Gillionville Road, continue in a generally southern direction, coincident with the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 6,212 feet, more or less, to a point in the right-of way of South Westover Boulevard, where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary turns due west. From said point, follow the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary west for 2,498 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, follow the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary north for 662 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a generally westerly direction for 6,540 feet, more or less, to a point in the right-of-way for Lockett Station Road. From said point in the right-of-way for Lockett Station Road, continue north along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, parallel to Lockett Station Road, for 4,954 feet, more or less, to a point in the right-of way for Gillionville Road. From said point in the right-of way for Gillionville Road, follow the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary west, parallel to Gillionville Road, for 4,295 feet, more or less, to a point, at which point, the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary turns due north, perpendicular to Gillionville Road. From said point, proceed north along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 2,062 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue west along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 2,351 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue south along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 1,696 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 508 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue south along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 348 feet, more or less, to a point in the right-of-way for Gillionville Road. From said point, continue west along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, parallel to Gillionville Road, for 520 feet, more or less, to a point, at which point the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary turns due south, perpendicular to Gillionville Road. From said point, continue south along the Albany, Georgia City limit boundary for 3,214 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 2,143 feet, more or less, to a point in the middle of the Cooleewahee Creek. From said point in the middle of the Cooleewahee Creek, follow the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, coincident with the centerline for Cooleewahee Creek, in a generally southwesterly direction, for 4,078 feet, more or less, to a point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary diverges from the centerline for Cooleewahee Creek. From said point, continue south along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 10,468 feet to a point. From said point, follow the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary east for 18,397 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue north along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 2,221 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 677 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue north along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 95 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 563 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue north along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 133 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 2,653 feet, more or less, to a point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary intersects Old Pretoria Road. From said point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary intersects Old Pretoria Road, proceed in a generally northeasterly direction along Old Pretoria Road for 1,495 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Old Pretoria Road and West Oakridge Drive. From the intersection of Old Pretoria Road and West Oakridge Drive, continue east on West Oakridge Drive for 2,433 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Oakridge Drive and Westtown Road. From the intersection of West Oakridge Drive and Westtown Road, proceed north on Westtown Road for 3,625 feet, more or less, to the second railroad track crossing. From the intersection of Westtown Road and the second railroad track crossing, which is a side track of Norfolk Southern Railroad, follow the railroad track in a generally northwesterly direction for 4,352 feet, more or less, to the intersection of said railroad track and West Gordon Avenue. From the intersection of said railroad track and West Gordon Avenue, proceed west on West Gordon Avenue for 628 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Gordon Avenue with South Valencia Drive. From the intersection of West Gordon Avenue with South Valencia Drive, go north on South Valencia Drive for 2,150 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Valencia Drive and the Norfolk Southern Railroad track. From the intersection of South Valencia Drive and the Norfolk Southern Railroad track, follow the railroad track in a northeasterly direction for 6,480 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the Norfolk Southern Railroad track with North Slappey Boulevard. From the intersection of the Norfolk Southern Railroad track with North Slappey Boulevard, proceed north on North Slappey Boulevard for 714 feet, more or less, to the intersection of North Slappey Boulevard and Dawson Road which is also the point of beginning.     Ward 5: Ward 5 shall include that northwestern portion of the city of Albany, more particularly described as follows: From the point of beginning at the intersection of Dawson Road with Whispering Pines Road, proceed in an easterly direction along Whispering Pines Road for 3,675 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Whispering Pines Road with Forest Glen Drive. From the intersection of Whispering Pines Road with Forest Glen Drive, go north on Forest Glen Drive for 1032 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Forest Glen Drive and Sharon Avenue. From the intersection of Forest Glen Drive and Sharon Avenue, go west on Sharon Avenue for 224 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Sharon Avenue and Elton Street. From the intersection of Sharon Avenue and Elton Street, go north along Elton Street for 2,389 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Elton Street with a point on the south right-of way for Liberty Expressway. From the intersection of Elton Street with said point on the south right-of way for Liberty Expressway, follow the south right-of-way boundary for Liberty Expressway in a westerly direction for 2,740 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the south right-of-way boundary for Liberty Expressway with Nottingham Way. Form the intersection of the south right-of-way boundary for Liberty Expressway with Nottingham Way, proceed north on Nottingham Way for 1,934 feet, more or less, to a point where Nottingham Way intersects the northern city limit boundary for the City of Albany, Georgia. From said point where Nottingham Way intersects the northern city limit boundary for the City of Albany, Georgia, follow the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary west for 17,680 feet, more or less, to a point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary takes a ninety degree turn to the south. From said point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary takes a ninety degree turn to the south, continue south along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 10,012 feet, more or less, to a point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary takes a ninety degree turn to the east. From said point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary takes a ninety degree turn to the east, continue east for 6,274 feet, more or less, to a point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary takes a ninety degree turn to the north. From said where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary takes a ninety degree turn to the north, continue north along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 1,145 feet, more or less, to a point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary takes a ninety degree turn to the east. From said point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary takes a ninety degree turn to the east, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 1,603 feet, more or less, to a point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary intersects the right-of-way for Beattie Road. From said point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary intersects Beattie Road, proceed in a generally southerly direction along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, and parallel to Beattie Road, for 4,669 feet, more or less, to a point on the south right-of-way for Gillionville Road where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary takes a ninety degree turn to the east. From said point on the south right-of-way for Gillionville Road, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, and parallel to Gillionville Road, for 5,600 feet, more or less, to a point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary intersects North Westover Boulevard. From said point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary intersects North Westover Boulevard, proceed north on North Westover Boulevard for 5,030 feet, more or less, the intersection of North Westover Boulevard and Westgate Drive. From the intersection of North Westover Boulevard and Westgate Drive, proceed in a generally northeasterly direction for 4,798 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Westgate Drive and Dawson Road which is also the point of beginning.     Ward 6: Ward 6 shall include that south central portion of the City of Albany, more particularly described as follows: From a point of beginning at the intersection of East Broad Avenue and South Front Street, proceed in a southerly direction, then around a sharp curve to the west, for 2,609 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Front Street and Mercer Avenue, at which point, South Front Street makes a 90 degree turn to the south. From the intersection of South Front Street and Mercer Avenue, continue south, then west, along South Front Street for 4,583 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Front Street with South Jackson Street. From the intersection of South Front Street with South Jackson Street, proceed south on South Jackson Street for 702 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Jackson Street and Alice Avenue. From the intersection of South Jackson Street and Alice Avenue, go west on Alice Avenue for 2,560 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Alice Avenue with South Madison Street. From the intersection of Alice Avenue with South Madison Street, go north on South Madison Street for 390 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Madison Street and Jefferies Avenue. From the intersection of South Madison Street and Jefferies Avenue, continue west on Jefferies Avenue for 1,003 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Jefferies Avenue with Newton Road. From the intersection of Jefferies Avenue with Newton Road, proceed in a southwesterly direction for 300 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Newton Road and Lippitt Drive. From the intersection of Newton Road and Lippitt Drive, go west along Lippitt Drive for 3,360 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Lippitt Drive with South Slappey Boulevard. From the intersection of Lippitt Drive with South Slappey Boulevard, proceed north on South Slappey Boulevard for 3,555 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Slappey Boulevard and West Lincoln Avenue. From the intersection of South Slappey Boulevard and West Lincoln Avenue, go west along West Lincoln Avenue for 2,365 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Lincoln Avenue and Walnut Street. From the intersection of West Lincoln Avenue and Walnut Street, go south on Walnut Street for 280 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Walnut Street and West Gordon Avenue. From the intersection of Walnut Street and West Gordon Avenue, proceed west on West Gordon Avenue for 1,162 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Gordon Avenue and Elm Street. From the intersection of West Gordon Avenue and Elm Street, proceed north on Elm Street for 355 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Elm Street and West Lincoln Avenue. From the intersection of Elm Street and West Lincoln Avenue, go west on West Lincoln Avenue for 850 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Lincoln Avenue with South Magnolia Street. From the intersection of West Lincoln Avenue and South Magnolia Street, follow South Magnolia Street north for 2,331 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Magnolia Street with Norfolk Southern Railroad. From the intersection of South Magnolia Street with Norfolk Southern Railroad, continue along the Norfolk Southern Railroad track in a southwesterly direction for 1,832 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the Norfolk Southern Railroad track with South Valencia Drive. From the intersection of the Norfolk Southern Railroad track with South Valencia Drive, proceed south on South Valencia Drive for 2,133 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Valencia Drive and West Gordon Avenue. From the intersection of South Valencia Drive and West Gordon Avenue, proceed east on West Gordon Avenue for 638 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Gordon Avenue with a side track of Norfolk Southern Railroad. From the intersection of West Gordon Avenue with the side track of Norfolk Southern Railroad, follow the side track of Norfolk Southern Railroad for 4,341 feet, more or less, in a generally southeasterly direction to the intersection of the side track of Norfolk Southern Railroad with Westtown Road. From the intersection of the side track of Norfolk Southern Railroad with Westtown Road, proceed south on Westtown Road for 3,606 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Westtown Road and West Oakridge Drive. From the intersection of Westtown Road and West Oakridge Drive, proceed west on West Oakridge Drive for 2,946 feet, more or less, to the intersection of West Oakridge Drive and Old Pretoria Road. From the intersection of West Oakridge Drive and Old Pretoria Road, follow Old Pretoria Road in a generally southwesterly direction for 1,337 feet more or less, to a point where Old Pretoria Road intersects the Albany, Georgia city limit Boundary. From said point where Old Pretoria Road intersects the Albany, Georgia city limit Boundary, follow the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary due east for 57 feet, more or less, to a point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary takes a sharp turn the southwest and runs parallel to Old Pretoria Road. From said point where the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary takes a sharp turn the southwest and runs parallel to Old Pretoria Road, continue southwest along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 2,219 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, follow the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a generally southerly direction, adjacent to Southwest Georgia Regional Airport, for 11,027 feet, more or less, to a point in the northern right-of-way for Oakhaven Drive. From said point in the northern right-of-way for Oakhaven Drive, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, and parallel to Oakhaven Drive, for 6,206 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue in a northeasterly direction along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 2,540 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue in a northwesterly direction along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 109 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, in a northeasterly direction, for 4,430 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, follow the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary in a southeasterly direction for 362 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue in a generally northeasterly direction along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 1,501 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 2,310 feet, more or less, to a point in the south right-of-way for Johnny W Williams Road. From said point in the south right-of-way for Johnny W Williams Road, continue south along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 3,184 feet, more or less, to a point in the right-of-way for Story Road. From said point in the right-of-way for Story Road, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, and parallel to Story Road, for 3,649 feet, more or less, to a point in the right-of-way for Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive. From said point in the right-of-way for Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, continue north along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, and parallel to Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, for 2,858 feet, more or less, to a point in the right-of-way for Slater King Drive. From said point in the right-of-way for Slater King Drive, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, and parallel to Slater King Drive, for 1,552 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue south along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 1,651 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 1,228 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue north along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 840 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 2,298 feet, more or less, to a point on the east bank of the Flint River. From said point on the east bank of the Flint River, continue in a generally northern direction, along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, and the east bank of the Flint River, for 482 feet, more or less, to a point on the east bank of the Flint River. From said point on the east bank of the Flint River, continue in a northeasterly direction along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 1,060 feet, more or less, to a point in the right-of-way for Radium Springs Road. From said point in the right-of-way for Radium Springs Road, continue in a southerly direction along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, and parallel to Radium Springs Road, for 1,459 feet, more or less, to a point in the right-of-way for Radium Springs Road. From said point in the right-of-way for Radium Springs Road, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 1,266 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue south along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 301 feet, more or less, to a point. From said point, continue east along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary for 3,060 feet, more or less, to a point in the east right-of-way of Georgia Florida Railnet. From said point in the east right-of-way of Georgia Florida Railnet, continue north along the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary, and parallel to the Georgia Florida Railnet track, for 5,767 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary with Moultrie Road. From the intersection of the Albany, Georgia city limit boundary with Moultrie Road, proceed in a northwesterly direction along Moultrie Road for 6,453 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Moultrie Road and Radium Springs Road. From the intersection of Moultrie Road with Radium Springs Road, proceed in a northerly direction along Radium Springs Road for 1,589 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Crawford Drive with Radium Springs Road. From the intersection of Crawford Drive with Radium Springs Road, continue for 2,175 feet, more or less, in an easterly, then southerly direction along Crawford Drive to the intersection of Crawford Drive with Mitchell Avenue. From the intersection of Crawford Drive with Mitchell Avenue, proceed east on Mitchell Avenue for 406 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Mitchell Avenue and South Street. From the intersection of Mitchell Avenue and South Street, proceed north on South Street for 608 feet, more or less, to the intersection of South Street with Dunes Avenue. From the intersection of South Street with Dunes Avenue, proceed east on Dunes Avenue for 815 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Dunes Avenue and Rood Street. From the intersection of Dunes Avenue and Rood Street, go south on Rood Street for 550 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Rood Street and Mitchell Avenue. From the intersection of Mitchell Avenue and Rood Street, proceed east on Mitchell Avenue for 410 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Frotscher Street and Mitchell Avenue. From the intersection of Frotscher Street and Mitchell Avenue, go north on Frotscher Street for 615 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Frotscher Street with Dunes Avenue. From the intersection of Frotscher Street with Dunes Avenue, proceed east on Dunes Avenue for 435 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Dunes Avenue and Van Deman Street. From the intersection of Dunes Avenue and Van Deman Street, continue south along Van Deman Street for 550 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Van Deman Street and Mitchell Avenue. From the intersection of Van Deman Street and Mitchell Avenue, proceed east on Mitchell Avenue for 610 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Mitchell Avenue with Mobile Avenue. From the intersection of Mitchell Avenue with Mobile Avenue, continue in a generally northerly direction on Mobile Avenue for 1,570 feet, more or less, the intersection of Mobile Avenue with Silica Drive. From the intersection of Mobile Avenue with Silica Drive, follow Silica Drive east, then south, then east for 2,300 feet, more or less, to the intersection of Silica Drive with the Georgia Florida Railnet. From the intersection of Silica Drive with the Georgia Florida Railnet, proceed north along the Georgia Florida Railnet for 2,478 feet, more or less to the intersection of the Georgia Florida Railnet and East Oglethorpe Boulevard. From the intersection of the Georgia Florida Railnet and East Oglethorpe Boulevard, proceed in a generally westerly direction along East Oglethorpe Boulevard for 7,971 feet, more or less, to the intersection of East Oglethorpe Boulevard with the center line for the Flint River. From the intersection of East Oglethorpe Boulevard with the center line for the Flint River, proceed north along the centerline for the Flint River for 553 feet, more or less, to the intersection of the centerline for the Flint River with East Broad Avenue. From the intersection of the centerline for the Flint River with East Broad Avenue, proceed west on East Broad Avenue for 559 feet more or less, to the intersection of East Broad Avenue and South Front Street which is also the point of beginning. (Code 1985, § 11-9; Ord. No. 03-111, §§ 1, 5, 5-27-2003; Ord. No. 04-100, 1-6-2004; Ord. No. 12-112, § 1(exh. A), 9-25-2012; Ord. No. 13-111, § 1, 3-26-2013) 
Chapter 26 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— The state Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 26-1. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Emergency management means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons to include weapons of mass destruction, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, consequence management functions to include victim services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. (Code 1985, § 12-1; Ord. No. 92-111, § 1, 3-10-1992) 
Sec. 26-2. - Emergency management agency; emergency management director, duties. (a)  The City of Albany, Georgia, shall be a part of the Albany-Dougherty County Emergency Management Agency. (b)  The emergency management director, is charged with the following duties: (1)  To represent the governing officials of the city and county on matters pertaining to emergency management; (2)  To assist city and county officials in organizing city and county departments for emergency operations; (3)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the city-county plan for emergency functions set forth in section 26-1. Such plan will be in consonance with the Georgia Natural Disaster Operations Plan, Nuclear Emergency Operations Plan, and the state Hurricane Operations Plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of Dougherty County, Georgia and the city, therein for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval; (4)  To maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the Albany-Dougherty County Emergency Management Agency, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency; (5)  To submit reports as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity, etc.; (6)  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the Albany-Dougherty County Emergency Operations Center; and (7)  To coordinate the activities of the Albany-Dougherty Emergency Operations Center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of the Albany-Dougherty County governing officials. (Code 1985, § 12-2; Ord. No. 92-111, § 2, 3-10-1992; Ord. No. 98-147, § 1, 11-10-1998) 
Sec. 26-3. - Functional organization.     The Albany-Dougherty County Emergency Management Agency shall be established around existing city and county departments and the emergency functions described in section 26-1 are assigned as follows: Department/Agency Functions* Mayor, chairman, board of commissioners of Dougherty County, Georgia Direction and control Public Safety Communications Communications and warning Police department sheriff's office Police services—evacuation Emergency management agency Public information—state military support preliminary damage assessment and reporting, public property assistance, attack preparedness, specific hazard planning Fire department Search, rescue and recovery—fire services—hazardous materials—radiological protection Public works Engineering—petroleum and solid fuel services Engineering department Engineering—infrastructure and traffic control services WG and L Commission Utilities services Albany Transit System Transportation services American Red Cross Food services shelter Health department Health and medical services Clerk's office Administrative services Department of family and children services Social services—shelter and temporary housing  *As appropriate to the local organization, these functions can be assigned to existing departments or may be separate. Assignments should be consistent with the local Emergency Operations Plan.     Heads of city departments listed above are responsible for assisting county department heads in developing appropriate annexes to the local Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management coordinator for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. (Code 1985, § 12-3; Ord. No. 92-111, § 3, 3-10-1992; Ord. No. 98-147, § 1, 11-10-1998) 
Sec. 26-4. - Emergency powers.     In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor of the city, separately, or jointly with the chairman, board of commissioners of county or in their absences, the county administrator and the city manager, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and therefore shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: (1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; (2)  To seize, or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public; (3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and (4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. (Code 1985, § 12-4; Ord. No. 92-111, § 4, 3-10-1992; Ord. No. 98-147, § 1, 11-10-1998) 
Sec. 26-5. - Volunteers.     All persons, other than officers and employees of the city performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city and county officers and employees. (Code 1985, § 12-5; Ord. No. 92-111, § 5, 3-10-1992) 
Sec. 26-6. - Penalty.     Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished for committing a misdemeanor. (Code 1985, § 12-6; Ord. No. 92-111, § 6, 3-10-1992) 
Sec. 26-7. - Interpretation.     This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. (Code 1985, § 12-7; Ord. No. 92-111, § 7, 3-10-1992) 
Secs. 26-8—26-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRICE OVERCHARGING DURING EMERGENCIES[2] Footnotes: --- (2) --- State Law reference— Unlawful, unfair, and deceptive trade practice for any person or business in any area in which a state of emergency has been declared to sell or offer for sale at retail any goods or services necessary to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or property at a price higher than the price at which such goods were sold or offered for sale immediately prior to the state of emergency, O.C.G.A. § 10-1-393.4. 
Sec. 26-37. - Overcharging prohibited. (a)  In order to preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons, or their property, within the declared disaster area, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which the city has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business in the city to overcharge for any goods, materials, services, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, sold or rented, within the city. (b)  Except that a retailer or installer of lumber, plywood, and other lumber products may increase the price of such products as may be necessary to replenish such retailer's existing daily stock at current market rates, maintaining the same markup percentage such retailer applied prior to the state of emergency. (Code 1985, § 12-21; Ord. No. 94-140, § 1, 7-22-1994) 
Sec. 26-38. - Definitions.     The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:     Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, services or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or, in applicable cases, substantially in excess of the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the merchandise or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency.     State of emergency means as defined pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(7) as a condition declared by the governor when, in the governor's judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to a warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or caused thereby.     Subsequent recovery period means that period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated. (Code 1985, § 12-22; Ord. No. 94-140, § 2, 7-22-1994) 
Sec. 26-39. - Penalties.     Violations of the provisions of this article upon conviction shall be punished according to the general penalties described in sections 1-17 and 1-18. Each sale or rental shall constitute a separate offense. (Code 1985, § 12-23; Ord. No. 94-140, § 3, 7-22-1994) 
Chapter 28 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; statewide application of International Fire Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a). 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Secs. 28-1—28-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
Sec. 28-21. - Firefighters; duties generally.     The firefighters shall at all times, night and day, be subject to duty and prepared at a moment's notice to respond to all alarms of fire. They shall faithfully abide by all orders and rules prescribed by the fire chief and city manager. (Code 1975, § 11-22; Code 1985, § 13-18) 
Sec. 28-22. - Fire chief—Bond; oath; qualifications.     Before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, the fire chief shall give bond in such amount as the board of city commissioners may require and make and subscribe the oath provided in section 2-130. No person not possessing the physical qualifications prescribed for members of the fire department shall be elected fire chief. (Code 1975, § 11-23; Code 1985, § 13-19) 
Sec. 28-23. - Same—Powers and duties generally. (a)  The fire chief shall have at all times the general superintendence, control and command of all officers, men, apparatus, material and property of the fire department, subject to such regulations as shall be prescribed by this Code and existing or future ordinances. (b)  The fire chief shall: (1)  Establish such rules and regulations as he or she may deem necessary for the proper management of the fire department, subject to the approval of the city manager; (2)  Cause to be examined daily the condition of the engine house, apparatus and other property of the fire department and shall, in his or her reports to the city manager, report the condition thereof. If any repairs shall be required at any time it shall be his or her duty to at once make a report of the same to the city manager who shall pass upon the same before they are paid for; (3)  Approve all bills against the fire department before they are forwarded to the city manager; (4)  Purchase all necessary supplies and implements for the fire department under the direction of the city manager and shall make a full and complete report of the condition and doings of the fire department to the city manager annually and at such other times as may be required of him or her; (5)  See to the proper and speedy extinguishment of fires which may endanger property in the city and in case of such fires shall have supreme and absolute command of the firefighters or all persons connected with the department, and the entire apparatus and property that may be employed for the extinguishment of fires. The firefighters and apparatus at all fire stations shall at all times be under the fire chief's direction and control, and the fire chief shall have power to fine, suspend without pay or dismiss for any neglect of duty or disobedience of the fire chief's rules; (6)  Keep the firefighters well drilled and well instructed in their duties. (Code 1975, § 11-24; Code 1985, § 13-20) 
Sec. 28-24. - Unauthorized assistance; destroying houses, etc.     If any person at any fire in the city, not specially ordered and commanded by the fire chief or assistant fire chief to aid or assist in pulling down or blowing up any house to prevent the spread of fire, shall, without such command, pull down or assist in pulling down or blow up or assist in blowing up any house, such person shall immediately be arrested. (Code 1975, § 11-25; Code 1985, § 13-21) 
Sec. 28-25. - Operation outside city. (a)  The fire department, consisting of all firefighting equipment and firefighters, shall not be used in connection with any firefighting or prevention work except such as may occur within the confines of the county. (b)  The provisions of this section shall not limit, restrict or modify the existing reciprocity between the city and neighboring municipalities or governmental agencies, with reference to mutual assistance to each other in cases of emergency. (c)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, the city shall provide fire protection to the FAA VORTAC radio facility located approximately five miles northwest of the city, just off the Dawson Road, in Lee County, and the use of city firefighting equipment and firefighters for that purpose is hereby authorized. (Code 1975, § 11-27; Code 1985, § 13-22) 
Sec. 28-26. - Fire department responsibility regarding hazardous materials emergency response; recovery of costs. (a)  Hazardous materials emergency response; responsibility. Whenever there shall occur, within the boundaries of the city, any incident involving a chemical or material defined by federal, state or local law as a hazardous substance, or which is in fact hazardous in the natural state to the public health or safety, or when said chemical or material is involved in a release to the atmosphere, fire, chemical reaction or detonation, and, when said incident shall endanger any portion of the population or property of the citizens of said jurisdiction or shall expose anyone within said boundaries to potentially toxic or lethal agents, the Albany Fire Department is authorized and directed to mitigate said incident. The provisions of section 26-2, relating to the emergency operations plan, shall apply in all cases requiring the efforts of multiple governmental agencies in the mitigation of such incidents. (b)  Recovery of costs for hazardous materials mitigation; responsibility for cleanup of same. Within this section, the "responsible person" shall be defined as the person or company operating any facility or vehicle involved in the incident, or, the property owner upon whose property the involved chemical or chemicals or materials were stored at the time of the incident. All costs incurred by the city or any other agency or person involved in the mitigation of incidents defined in this section shall be borne by the responsible person. (Code 1985, § 13-23; Ord. No. 89-137, §§ 1, 2, 6-15-1989) 
Secs. 28-27—28-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATE MINIMUM FIRE SAFETY STANDARDS 
Sec. 28-57. - Adoption; amendments.     The state minimum fire safety standards, as adopted in the rules and regulations promulgated by the state safety fire commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq., as said rules and regulations now exist, and as they shall be lawfully amended from time to time, are hereby adopted by the county and the city. Future amendments to and changes in said standards as reflected in future amendments to or changes in said rules and regulations are hereby adopted and shall become effective in the county and the city upon promulgation without the necessity of further action on the part of the county or the city. (Code 1985, § 13-36; Ord. No. 86-110, § 1, 2-11-1986) 
Sec. 28-58. - Submission of plans; issuance of permits and certificates.     No plans or specifications for the construction of any building or structure which is subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13 shall be utilized, and no building permit shall be issued for the construction of any such building or structure until after such plans and specifications shall have been submitted to the chief of the city fire department and approved by the fire chief as being in compliance with the state minimum fire safety standards herein adopted. No temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy shall issue with respect to said buildings or structures without the certification of the chief of the city fire department that construction has been in accordance with said state minimum fire safety standards. (Code 1985, § 13-38; Ord. No. 86-110, § 3, 2-11-1986) 
Sec. 28-59. - Inspection powers.     For the purpose of making inspections and carrying out and enforcing the provisions of this article and the state minimum fire safety standards, the chief of the city fire department shall have all of the powers and authority granted to the chief building inspector and the chief building inspector's designees under local and state law. Specifically, and without in any way limiting the generality of the foregoing provisions, the chief of the city fire department shall have all of the powers granted to the building inspector of the county and the city by the laws of the city and the county. The chief of the city fire department shall have authority to delegate any or all of the powers and authority herein granted to one or more designees. (Code 1985, § 13-39; Ord. No. 86-110, § 4, 2-11-1986) 
Sec. 28-60. - Coordination of inspection and enforcement activities.     The inspection and enforcement activities of the fire department and the inspection department shall be coordinated so as to conserve time and expense and result in a minimum of inconvenience to property owners, lessees, tenants, and builders, and said departments and the personnel thereof shall cooperate with each other to the fullest extent in carrying out their respective functions and duties. (Code 1985, § 13-40; Ord. No. 86-110, § 5, 2-11-1986) 
Sec. 28-61. - Peace officer powers.     Any designee of the chief of the city fire department who has been duly certified by the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Council shall, in the performance of his or her duties under this article, have all of the powers of a peace officer as defined by the Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act (O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.). (Code 1985, § 13-41; Ord. No. 86-110, § 6, 2-11-1986) 
Sec. 28-62. - Violations; penalty.     Any person who fails or refuses upon demand of the fire chief or the fire chief's designee to correct any hazardous condition or any condition which is in violation of the state minimum fire safety standards, or is otherwise unlawful, or fails to obey any lawful order of the fire chief or the fire chief's designee, or otherwise violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided in section 1-17. Each day any condition, failure, or refusal, or violation described in this section continues shall be a separate offense punishable as aforesaid. (Code 1985, § 13-42; Ord. No. 86-110, § 7, 2-11-1986) 
Sec. 28-63. - Abatement of nuisance.     Any condition which constitutes a fire hazard or is in violation of the state minimum fire safety standards shall constitute a nuisance and shall be abatable under chapter 36, nuisances. (Code 1985, § 13-43; Ord. No. 86-110, § 8, 2-11-1986) 
Secs. 28-64—28-84. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE CODE BOARD OF APPEALS 
Sec. 28-85. - Establishment.     There is hereby established a fire code board of appeals for Dougherty County and the City of Albany, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as board of appeals. (Code 1985, § 13-61; Ord. No. 87-226, § 1, 12-22-1987) 
Sec. 28-86. - Appointment of board; meetings. (a)  The fire code board of appeals shall consist of five members, to be appointed jointly by the board of county commissioners and the board of city commissioners from nominations received from the county administrator and city manager. Anyone eligible to hold office in Dougherty County and the City of Albany shall be eligible for appointment to the board of appeals. (b)  The board of county commissioners and the board of city commissioners shall appoint one citizen member each to serve for a term of three years, and three members jointly to serve for a term of two years. All citizen members shall serve until their successors have been appointed and qualified. (c)  The board of county commissioners and the board of city commissioners, on the recommendation of the board of appeals, shall have the right to remove any member of the board of appeals who is absent for three consecutive meetings unexcused by the board of appeals or who is otherwise delinquent in the performance of his or her duties on the board of appeals. Vacancies occurring prior to termination of the term of a member shall be filled by the board of county commissioners and the board of city commissioners jointly for the remainder of the term. (d)  The board of appeals shall elect a chairperson, and such other officers as the board of appeals shall determine. Officers shall be elected for a term of one year and until their successors have been elected. (e)  Three voting members of the board of appeals shall constitute a quorum, and the vote of a majority of those present at a meeting at which there is a quorum shall be sufficient to take action. (f)  The board is authorized to adopt such rules of procedure as it shall deem appropriate. (g)  The board of appeals shall meet whenever directed by the appointing authority to interpret the provisions of the fire code and to consider and rule on any properly filed appeal from a decision of the fire marshal, giving at least five days notice of hearing, but in no case shall it fail to meet on an appeal within 30 days of the filing of notice of appeal. All of the meetings of the board of appeals shall be open to the public. (h)  Members of the board of appeals shall not be entitled to compensation for service on the board of appeals except for actual expenses necessarily incurred by them in the performance of their duties. (Code 1985, § 13-62; Ord. No. 87-226, § 2, 12-22-1987) 
Sec. 28-87. - General powers of the board of appeals.     The board of appeals shall provide for reasonable interpretations of the provisions of the fire code and rule on appeals from decisions of the fire marshal. (Code 1985, § 13-63; Ord. No. 87-226, § 3, 12-22-1987) 
Sec. 28-88. - Fire marshal order stayed.     Pending final decision of the board of appeals, the order of the fire marshal based on the fire marshal's interpretation of the code shall be stayed unless there is an immediate fire hazard to life or property. (Code 1985, § 13-63; Ord. No. 87-226, § 4, 12-22-1987) 
Sec. 28-89. - Procedures for appeal. (a)  Where any person seeks relief from a decision of a fire official enforcing provisions of the fire prevention code applicable to the county and the city, including permits, certificates, waivers, alternate materials, alternate methods, approvals, or variances or matters of code interpretations, that person may request reconsideration of the fire official's decision by appealing in writing to the fire marshal within 15 days of the receipt of the decision stating the reasons why relief is sought and what decision the person feels should be forthcoming. The fire marshal shall, within ten days after receiving a copy of the appeal in writing, hold a hearing and decide the question after hearing testimony from all concerned persons. The fire marshal shall render a written decision within five days after the hearing is completed. (b)  After such a hearing by the fire marshal, any person seeking relief from a decision of the fire marshal regarding provisions of this Code may appeal to the board of appeals within 15 days after receipt of written notice of the fire marshal's decision. Such appeal shall be in writing and directed to the fire marshal. Copies of the appeal shall be promptly transmitted to the board of appeals by the fire marshal. Upon giving not less than five business days' notice to the person interested, a hearing shall be held. The board may, after such a hearing, by a majority vote, affirm, annul, or modify the action of the fire marshal. The decision of the board shall be in writing, and a copy shall be mailed to the appellant within seven business days after the conclusion of the hearing and any decisions made shall be final. (Code 1985, § 13-65; Ord. No. 87-226, § 5, 12-22-1987) 
Secs. 28-90—28-106. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
Sec. 28-107. - Fire prevention code adopted; application.     There is hereby adopted by the board of commissioners of the city the latest edition of the state minimum fire safety and prevention code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12, that allows the fire chief, or the fire chief's designee, of the city and the county the authority to inspect all buildings and premises except one- and two-family dwellings. However, this code shall also apply to one- and two-family dwellings in which the building or premises contains a business required to be licensed by a federal, state, or local government agency. The fire chief, or the fire chief's designee, is granted the right of entry to inspect for fire hazards and to abate such fire hazards in accordance with state minimum fire safety standards, NFPA 1, NFPA 101 Life Safety Code and Standard Fire Prevention Code. (Code 1985, § 13-81; Ord. No. 88-128, § 1(1), 5-10-1988; Ord. No. 92-161, § 1, 11-9-1992) 
Sec. 28-108. - Right of entry by fire chief.     The fire chief or the fire chief's designee is granted the right of entry to any and all buildings of whatever size or nature which are being used for personal care homes and housing individuals not related by blood or marriage. The fire chief or the fire chief's designee upon entry, may survey the premises and make recommendations as to fire hazards and the proper procedures to abate said hazards in accordance with state minimum fire safety standards. (Code 1985, § 13-82; Ord. No. 88-128, § 1(2), 5-10-1988) 
Sec. 28-109. - Fire hydrants.     All municipal fire hydrants located within the city and the county must be clearly visible, accessible, and painted yellow with silver bonnets. Privately owned fire hydrants shall be painted red. No fire hydrants may be used for any purpose other than firefighting without the express permission of the Water, Gas and Light Commission. (Code 1985, § 13-83; Ord. No. 88-128, § 1(3), 5-10-1988) 
Sec. 28-110. - Access roads and fire lanes.     All access roads and fire lanes shall be capable of supporting the loads of fire apparatus and shall have a minimum of 13 feet, six inches of vertical clearance. (Code 1985, § 13-84; Ord. No. 88-128, § 1(4), 5-10-1988) 
Sec. 28-111. - Private fire prevention systems.     All private fire water systems, fire hydrants, valves and other associated equipment for fire protection installed within the county and the city shall be compatible with the existing water systems, their fixtures, and approved by the Water, Gas and Light Commission prior to installation. (Code 1985, § 13-85; Ord. No. 88-128, § 1(5), 5-10-1988) 