THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA ____________ Published by Order of the Board of City Commissioners 2009 ____________ > OFFICIALS of the CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION ____________ Willie Adams, Jr., M.D. Mayor ____________ Jon Howard Dorothy Hubbard Morris Gurr Roger Marietta Bob Langstaff, Jr. Tommie Postell City Commissioners ____________ Alfred D. Lott City Manager ____________ C. Nathan Davis City Attorney ____________ Sonja Tolbert City Clerk PREFACE     This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia.     Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented through Ord. No. 07-111, adopted April 24, 2007, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of city commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, the 1985 Code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein.     The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. Chapter and Section Numbering System     The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. Page Numbering System     The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  Indexes     The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. Looseleaf Supplements     A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.     Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. Acknowledgments     This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Shelly Hayes, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project.     The publisher is most grateful to Alfred D. Lott and city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. Copyright     All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. © Copyrighted material. Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Albany, Georgia. 2009. AN ORDINANCE ENTITLED 09-141 AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF ALBANY, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of the City of Albany, Georgia and it is hereby ordained by authority of same:     Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Albany, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 64, each inclusive, is adopted.     Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before September 22, 2009 and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed.     Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.     Section 4. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of City Commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments.     Section 5. Ordinances adopted after September 22, 2009, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.     Section 6. The last sentence of Section 38-69(d) of the Code is changed to read "within five business days."     Section 7. The reference at lines 2 and 3 of Section 52-33 of the Code "but not less than semiannually" is deleted.     Section 8. There is added in alphabetical order to Section 60-127 of the Code "PTP means Pilot Testing Program."     Section 9. To the list of priority pollutants at Section 60-196(c) of the Code, there is added "Bis (2-chloroisopropyl) ether" and "1, 12-Benzofluoranthene" is deleted and in its place is "11, 12-Benzofluoranthene."     Section 10. The penultimate sentence of Section 60-131 (f) of the Code is changed to read "If no building permit is required, the appropriate charge shall be paid to the city at the time the water meter is installed or the size changed."     Section 11. The last sentence of Section 60-949(1) of the Code is changed to read "For purposes of this section the approximate location of underground utility facilities is defined as a strip of land at least four (4) feet wide, but not wider than the width of the utility facility plus two (2) feet on either side thereof."     Section 12. This ordinance in no way changes any provisions of the City Charter and shall become effective upon its adoption. /s/         Dorothy B. Hubbard       Mayor Pro Tem   ATTEST: /s/         Sonja Tolbert       City Clerk   Adopted: December 15, 2009 Introduced by Commissioner:  Postell                       Date(s) read:  Dec. 15, 2009       
Appendix A - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Printed herein are the subdivision regulations of the city, as they appeared in chapter 25 of the 1985 Code. Amendments to provisions contained in chapter 25 are indicated by parenthetical history notes following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. The same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text has been used as it appears in the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. State Law reference— Recording of maps and plats, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67 et seq.; subdivisions abutting state highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-150 et seq.; the Zoning Procedures Laws, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; Georgia Land Sales Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
Sec. 25-1. - Short title.     These subdivision regulations shall be officially known as the "Land Subdivision Regulations of Albany and Dougherty County, Georgia" but may also be cited or referred to as the "Albany Dougherty Subdivision Regulations." (Code 1985, § 25-1; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. I, A), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-2. - Authority, purpose and jurisdiction. (a)  This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority delegated to the board of city commissioners of the city and board of commissioners of the county under "article IX" of the Constitution of the state, 1983 "Counties and Municipalities," paragraph I—IV and the Official Code of the state Annotated 44-3-1 et seq., and other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state. (b)  The purpose of this chapter is to promote good planning practice, to ensure orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare, while allowing cost saving efficiencies. To adequately ensure the interpretation of this chapter, the subdivision design engineer shall be a professional engineer registered to practice in the state and competent in civil design and plats for recording shall be prepared by a professional land surveyor registered in the state. The design engineer will be the contact person with the city engineer and county public works during the development process. (c)  The provisions in this chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated area of the city and unincorporated county. From and after the date of the adoption of this chapter these regulations shall govern the subdivision of land within the jurisdiction.     Any owner of land within the limits of said subdivision jurisdiction wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the planning commission a plat of the subdivision which shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter. No plat of a subdivision lying within such territory or part thereof shall be filed or recorded and no subdivider shall proceed with the improvement or sale of land until such approval is entered in writing on the plat by the planning commission. (Code 1985, § 25-2; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. I, B), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-3. - Administration, exceptions and interpretation. (a)  It is the responsibility of the planning commission to administer the provisions of this chapter by managing the subdivision application review process. In managing the subdivision review process the planning commission shall have the power to establish a fee schedule sufficient to recover costs incurred. (b)  The planning commission shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the requirements as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions of this chapter pertaining to subdivision review if literal enforcement of one or more provisions of this chapter is impracticable or will cause undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question, provided the approved exceptions will not be in conflict with other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation. (c)  The planning commission shall have the power to provide interpretations concerning provisions of this chapter which are unclear or in dispute. In rendering interpretations, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements unless it is demonstrated that more stringent standards are necessary to promote the public health, safety and welfare. (Code 1985, § 25-3; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. I, C), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-4. - Enforcement and penalties. (a)  It shall be the duty of the city engineer and the county director of public works to enforce these regulations and to bring to the attention of the city/county attorney any violations or lack of compliance herewith. (b)  Violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable as provided by law and each day such violations continue constituting a separate offense. Any person, firm or other legal entity who fails to comply with or violates any of these regulations shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each offense and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken by law or in equity to prevent any violations of these regulations, to prevent unlawful constructions, to recover damages, to restrain, correct or abate a violation, to prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises and these remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above. (Code 1985, § 25-4; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. I, D), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-5. - Conflict and separability. (a)  Where the conditions imposed by any provisions of this chapter are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards or requirements shall govern. The construction standards, which are published separately, shall govern the construction work. (b)  The provisions of this chapter are separable. If a section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. (Code 1985, § 25-5; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. I, E), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-6. - Amendments.     When necessary to further its purposes, this chapter shall be amended by the city and/or county commission after considering recommendation(s) made by the planning commission regarding approval or denial. Prior to acting on any proposed amendment, the board of city commissioners and board of county commissioners shall hold a public hearing on the amendment, having first published two notices of the time and place of the hearing in a local newspaper at least 15 but not more than 45 calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing. (Code 1985, § 25-6; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. I, F), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-7. - Acceptance of dedications to city or county.     Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets and rights-of-way, public areas, or easements shall be by ordinance of the board of city commissioners or the board of commissioners of the county as applicable. Approval by the planning commission and/or the director of public works/city engineering shall not be deemed to constitute, imply, or effect acceptance by the city or county of any street, right-of-way, public area, or easement shown on a final plat. (Code 1985, § 25-7; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. I, G), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-8. - Definitions. (a)  Usage. For the purpose of these regulations, certain abbreviations, terms, and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this section.     Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the singular number shall include the plural. The word "should" is directory and not mandatory. The word "shall" is mandatory and directory.     Words not defined herein shall be considered to have a definition consistent with generally accepted planning and engineering principles as determined by the planning staff and the city engineer and the the county director of public works. (b)  Words and terms defined:     Alley. A dedicated travelway other than a street which affords only secondary means of access to abutting property.     Appeal. The process by which an aggrieved party may petition for review of a decision made by an official or department of city or county government.     Applicant. A developer submitting an application for development.     Approving authority. The Albany Dougherty Planning Commission.     As-built drawings. Also known as "record drawings." A drawing that depicts to scale the finished condition and location of water, sewer, and storm drainage facilities.     Block. A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way, shorelines of waterways, drainageways or boundary lines of municipalities or counties.     Board of zoning appeals. Quasi-judicial body appointed by the Albany city commission and the county Commission that considers applications for zoning variances and hears appeals that result from decisions or interpretations made by the building inspector.     Board of city commissioners. The mayor and members of the board of city commissioners of the City of Albany, Georgia.     Board of county commissioners. The chairman and members of the the county board of commissioners.     Buffer. An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and parallel with the property line, either consisting of natural existing vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, fences, and/or berms, designed to limit continuously the view of and/or sound from the site to adjacent sites or properties.     Building. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing or shelter of persons, animals, or goods. Where roofed structures on separate lots are separated from each other by party walls having no opening for passage, each portion so separated shall be considered a separate building.     Building line (setback). A line established in general, parallel to the front street line between which line and the front street (property) line no part of a building shall project, except as otherwise provided by these regulations. The minimum building line shall be minimum front yard setback established by the zoning ordinance.     Building permit. A written permit issued by the building inspector authorizing construction, renovation, or repairs to a structure or site work.     Capital improvements program. A proposed schedule of all future governmental projects duly approved in order of construction priority together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project.     City. The City of Albany, Georgia.     City engineer. The engineer employed by the city or the duly authorized representative of the city engineer.     Cluster development. A development approach in which building lots may be reduced in size and buildings sited closer together, usually in groups or clusters, provided that the total development density does not exceed that which could be constructed on the site under conventional zoning and subdivision regulations. The land that remains undeveloped is then preserved as open space. (See Illustration 1)     Common open space. Land within or related to a development, not individually owned or dedicated for public use, which is designed and intended for the common use or enjoyment of the residents of the development and maintained by a homeowners' association. It may include complementary structures and improvements.     Comprehensive development plan. A comprehensive long-range plan intended to guide the growth and development of the city and the county. It includes analysis, recommendations, and proposals for the community's population, economy, housing, transportation, community facilities, and land use.     Concept plan. A preliminary presentation and accompanying documentation of a proposed subdivision of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification. (See illustration 2)     Construction plans. Those maps, drawings, and documents accompanying a subdivision plat which are used to guide construction and to depict the specific location of and provide the computations and specifications for the design of the improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements and standards of these regulations.     Conventional development. Development other than cluster development or planned unit development. (See illustration 1)     County. Dougherty County, Georgia.     Dedication. The act of granting a right of property to the public, at no cost to local government, often through the form of an easement or right-of-way.     Design standards. Standards that set forth specific improvement requirements.     Detention basin. A man-made or natural water collector facility designed to collect surface and subsurface water in order to impede its flow and to release the same gradually at a controlled rate into natural or man-made outlets.     Developer. The legal or beneficial owner(s) of a tract or of any land included in a proposed development. Also, the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or any other person having enforceable proprietary interest in such land.     Development. A planning or construction project involving substantial property improvement and, usually, a change of land-use character within the site; the act of using land for building or extractive purposes.     Development regulations. Zoning, subdivision, site plan, floodplain regulation, or other governmental regulation of the use and development of land.     director of public works. The designated city or county administrative official serving as the director of each respective jurisdictions' department of public works, or the duly authorized representative of the director.     Drainage. The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by drains, grading, or other means.     Drainage easement. An area set aside for the purpose of transporting stormwater.     Drainage system. The system through which water flows from the land, including all watercourses, waterbodies and wetlands.     Driveway. A paved or unpaved area used for ingress or egress of vehicles and allowing access from a street or alley to a building or other structure or facility.     Easement. A right-of-way granted for limited use of private land for a public, quasi-public, or private purpose.     Engineer. A registered, professional engineer, licensed by the state, competent in civil design.     Engineering director of water, gas and light. The designated official serving as the engineering director of the water, gas, and light commission of Albany, Georgia.     Environmental constraints. Features, natural resources, or land characteristics that are sensitive to improvements and may require conservation measures or the application of creative development techniques to prevent degradation of the environment, or may require limited development, or in certain instances may preclude development.     Escrow. A deed, a bond, money, letter of credit, or a piece of property delivered to a third person by agreement to be delivered by him to the appropriate party only upon fulfillment or lack thereof of said agreement.     Exempt subdivision. See Subdivision-exempt.     Final approval. The official action of the planning commission or its designated staff taken on any applications, plats, or site plans, after all conditions have been fulfilled.     Full staff. Includes planning, city engineering, county public works, traffic engineering, DOT, WG & L [WGL], et al.     General development plan. A plan that allows a developer to submit general development intentions to receive approval for the development of a major subdivision in phases. It allows the planning commission to evaluate the major features of the proposal while allowing the cost of detailed engineering work to be incurred by the developer on a phase by phase basis (see Illustration 3).     Grade. The slope of a street, or other public way, specified in percentage terms.     Gutter. A shallow channel usually set along a curb or the pavement edge of a road for purposes of catching and carrying off runoff water.     Health department. The county health department, which is duly authorized to perform health services in both the city and the county.     Improvement. Any man-made item which becomes part of, placed upon, or is affixed to real estate.     Improvements guarantee. A guarantee in the form of a letter of credit, bond or certified check to insure completion of required subdivision improvements.     Inspection department. The building and inspection department which is authorized to perform inspections and issue permits for both the city and the county.     Landscape architect. A currently registered landscape architect licensed to practice in the state.     Lot. A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit.     Lot area. The size of a lot measured within the lot lines and expressed in terms of acres or square feet.     Lot, corner. A lot abutting on two streets at their intersection.     Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.     Lot, flag. A lot with a "pole" providing frontage on a public or private street; the "pole" of which is generally of less width than the minimum width allowed for a lot in that zoning district.     Lot frontage. That portion of a lot extending along a street right-of-way line.     Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot.     Lot width. The mean horizontal distance between the side lines at the minimum building line measured along the building line except in the case of flag lots.     Main. In any system of continuous piping, the principal artery of the system to which branches may be connected.     Major subdivision. See Subdivision-major.     Off-street parking space. A parking space provided in a parking lot, parking structure, or private driveway.     Open space. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for the public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space.     Outlot. Lots which are either unbuildable or not intended for development and are allowed only for aesthetics, safety, common use, or the public good. Outlots are normally owned in common and labeled as such.     Owner. Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity having or controlling over 50 percent proprietary interest in the land sought to be subdivided.     Parcel. Any and all plots of land which are separately identified on the official tax appraisal maps on the basis of ownership.     Parking space. An area provided for the parking of a motor vehicle.     Percolation test. (Perc test.) A test designed to determine the ability of ground to absorb water, and used to determine the suitability of a soil for drainage or for the use of a septic system.     Performance guarantee. See Improvements guarantee.     Phased development. A tract of land that is subdivided and developed in a series of planned phases. A general development plan review is required to perform phased development. (See Illustration 3)     Planned unit development. An area of a minimum size, as specified by ordinance, to be planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a single entity containing one or more structures to accommodate appurtenant common areas. (See illustration 4)     Planning commission. The duly designated planning board of the city and the county.     Planning director. The director of the Albany Dougherty planning commission or the duly authorized representative of the director.     Planning staff. The professional planning staff of the Albany Dougherty Planning Commission.     Plat. A map of real property, a subdivision, or site plan.     Plat, final. The map or plat for recording as required in these regulations.     Plat, preliminary. The preliminary drawing or drawings, described in these regulations, indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission for approval.     Preapplication conference. An initial meeting between developers and appropriate city or county staff members.     Preliminary plat approval. The conferral of certain rights prior to final approval after specific elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the planning commission and the applicant.     Private street. See Street, private.     Public improvement. Any structure, drainageway, utility line, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian-way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the city or county may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation.     Public open space. Open space conveyed or otherwise dedicated to a public agency.     Public street. See Street, public.     Public utilities. Water, gas, sanitary and storm sewer, electrical, cable, and communications lines and facilities.     PUD. See Planned unit development.     Resubdivision. A change in an approved or recorded subdivision plat if such change affects any lot line. Lot line does not necessarily mean a property and/or building site line.     Reverse frontage lot. A lot extending between and having a frontage on an expressway or arterial and a minor or local street and with vehicular access solely from the later.     Retention basin. A pond, pool, or basin used for the storage of water run-off.     Right-of-way. A strip of land owned and used by the general public, railroads, or utility companies for transportation or other special use. For land platting purposes, every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the adjoining lots or parcels and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for transportation and utilities shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established.     Roadway. The actual road surface area between the inside edges of the curbs, which may include travel lanes, parking lanes, and deceleration and acceleration lanes. Where there are no curbs, the roadway is that portion between the edges of the paved (or hard surface) width.     Septic system. An underground system with a septic tank and drain tile field used for the disposal of sewage wastes.     Septic tank. A sewage disposal tank in which a continuous flow of waste material is decomposed by anaerobic bacteria or stored.     Setback. The distance between the street right-of-way line and the front line of a building or any projection thereof, excluding uncovered steps.     Sewer. Any pipe used to collect and carry away sewage or stormwater runoff from the generating source to treatment plants or receiving streams or facility.     Shoulder. That portion of a street or road from the outer edge of the paved surface to the inside edge of the ditch.     Sidewalk (area). A paved path provided for pedestrian use and usually located at the side of a road within the right-of-way. All sidewalks shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act.     Sight triangle. (Clear sight distance) A triangular-shaped portion of land established at street intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.     Sketch plan. A rough plan of a proposed subdivision or other development. (See illustration 2)     Staff review. Review by the staff of the Albany Dougherty Planning Commission.     Street. A roadway, as distinguished from an alley, that affords traffic circulation and principal means of access to abutting property. Commonly designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, freeway, road, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane, place, circle, court, or otherwise. Various classifications of streets shall be defined as follows (see appendix 3):     Arterial. A street which is used primarily for fast and heavy traffic flow at higher design speeds; is of considerable continuity and is used as a connector for travel between major activity centers with some access control.     Major collector. A street which carries traffic from activity centers and minor collector streets to arterial streets and streets of higher classifications.     Minor collector. Principal entrance street to subdivisions and the main streets for circulation within a subdivision which serve a network of four or more local streets. Minor collector streets are designated so that traffic circulation in a subdivision would cause such a street to be used as a link between local streets and major collector or arterial streets.     Local. A street used primarily in residential subdivisions for access to abutting properties as opposed to the collection and dispersion of traffic.     Dead-end street. A street connecting to only one other street.     Special purpose streets.     Street, private. A street or road duly approved by the Albany Dougherty planning commission pursuant to the provisions of the subdivision regulations and shown on a recorded plat.     Street, public. A street to which the city/county has acquired ownership of and/or maintenance responsibility for, either by dedication and acceptance or other means.     Street, stub. A portion of a street for which an extension has been proposed and approved. May be permitted when development is phased over a period of time, but only if the street in its entirety has been approved in the preliminary plan.     Street hierarchy. The conceptual arrangement of streets based upon function. A hierarchical approach to street design classifies streets according to function, from high-traffic arterial roads down to streets whose function is residential access. Systematizing street design into a road hierarchy promotes safety, efficient land use, and residential quality. (See appendix 3)     Streets, listed thoroughfare. Those streets or portions of streets lying in unincorporated areas of the county and identified in appendix 2 of these regulations, to which access is restricted or further regulated by these regulations.     Subdivider. Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate, or trust, or any other combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as herein defined, including any authorized agent of the subdivider.     Subdivision. The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development.     Subdivision, administrative. Divisions of two or more lots where each lot has a minimum of five acres and a minimum of 200 feet of frontage on an existing public road, if no new streets are created and the resultant lots meet the standards of the zoning ordinance: (1)  Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions; (2)  Divisions of property upon court order, including, but not limited to, judgements of foreclosure; and (3)  Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument. Divisions of property owned by multiple owners where the property is to be deeded individually to the several owners and otherwise complies with the provisions of the ordinance. Realignment of lot lines where no additional lots are created and the new lots comply with all zoning provisions.     Subdivision-exempt. Any division of land not classified as a subdivision.     Subdivisions-major. Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision.     Subdivisions-minor. The following shall be deemed minor subdivisions: (1)  Any subdivision or resubdivision which will not involve the construction of public streets or public drainage facilities, and is not in conflict with the comprehensive plan, these regulations, the zoning ordinance, or other applicable regulations as officially adopted. (2)  Where a building exists on each proposed lot, tract, parcel, site or plot of land in the subdivision, provided that the owner certifies on the plat that all such existing buildings were constructed prior to the adoption of these regulations and that such plat is submitted to the planning commission for full staff review which shall be noted on the plat.     Subdivision regulations. The Albany Dougherty Subdivision Regulations.     Surveyor. A registered, practicing surveyor, licensed by the state.     USGS. United States Geological Survey.     Variance. A waiver from compliance with a specific provision of the subdivision ordinance granted because of particular difficulties or unnecessary hardship that would be imposed by the strict application of that provision of the ordinance. The granting of variances is the responsibility of the planning commission.     Water, Gas, and Light (WG&L) [WGL]. The water, gas, and light commission of Albany, Georgia.     Wetlands. As established by the United States Corps of Engineers and/or the Environmental Protection Agency.     Zoning ordinance. The zoning ordinance of Albany, Georgia and the zoning regulations of the county, the state, as applicable. (Code 1985, § 25-8; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. II, A, B), 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 95-153, § 1, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 97-131, § 1, 7-8-1997) 
Sec. 25-9. - Procedures. (a)  Purpose. This section is intended to establish the procedures for planning commission review and actions on applications for subdivision development activities. (b)  Preapplication. For the purpose of expediting applications and reducing subdivision development costs, a preapplication conference shall be required in accordance with the following procedures. (1)  Preapplication conference. a.  The purpose of the preapplication conference is to allow the applicant to meet with appropriate city/county and public works officials. All subdivisions shall be submitted to the Albany Dougherty planning commission with a completed preapplication form, if requested by the Albany Dougherty Planning director. (2)  Concept plan. a.  The applicant may request an informal review of a concept plan for a proposed development. This review will be performed by the full staff with assistance from the planning staff, and is designed to provide input in the formative stages of subdivision design. b.  Applicants seeking concept plan review shall submit the items stipulated in article IV of this chapter seven days before the concept plan meeting. c.  A brief written summary of the concept plan review shall be provided to the applicant by the planning director within 14 days of the final meeting. (c)  Applications. (1)  Type of applications. The following type applications may be filed by the applicant. a.  Minor subdivision; b.  Major subdivision; c.  Phased development; d.  Administrative subdivision. Note— Certain developments may involve a combination of applications. (2)  Content. A subdivision application shall include items specified in article IV of this chapter, which constitutes a checklist of items to be submitted for subdivision review. (3)  Complete application. A subdivision application shall be deemed complete for purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action when it is certified as complete by the planning director. In all cases, however, the application shall be deemed complete unless planning staff has notified the applicant in writing of any deficiencies in the application within a 14-day period from the date of its submission. In cases where an application is deemed incomplete and the applicant has been notified in writing of application deficiencies, the application will not be processed until the deficiencies are corrected. The resubmission of an application or submission of information needed to correct application deficiencies will be considered acceptable unless planning staff has notified the applicant in writing of additional deficiencies in the application within a seven-day period from the date of its resubmission. Though an application has been deemed complete by the action or inaction of planning staff, the planning commission may subsequently require correction of any information required in the ordinance, as is reasonably necessary to make an informed decision. (d)  Minor subdivision procedures. (1)  Approval of minor subdivisions. a.  An applicant requesting approval of a proposed minor subdivision as defined in this chapter shall submit to the planning staff ten copies and one polyester film reproducible of plat information and copies of the items required in article IV of this chapter, together with a completed preapplication form, a subdivision application form and the stipulated fee. b.  Review and actions for a minor subdivision shall be handled administratively by the full staff. Actions shall be taken on this application within seven days of certification that it is a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure of any staff to act within the period prescribed shall constitute that department's approval of that minor subdivision and a certificate of approval shall be issued by the planning director on the request of the applicant. c.  The planning director shall notify the planning commission of actions taken on final plat applications within 28 days of the action. d.  Actions of the full staff may be appealed to the planning commission. An applicant requesting an appeal of the actions of full staff shall submit to the planning staff ten copies of the items required in article IV of this chapter within 14 days of the action. Such appeals will be acted on by the planning commission within 31 days of the filing of the appeal. (e)  Major subdivision procedures. (1)  Preliminary approval of major subdivision. a.  An applicant requesting preliminary approval of a major subdivision as defined by this chapter shall submit to the planning staff ten copies of the items required in article IV of this chapter, together with a completed preapplication form (the preapplication form is required at the discretion of the director), a subdivision application form and the stipulated fee. b.  The application shall be reviewed and commented on by the full staff. Copies of the application and related information shall be furnished to the full staff by planning staff within seven days of the date of certification of a complete application. Written review comments shall be returned to planning staff within 14 days of the date of certification of a complete application. c.  Review for preliminary approval of a major subdivision on a complete application shall be handled by the planning commission staff. Action should be taken on this application within 28 days of certification that it is a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure of the planning commission to act within the period prescribed shall constitute preliminary subdivision approval and a certificate of approval shall be issued by the planning director on the request of the applicant. (2)  Effect of preliminary approval of major subdivision. Preliminary approval of a major subdivision shall confer the following rights upon the applicant for a period of three years: a.  The applicant may begin construction upon approval from the city engineer or county public works department upon approval of construction plans by appropriate departments. b.  The applicant may submit for final plat approval of either the entire subdivision, or a portion thereof provided that phased development has been permitted through the approval of a general development plan. c.  The planning staff may grant the rights referred to above in subsections a. and b. for such period of time longer than three years that is determined to be reasonable. (3)  Final approval of major subdivision. a.  An applicant requesting final approval of a major subdivision shall submit to the planning staff ten copies of the items required in article IV of this chapter and one polyester film reproducible of the plat together with the stipulated fee. In addition, the applicant should submit a statement to the planning staff from the city engineer or county director of public works, and/or appropriate utility indicating that the city or county or utility is in receipt of "as built" plans showing all streets and water, sewer, and storm drainage with locations and elevations and identifying those portions already installed and attesting to this completion to applicable specifications and those to be installed, or acceptable improvement guarantees in the amount required to ensure satisfactory completion of required improvements. The applicant shall also provide evidence from the traffic engineering department that all street signs and street lighting requirements have been satisfied. Additionally, deeds to all rights-of-way, easements and improvements dedicating them to the proper government shall be submitted to the Albany Dougherty Planning Commission. b.  Review and actions for final approval of a major subdivision shall be handled administratively by the full staff. Actions shall be taken on this application within seven days of certification that it is a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure of the full staff to act within the period prescribed shall constitute major subdivision approval and approval shall be issued by the planning director. c.  The planning director shall notify the planning commission of actions taken on final plat applications within 28 days of the action. d.  Actions of the staff may be appealed to the planning commission. An applicant requesting an appeal of the actions of the full staff shall submit to the planning staff ten copies of the items required in article IV of this chapter within 14 days of the action. Such appeals will be acted on by the planning commission within 28 days of the filing of the appeal. (f)  Phased development. Where large scale developments are proposed, the developer may choose to complete the project in phases. This can be done by the submission of a General Development Plan (GDP), which encourages the developer to perform comprehensive land planning while allowing the costs of detailed site engineering to be incurred on a phase by phase basis (see Illustration 3). (1)  Application procedures. a.  An applicant requesting approval of a GDP shall submit to the planning staff 20 copies of the items required in article IV of this chapter and a polyester film reproducible together with a completed application form and the stipulated fee. b.  The application shall be reviewed and commented on by the full staff. Copies of the application and related information shall be furnished to the full staff by planning staff within seven days of the date of certification of a complete application. Written review comments from the full staff shall be returned to the planning staff within 14 days of the date of certification of a complete application. c.  Review and action for approval of a GDP shall be handled by the planning commission. Action should be taken on this application within 35 days of certification that it is a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. (2)  Effect of approval of general development plan. a.  An approved GDP is designed to serve as a guide for the applicant's preparation of and the planning commission's review of future preliminary plats. Approval of a GDP grants the following nonvested rights, which are presumed to be valid for ten years subject to engineering and environmental considerations: 1.  The location and general nature of infrastructure such as streets and utilities. 2.  The total number of residential dwelling units by type (i.e., detached single-family, town-houses, garden apartments, etc.) and/or the amount and type of nonresidential floor area (i.e., commercial, office, industrial, etc.) 3.  The general location and density of these uses within the proposed development. 4.  The nature of the proposed phases of development. b.  Each phase of the development shall be separately granted preliminary and final approval pursuant to major subdivision review procedures. Each section of a phased development must be planned and constructed in such a way that adheres to the GDP concept and meets all design standards. Also, each phase must be able to exist independently and effectively if no further phases are completed. c.  The planning commission may approve preliminary plats of phases with slight deviations from the GDP, but may require the submission of a revised GDP if the changes are determined to significantly affect the character or performance of the development. d.  The planning commission may grant the rights referred to above in subsections a. through c. for such period of time longer than ten years that it determines to be reasonable. (g)  Recordation. (1)  Plats. The clerk of the superior court shall not file or record a final plat of a subdivision, as defined within these regulations, until such plat has been approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and signed by the planning director. The planning staff shall be responsible for the delivering of final plats to the clerk of the superior court for recordation and shall accomplish such delivery with the next full working day after all required signatures have been affixed to the plat. (2)  Deed of conveyance. A deed transferring title of streets, easements and other designated areas shall be submitted to the appropriate commission for their acceptance. These deeds may be submitted upon preliminary approval for acceptance by the commission conditioned upon approval of the improvements by the city engineer or the county public works director as appropriate. (h)  Administrative subdivision procedures. (1)  Approval of administrative subdivisions. a.  An application requesting approval of an administrative subdivision as defined by this chapter shall submit to the planning commission three copies and one polyester film reproducible of plat information and copies of the items required in article IV of this chapter, together with a completed application form and the stipulated fee. b.  Review and actions for an administrative subdivision shall be handled by the planning director. Actions shall be taken within four days of certification that it is a complete application or within such further time as may be consented to by the developer. Failure to act shall constitute approval. c.  The planning director shall notify the planning commission of actions taken on administrative subdivisions within 28 days of the action. d.  Actions of the staff may be appealed to the planning commission. An applicant requesting an appeal of the actions of the full staff shall submit to the planning commission staff ten copies of the items required in article IV of this chapter within 14 days of the action. Such appeals will be acted on by the planning commission within 28 days of the filing of the appeal. (Code 1985, § 25-9; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. III, A—F), 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 95-153, § 1(art. III, G), 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 97-131, § 1, 7-8-1997) 
Secs. 25-10—25-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 
Sec. 25-21. - General provisions.     Subdivision development shall be in conformity with the following design and improvement standards. With regard to roadway, drainage, and utility requirements, alternate design standards may be approved by the planning commission, city engineer, the county director of public works, engineering director of water, gas and light commission, or director of traffic engineering; however, such changes shall be in accordance with sound engineering practices and for the purpose of addressing hardship and unsafe conditions which would result under the strict applications of the requirements of these regulations. (Code 1985, § 25-21; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. IV, A), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-22. - General design standards.     The subdivision of land including the arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets, alleys, cross-walks, easements, sites for parks, playgrounds, and schools or other land to be dedicated for public use shall conform to the comprehensive plan of the city and the county. Approval of the design of a proposed subdivision shall be considered on the basis of its relation to existing and platted streets, reasonable circulation of traffic within the subdivision and adjacent land, topographic conditions, run-off of stormwater, public convenience and safety, and appropriate relation to the proposed land uses of the areas to be served. (1)  Size and shape of land to be subdivided. a.  The size and shape of the land to be subdivided shall be sufficient and proper for land planning purposes and suitable in area and dimensions for the uses intended. b.  The plans for the subdivision of the property should incorporate into, and be compatible with, the existing and potential uses on property contiguous to the area to be subdivided. (2)  Design compatibility with natural features. a.  The design of every subdivision shall be compatible with the existing topography, drainage patterns, and other natural features on the site. b.  The design of every subdivision should conserve, wherever possible, isolated mature trees, wooded areas, watercourses, scenic views, ponds, floodplain areas, historical landmarks, and other features of the property, which, if preserved, would add to the attractiveness and value of the subdivision, neighborhood, or the city/county as a whole. (3)  Subdivision name. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or too closely approximate phonetically or in spelling the name of any other subdivision previously approved and/or recorded, except where the subdivision is a phase or addition of a large or existing development or is a resubdivision of a previously recorded subdivision. The planning commission shall have final authority to approve the name of the subdivision and phase or addition number. (4)  Lots. a.  Political boundaries. In general, lots shall be laid out so that they do not cross any political boundary. However, if a proposed subdivision is so located as to require or is proposed to have access provided through another county or is to be located partially within either the county or the city and partially within some other jurisdiction, the subdivider shall provide the planning commission with official assurances from such other jurisdictions that such access is, in fact, on a public thoroughfare. b.  Arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with these city/county regulations and in providing driveway access to buildings on such lots from an approved public or private street. c.  Lot specifications. 1.  Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the zoning ordinance and the health department in areas not served by public water and sewer. 2.  In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule shall provide a better street or lot plan. 3.  The depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the zoning ordinance. 4.  In general, if there are easements down side lot lines of individual lots in a subdivision and a building site consists of more than one lot, the easement down the middle of interior lot line is voided or removed unless there has been some utility construction placed within the easement and the utility easement is relocated down the new property line. An administrative subdivision shall be filed removing the center lot line. 5.  Lots abutting a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream shall have a minimum width and depth required to provide an adequate building site while providing front, side, and rear yards as required in the zoning ordinance. As required in the city/county floodplain management ordinance, the building finished floor elevation shall be one foot above the flood level as measured from the 100-year floodwater line. d.  Access. 1.  All lots shall abut a public or approved private street as permitted by the provisions of these regulations. 2.  Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from major or minor arterial streets or highways or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 3.  All subdivisions containing lots fronting on state highways shall be submitted to the department of transportation for approval. 4.  Single business enterprises and multiple business developments considered to be high-traffic generators shall provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites. e.  Driveway location. 1.  Driveways shall be located so that there is adequate clear sight distance onto the abutting road, avoiding locations along the inside curve or below the crown of a hilltop on an arterial street. f.  Flag lots. Flag lots shall be allowed as follows: 1.  Where the flag lot makes it possible to better utilize irregularly shaped properties or areas with resource limitations. 2.  The "pole" portion of a flag lot shall be included as part of the lot area for the purpose of determining average lot area, and the "pole" shall have a minimum width at the street right-of-way of not less than 30 feet, provided that, where flag lots are used, there shall be at least two lots at any point of access for a total minimum joint frontage of 60 feet. 3.  Flag lots shall not be permitted whenever their effect would be to increase the number of driveways taking access to a collector or arterial road. Shared driveways shall be used to eliminate additional points of access. This criterion prohibits one of the most common abuses, the use of flag lots to avoid the developmental costs of roads. These sites are best developed without flag lots, even if the cost of the lots is thereby increased, since controlling access reduces congestion on major roads. The shared driveway cut shall be provided by the developer and the driveway shall be constructed to the minimum depth necessary to serve all lots prior to recording the plat. 4.  Minimum lot area for flag lots shall be at least twice that of the zoning district in which the flag lot is located, except in the AG district where the minimum lot size shall remain ten acres. 5.  Side and rear yard requirements shall be met on the lot excluding the "pole" portion of the lot. 6.  The maximum length of the "pole" portion of the lot shall be no more than five times the lot width measured at the building line. This may be greater due to unusual circumstances when approved by the planning commission. 7.  A minimum frontage of 30 feet shall apply to lots which front upon the turn-around portion of a cul-de-sac. (5)  Blocks. a.  Design. 1.  The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard for the following: i.  Provisions for adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of uses contemplated. ii.  The size requirements of lot size within the applicable zoning district. iii.  Need for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of the street traffic. 2.  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to arterial streets, railroads, water-courses, drainageways, or other property lines of the subdivision. 3.  No block should exceed 1,800 feet in length except where required by unusual topographic conditions. 4.  In blocks exceeding 1,200 feet in length, the planning commission may require a 20 foot-wide right-of-way or easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, and/or a paved sidewalk. (Code 1985, § 25-22; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. IV, B), 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 94-133, § 1, 6-29-1994; Ord. No. 94-158, § 1, 10-11-1994; Ord. No. 97-131, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 99-137, 12-14-1999) 
Sec. 25-23. - Streets. (a)  General standards. (1)  All streets. All streets in the subdivision shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed street system as established on the DARTS plan and comprehensive plan of the city and the county. (2)  Major elements. Major elements of the street system should be used to help define and buffer different land use areas, enhancing their identity and cohesiveness. (3)  Minimize length, intersections and paved area. To the extent feasible, the lineal length of streets, the number of street intersections, and the paved area within intersections should be minimized. (4)  The design of the street system. The design of the street system of the subdivisions shall be in accordance with table I-A and I-B—minimum standards for street design and construction—and shall be in accordance with the engineering standards herein. (5)  Adequate drainage structures. Adequate drainage structures shall be provided. The design, installation, and construction of drainage structures shall comply with the engineering standards herein and the city and the county floodplain management ordinance. (6)  Private streets. Private streets shall be permitted if they have an alignment and width consistent with engineering and planning commission recommendations, have adequate easements for utilities and access and are local in nature and designed to prevent through traffic. Prior to final plan approval, the applicant shall file a release of maintenance agreement with the city/county attorney, releasing the relevant governing body from any present or future maintenance of all private streets. The perpetual maintenance of private streets shall be guaranteed by the establishment of a homeowners' association, other responsible association, or other instrument. In all cases, the instrument of street maintenance shall be approved by the planning commission. When built, private streets shall have signs posted indicating they are private streets. If, in the future, the property owners desire the streets to become public, they shall be improved to existing city/county standards prior to acceptance by the governing body. Private street design and construction standards shall be submitted to the city/county engineer for approval. In no case shall land reserved for right-of-way be less than required for a similar public street, nor shall the road width be less than required for a public road of similar classification. (7)  Private access drives. Private access drives shall be permitted to serve landlocked lots only where landlocked lots were in existence prior to the enactment of these regulations or are a result of special physical features that otherwise render the property undevelopable. No more than one such drive shall be approved per subdivision development and must be approved as part of the original plat. (8)  Listed thoroughfares. Listed thoroughfares to which driveway access is restricted or limited by these regulations are included in appendix 2 and regulated as follows: a.  Where a subdivision for single-family and two-family lots will abut or contains any of the thoroughfares listed in appendix 2, the planning commission shall require that such single-family and two-family lots not have direct vehicular access to such listed thoroughfares except in the cases of: 1.  Subdivisions of property to accommodate the residential needs of family members of the owner of a large tract of land; in which case, minimum frontages are to be as close to that required by exception 3. below as practical; however, when such frontage cannot be met, the planning commission may, upon the recommendation of the county director of public works or such person as may be directed to act as the county traffic engineer, approve lesser frontages and driveway spacing as low as that permitted in exception 4. below; 2.  When there are particular and unusual physical conditions not caused by the owner which would result in a hardship as distinguished from a mere inconvenience; 3.  Where any lot created will have a minimum frontage of 200 feet and only one driveway per lot; or 4.  Where the subdivision will have minimum lot frontages of 200 feet for all corner lots and 150 feet for all noncorner (interior) lots and the plat will contain restrictive covenants requiring the use of joint (common) or abutting driveways or parallel driveways which are no more than six feet from the property line.     Generally, this would mean that lots should not front said listed thoroughfares; however, any design solution which satisfies the intent of restricting direct vehicular access to such thoroughfares would be acceptable. Potential design solutions to achieve this purpose include: i.  Use of marginal access streets wherein land abutting a listed thoroughfare is separated from such thoroughfare by a planted or grassed strip of land and a marginal access street; ii.  Use of reverse frontage lots wherein lots back up to a listed thoroughfare and front on and have access only to a local or minor collector street running approximately parallel to the listed thoroughfare. Such reverse frontage lots shall have a no-access reservation (at least 15 feet wide) along their rear property line and immediately adjacent to any abutting listed thoroughfare; iii.  Using one or more cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets or short looping streets wherein lots front and only have access to such streets and those streets are only entered from and generally designed at right angles to a street not a listed thoroughfare and laid out approximately parallel to any listed thoroughfare; and iv.  Other such design solutions as may be devised to achieve the same results. The use of deep lots with rear service alleys and a no access reservation along the front of the lot or the use of cul-de-sacs, U-shaped streets or short looping streets having direct access to a listed thoroughfare is not considered a good solution and should be approved only when unique circumstances make other solutions unacceptable.     Where a commercial or industrial subdivision will abut or contain a listed thoroughfare, the planning commission may require the use of such design standards as listed above. b.  Any lot on a designated listed thoroughfare but not a state highway which is to be used for residential purposes containing three or more dwelling units per building shall be reviewed and approved as a business use property. c.  Single business enterprise on a single lot on a "listed thoroughfare." 1.  Traffic movements confined primarily to on-site employees of any type business of no more than 40 employees are permitted driveways as follows: i.  Corner lots. One two-way on the principle thoroughfare and one two-way on the cross street; or ii.  Interior lots. One two-way driveway or two one-way driveways. 2.  Traffic movements consisting primarily of in-and-out customer activities with any type business except service stations and convenience stores with gas and characteristics shall be permitted driveways as indicated below: i.  No more than 50 on-site parking spaces or are located on sites of less than 300 feet [of] frontage are permitted driveways as follows: aa.  Corner lots. One two-way driveway on the principle thoroughfare or side cross street and one two-way or two one-way driveways on the other remaining street; or bb.  Interior lots. One two-way driveway or two one-way driveways. ii.  More than 50 on-site parking spaces and are on sites having a minimum of 300 feet [of] frontage are permitted driveways as follows: aa.  Corner lot. Two two-way driveways on the principle thoroughfare or side cross street and one two-way or two one-way driveways on the other remaining street; or bb.  Interior lot. Two two-way driveways. cc.  Service stations and convenience stores which include gas and oil sales and have a minimum frontage of 150 feet shall be permitted no more than one curb opening for each 50 feet of frontage or major fraction thereof along any street. No driveway or curb opening shall be located nearer than ten feet to any corner or exterior lot line, as measured along the property line. No driveway shall be located nearer than 30 feet, as measured along the property line, to any other driveway giving access to or from the same service station. cc [dd.]  In all cases, driveways are to be located as far as practical from an inter-section. d.  Multiple businesses on either corner or interior lots or tracts on a "listed thoroughfare." The following applies to as many said thoroughfares as the property borders and any business use. 1.  Sites with up to 300 feet of frontage are permitted one two-way driveway or two one-way driveways. 2.  Sites with more than 300 feet and up to 1,000 feet of frontage are permitted two two-way driveways. 3.  Sites with more than 1,000 feet and up to 2,000 feet of frontage are permitted three two-way driveways. 4.  Sites with more than 2,000 feet and up to 3,000 feet of frontage are permitted three two-way driveways or two one-way driveways and one multilaned driveway. 5.  Sites with more than 3,000 feet of frontage will be permitted driveways on a case-by-case basis upon study and recommendation of the person designated to act as the county traffic engineer and/or state traffic and safety engineer as appropriate.     In the above instances (1.—5.), driveways of corner lots or tracts shall be as far as practical from the intersection. h. [6.]  (Driveway access for listed streets in the city, not under the jurisdiction of the state Department of Transportation (GDOT), is regulated by h(5)[e.]—(9)[i.]. Listed streets within the Central Business District are exempt from these regulations.) (e) [e.]  Where a subdivision for single-family and two-family lots will abut or contains any of the urban principal or minor arterials listed in Appendix 3, the planning commission shall require that such single-family and two-family lots not have direct vehicular access to such listed urban principal or minor arterials. Access must be from an interior local street or frontage street.     The planning commission may, upon the recommendation of the city Engineer, allow direct access to listed principal or minor arterials under the following conditions: (a)  Subdivision of property to accommodate the residential needs of family members of the owner of a large tract of land; (b)  When there are particular and unusual physical conditions, not caused by the owner, which would result in a hardship as distinguished from a mere inconvenience.     The following minimum frontages for listed urban principal or minor arterials are allowed if the planning commission grants direct access based on (a) or (b) above; any lot created will have a minimum frontage of 450 feet and only one driveway per lot; or where the subdivision will have minimum lot frontages of 300 feet for all corner lots and 250 feet for all non-corner (interior) lots and the plat will contain restrictive covenants requiring the use of joint (common) or abutting driveways, or parallel driveways which are no more than six feet from the property line. (f) [f.]  Subdivision of property on a listed urban principal or minor arterial, which is to be used for residential purposes containing three or more dwelling units per building shall follow access requirements outlined in (7) for commercial and industrial subdivisions. (g) [g.]  Where a commercial or industrial subdivision will abut or contain an urban principal or minor arterial listed in Appendix 3, the planning commission shall require that such lots follow driveway access guidelines established by the GDOT document "Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control." These guidelines are attached as appendix A. (h) [h.]  Where any lot abuts or contains a collector listed in appendix 3, the planning commission shall require that such lots follow driveway access guidelines established by the GDOT document "Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control." These guidelines are attached as appendix 4. (i) [i.]  An appeal for additional access for (7) and (8) above must be made to the city engineering department according to that department's procedure. (9)  Improvement plan and grading requirements. Streets shall be graded and improved to conform to the city and county construction standards and engineering specifications and shall be approved as to design and constructions by the city engineer and the county director of public works. (10)  Alleys. Alleys may be required in high density residential, commercial and industrial developments. Where provided, alleys shall have a minimum right-of-way (ROW) width of 25 feet and a minimum pavement width of 20 feet. (See table I-A, I-B—minimum standards for street designs.) (11)  Dead-end streets (temporary). If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the boundary line of the property being subdivided. A temporary turnaround of a design approved by the city engineer and the the county director of public works shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land required outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutting owners whenever the street is continued. (12)  Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs in residential areas should not be longer than 1,800 feet, but may be approved for longer lengths depending on design constraints. Cul-de-sacs may be built with standard circular turnarounds or with standard circular turnarounds with center islands. If a cul-de-sac is built with standard circular turnaround with center island, the island shall be landscaped with grass or trees and maintained by a homeowners association. All dead-end streets shall be provided with a cul-de-sac. (13)  Sight triangles (clear sight distance). Where any street intersection is created which would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility within the sight triangle, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to comply with the sight distance requirements of these regulations and shall not erect any sign or improvement which would preclude safe sight distance. (14)  Curb and gutter. a.  Where curb and gutter are constructed, vertical curb shall be used on all collector streets. Mountable (rolled) curb may be used on local streets if its use does not adversely affect storm drainage, if approved by the city engineer. (Design specifications for curb are contained in the appropriate jurisdiction's constructions specifications). b.  Where provided, curb and gutter shall be constructed based on city/county construction standards and specifications. (15)  Roadside ditches. Where curb and gutter is not provided, drainage ditches shall be constructed to provide for proper drainage. Drainage ditches shall have side slopes no steeper than 3:1, and shall be grassed and mulched, sodded, or paved depending on the intended design velocity of stormwater. Drainage ditch construction shall conform to the specifications detailed in applicable city/county construction standards. (16)  Utility areas. Utilities shall generally be located within the right-of-way and/or easements on both sides of and parallel to the street in accordance with table I-A, I-B. Utility areas shall be planted with grass or ground cover or treated with other suitable cover material. (17)  Street names and signs. No street name shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the name of existing streets. Therefore, developers are required to submit their proposed street names to the planning commission. Duplication of street names between the city and county are not to occur except where a street is planned as a continuation of a street between the two jurisdictions. A street which exists or is planned as a continuation of a street shall bear the same name. The planning commission shall have final authority to approve street names in new subdivisions. At least two street name signs shall be placed at each four-way intersection and one at each "T" intersection. Signs shall be free of visual obstructions. Street name signs shall be furnished and installed by the city or county. These shall be paid for by the subdivider prior to the recording of the final plat. (18)  House numbers/street addresses. House numbers or street addresses shall be provided by the planning commission after preliminary plat approval and a copy of the final plat showing the approved house numbers or street addresses shall be submitted along with the final plat. The planning staff may approve minor corrections or modifications at final review. (19)  Reserve strips. The creation of fee simple reserve strips to preclude access shall not be permitted. Streets roughly parallel to the boundary line of the subdivision shall be located either on that boundary line or not less than one lot depth from said boundary line. All streets intended to provide the subdivision and adjacent parcels of property with means of ingress and egress shall extend to the boundary line of the subdivision. (b)  Design criteria. In order to provide for roads of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, firefighting, sanitation, and road maintenance equipment, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and to avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards are hereby required. The following design criteria are ideal standards that should be the goal of all design. However, specific site conditions may dictate these goals to be unattainable. In such cases, flexibility will be allowed. (c)  Design layout. (1)  General concepts. a.  All streets shall be located in relation to existing topographic conditions, to public convenience and safety, and to efficient drainage and utility systems. b.  All streets shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industrial business districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers, to population densities, and to patterns of existing and proposed land uses. (2)  Residential streets. a.  A residential area should be conveniently accessible from arterial streets. b.  Residential streets shall provide safe and convenient access to housing. c.  Local streets shall be so laid out as to discourage high speed or through traffic, but the design shall be logical and comprehensive to a motorist or a pedestrian attempting to travel to and through the subdivision. d.  Curvilinear streets, cul-de-sacs, or looped streets shall be used where such will result in a more desirable layout. e.  Layout of residential areas should be planned to avoid future need to widen any local streets or minor collector streets. (3)  Nonresidential streets. a.  Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended through adjacent existing or potential residential areas. b.  The streets and other accessways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provisions of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas, so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian. c.  Streets extending parallel or approximately parallel to a railroad right-of-way should: 1.  Be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure depth for commercial or industrial sites, and 2.  Be at a distance at least 50 feet from the railroad right-of-way when intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at grade, or be at such other distance as shall be necessary, when intersecting a street which will be grade separated when crossing the railroad. (4)  Design speeds for streets. Part of the criteria to be used in the layout and design of streets shall be the following vehicular speed design factors: Arterial 45—55 miles-per-hour Major collector* 40—45 miles-per-hour Minor collector* 30—45 miles-per-hour Local 25—30 miles-per-hour  *The lower speed within the range shown shall apply specifically to residential areas while commercial and industrial area streets may use the full speed range depending on specific requirements of the development. NOTE—The above vehicular speed design factors shall not necessarily be used to establish speed limits. (5)  Intersections. a.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, but in no case shall any intersection be less than 75 degrees. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least one 100 feet therefrom. b.  Intersections on the inside of a curve, on a hilltop, or a point slightly below a hilltop shall be avoided. c.  An intersection of more than two streets shall not be permitted without approval of the planning staff, traffic engineer, city engineer or the county public works director. d.  In nonresidential areas and along arterial streets, proposed new intersections shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any intersections on the opposite side of such street. e.  In cases of intersection off-sets, centerline jogs of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted whenever possible; however, major streets should be aligned to avoid off-sets altogether. (d)  A system of joint use driveways and cross access easements shall be established wherever feasible along "listed thoroughfares," and the building site shall incorporate the following: (1)  A continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation. (2)  A design speed of ten miles per hour and sufficient width to accommodate two-way travel aisles designed to accommodate automobiles, services vehicles, and loading vehicles. (3)  Stub-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that the abutting properties may be tied in to provide cross-access through a service drive. (Code 1985, § 25-23; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. IV, C), 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 95-153, § 1, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 97-131, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 99-137, 12-14-1999; Ord. No. 06-132, §§ h., (5)—(9), 11-28-2006) 
Sec. 25-24. - Easements.     With the exception of where utilities are placed in alleys where required, easements shall be located on front, side, and rear lot lines. The width of front easement shall vary depending on location on the property and subject to review by the full staff. Side and rear easements shall be at least ten feet wide on each side of the lot line or property line where there are existing or planned utilities or drainage ways or as deemed otherwise necessary by the city engineer or the county public works director. (Code 1985, § 25-24; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. IV, D), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-25. - Water facilities, general requirements. (a)  Public water main extensions shall be approved by the appropriate utility system. Private water systems shall be approved by the state EPD with review by the city engineer and the county public works director as appropriate. (b)  All public water main extensions shall conform to the specifications of the appropriate utility system. (c)  A copy of the "as-built" water system plan shall be submitted to the engineering director of Water, Gas & Light, the city engineer and to the the county director of public works. (d)  All minor and major plats shall show the location of all fire hydrants within 500 feet of the subdivision. (Code 1985, § 25-25; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. IV, E), 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 97-131, § 1, 7-8-1997) 
Sec. 25-26. - Sewerage facilities. (a)  General requirements. State public health regulations and the city sewerage and pretreatment standards, as administered by the EPD and city, control the installation of sewerage facilities. The following are minimum requirements subject to EPD and the city approval. (1)  When an adequate public gravity flow sewer line is within 300 feet of the proposed development and it can be determined to be economically feasible, the applicant shall connect each lot to the system. It shall be considered economically feasible to connect a subdivision to a public sewer system when the total cost for sanitary sewer does not exceed the cost for septic tank system by more than 300 percent. (2)  When future upstream extensions are possible, sewer easements through the proposed development shall be required. (3)  Private disposal systems or treatment plants and septic tanks shall be approved by the county health department and if within the city limits shall be approved by the city. (4)  Installation of any sewer lines, laterals and mains shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. (5)  A copy of the "as-built" sewer plans shall be submitted to the city engineer or the county director of public works. (b)  Design standards. Additional design and construction standards for sewerage facilities, which also apply, are cited in the construction standards and engineering specifications of the city and the county. (Code 1985, § 25-26; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. IV, F), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-27. - Reserved. Editor's note— Section 25-27 was repealed by Ordinance No. 06-128, adopted 10-24-2006. 
Sec. 25-28. - Street lighting. (a)  A street lighting system shall be installed in all major subdivisions in the city limits of Albany. The cost of such street lighting system shall be determined by the traffic engineering department of the city and lighting shall be installed by the appropriate utility. The developer shall pay for the cost of installing the street lighting system prior to recording of the final plat. (b)  In residential subdivisions in the city, one standard luminary shall be placed at each street intersection, at the terminus of every cul-de-sac, at no more than every 150 feet along residential streets, and at special problem locations. In nonresidential subdivisions, spacing and location of light standards shall be required by standards adopted by the city commission and the street lighting plan of February 1, 1989. (c)  The construction specifications of the street lighting system shall comply with the requirements of the utility provider. (d)  All the county subdivisions involving new streets in residential developments shall be required to certify on the final plat of record that street lighting is provided for in said subdivision in accordance with the following minimum standards: _____ (1)  Underground utility: Overhead fixtures Traditional square fixture; decorative light to be used with decorative pole. Pole 20-foot decorative aluminum pole. Type of lamp High-pressure sodium. Maximum distance between lights 300 feet.  (2)  Overhead utility: Overhead fixture Cobra-head-type fixture. Pole 35-foot utility pole. Type of lamp High-pressure sodium. Maximum distance between lights 300 feet.  _____     Nonresidential subdivisions shall be lighted with spacing and location standards as determined by the planning commission. (Code 1985, § 25-28; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. IV, H), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-29. - Utilities: telephone, electric, gas and cable. (a)  General requirements. (1)  Underground utilities are encouraged but not required. (2)  No paved surfaced street shall be cut for underground utility installations except by permission of the city engineer or the county director of public works. (3)  Prior to the commencement of construction, owner's engineer shall locate position of all utility lines on the site and coordinate with the city engineer or county public works department, water, gas and light commission, Southern Bell, TCI Cable and other concerned utility companies before construction plans are approved. (b)  Design standards. (1)  Utility lines shall be located along the front, side and/or rear of property lines or at such other locations as may be approved by the utility companies involved and the city engineer or the county director of public works. (2)  Additional design and construction standards for utilities, which also apply, are cited in the construction standards and engineering specifications of the city and the county. (Code 1985, § 25-29; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. IV, I), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-30. - Monuments and markers. (a)  Preservation of existing monuments. All United States, state, county, or other official benchmarks, monuments, or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the subdivision shall be preserved. When a proposed improvement in a subdivision makes necessary the moving of benchmarks, monuments or stations, the authority having jurisdiction shall be notified and given sufficient time to take appropriate action. (b)  Placement of new monuments. Permanent reference monuments shall be placed at block corners and other points such as street intersections, lot corners, and angle points and shall be marked with a solid iron rod or an iron pipe not less than one-half inch in diameter, at least 18 inches long, driven flush with the ground. Removal and resetting of monuments by anyone other than a registered land surveyor is prohibited. The subdivision will be referenced to the Albany, the Dougherty Coordinate System (ADCCS) under the following circumstances: (1)  Any property corner is within 500 feet of an ADCCS monument. (2)  Any commercial or industrial subdivision of property over ten acres in size must be referenced to an ADCCS monument. (3)  Any residential subdivision of greater than ten acres and five lots or if public streets, water, and/or sewer to be constructed.     Subdivision or resubdivision of property located in a subdivision recorded since January 1, 1978, is exempt from this requirement unless any part of the property is within 500 feet of an ADCCS monument.     If an ADCCS monument is farther than two miles from any part of the subdivision, this requirement may be waived upon agreement of the city engineer and the director of the Albany Dougherty Planning Commission.     All references to ADCCS monuments are to be established through field surveys with permanent field notes available for inspection and review and with the same degree of accuracy as required for the subdivision. (Code 1985, § 25-30; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. IV, J), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-31. - Tree planting and preservation.     See the City of Albany Tree Ordinance, #92-124, as amended; no county standards (chapter 28, article III, section 28-31 et seq.). (Code 1985, § 25-31; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. IV, K), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-32. - Planned unit development. (a)  General. Planned unit development (PUD) is designed to provide developers with desirable gross densities, while requiring subdivision and site plan patterns to capitalize on topography and site features and to preserve common open space. Also, PUD can provide a variety of different uses and structure types that are effectively combined through the site planning process (see Illustration 4). (b)  Waiver of provisions of subdivision regulations. The zoning regulations contain provisions for a variety of residential, mixed use, and commercial PUDs. Provisions of these subdivision regulations may be waived by the planning commission and/or modified for PUD pursuant to the PUD district regulations. (c)  Design standards. PUD design standards are created individually for each development through a review and negotiation process that is designed to consider the unique nature of each PUD project. Design review criteria are based on general planning performance standards, and the criteria established in the applicable district regulations in the zoning regulations. The plans submitted and approved for PUD approval shall constitute general development plan approval. (Code 1985, § 25-32; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. IV, L), 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 95-153, § 1, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 25-33. - Platting standards. (a)  When lots/tracts are being subdivided from a larger parcel and the remainder parcel acreage is 40 acres or greater, the remainder parcel may not be surveyed at the discretion of the city county engineer and planning director. If not surveyed, the parcel shall be noted "parcel not surveyed at this time." (b)  All subdivisions shall be tied to a street intersection or other permanent corner subject to the approval of the city/county engineer when a (ADCCS) monument is not available as described in section 25-30(b). (Code 1985, § 25-33; Ord. No. 97-131, § 1(M), 7-8-1997) 
Secs. 25-34—25-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 
Sec. 25-41. - Improvements and guarantees.     Before the final plat is approved by the planning commission, the subdivider shall be required to complete or provide improvement guarantees for all improvements as required in these regulations. The form of all guarantees shall be approved by the applicable city and/or county attorney. (1)  Completion of improvements. The city engineer or the the county director of public works shall certify in writing to the planning commission that all improvements required by the city or county have been satisfactorily installed or properly guaranteed and a deed submitted. (2)  Improvement guarantees. The subdivider shall provide improvement guarantees at the time of application for final plat approval if all required improvements have not been installed and approved as herein required. Such improvement guarantees shall be approved by the city engineer or the county director of public works as to amount and surety and be sufficient to secure to the board of city commissioners or board of commissioners of the county the satisfactory completion of all public improvements required by these regulations. Improvement guarantees may take the form of either a letter of credit, a bond, or a certified check or other form acceptable to the city/county attorney and the planning commission and shall be released only after the city or county has accepted the work. (3)  Costs of improvements. All required improvements shall be made by the subdivider, at his expense, without reimbursement by the city or county or by any improvements district therein. (4)  Failure to complete improvements. In those instances where an improvement guarantee has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such guarantees, the city or county shall call the improvement guarantee due and collect all funds or require that all improvements be immediately installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the improvement guarantee is declared to be in default. If any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the city's or county's construction standards and specifications, the subdivider shall be responsible for removing any defects and completing the improvements or forfeiting the guarantee. (Code 1985, § 25-41; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. VI, A), 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 95-153, § 1, 11-14-1995) 
Sec. 25-42. - Inspection of improvements.     The city engineer or the the county director of public works shall provide for inspection of required improvements during and upon their completion and shall approve all such installations to ensure satisfactory compliance with provisions of these regulations. (Code 1985, § 25-42; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. VI, B), 6-22-1993) 
Sec. 25-43. - Maintenance of improvements.     The subdivider shall be responsible for maintenance and warranty repairs constructed by the developer for a period of one year from either the completion of construction or the recording of the final subdivision plat, whichever is the latest. (Code 1985, § 25-43; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. VI, C), 6-22-1993) 
Secs. 25-44—25-50. - Reserved. _____
ARTICLE IV. - SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS 
Sec. 25-51. - Requirements.     The following information is required at the stage of development indicated, either on the plat or in accompanying documentation. Description Admin. Final Minor Final Major Preliminary Final General Development Plan I.  PROJECT-PLAT INFORMATION (1) Name, signature, address and phone number of owner and applicant X X X X X (2) Name, signature, license number, seal, address and phone number of engineer/land surveyor, landscape architect X land surveyor only X land surveyor only X X land surveyor only X (3) Certification of the accuracy of the survey and plat by the engineer/land surveyor, landscape architect X X X (4) Title denoting type of application, land lot and land district, county/city block and lot, street location X X X X X (5) A locator map showing location of tract with reference to surrounding properties, streets, city/county boundaries, etc. X X X X X (6) North arrow and graphic scale X X X X X (7) Signature blocks for approval by appropriate authority X X X (8) Certification that the applicant is the owner of the property to be subdivided or his agent and signature by owner on final plat X X X X (9) Location and description of documentation X X X (10) Plats as required on a standardized sheet of 17" × 22" (or 11" × 17" at a scale of 1" = 200' or longer) X X X (11) Acreage of tract to the nearest tenth of an acre X X X X X (12) Date of original and all revisions X X X X X (13) Location and dimensions of any existing or proposed streets X existing X existing X schematic X X schematic (14) Delineate lot lines and area in square feet or acreage of all lots and other tracts that result from subdivision X X X schematic X X schematic (15) Minimum building setback lines X X X X X (16) Any existing or proposed easement or land reserved for or dedicated to public use and the purposes of such areas X X X schematic X X schematic (17) Phases of development X X X (18) Payment of application fees X X X X X (19) All watercourses, flood-plains, wetlands or other visible or known environmentally sensitive areas on site X X X schematic X X schematic (20) Existing rights-of-way and/or easements on the tract or that affect the tract X X X X X (21) Existing and proposed contours based on city/county datum. Contours may be required to extend beyond subject property unless otherwise approved X only where required by city engineering or county public works X X (22) Existing system of drainage of subject site and of any larger tract or basin of which it is a part X X (23) Drainage Area Map (as required by engineer) X X X (24) Drainage calculations as required by engineer X as required X X (25) Evidence of health department approval of soil survey or percolation tests if applicable X X X X (26) Names of adjoining subdivisions and/or property owners including reference to the plats or deeds of such properties by recorded name, date recorded, file and cabinet number or deed reference X X X X X II.  IMPROVEMENTS AND CONSTRUCTION INFORMATION (27) Proposed utility infrastructure plans, including sanitary sewer, water, stormwater management, telephone, electric and cable TV X schematic X schematic X schematic (28) Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan X (29) Proposed street names X X X (30) Lighting plan and details X X (31) Vehicular and pedestrian circulation X general (32) Evidence of approval of as-built construction plans by the city engineer or director of public works or the posting of an approved performance guarantee X X (33) Quit claim deeds to all public improvements and easements for all new easements shown on plat X X X  NOTES: X=Item required at indicated development stage. 1. Proposed deed restrictions or protective covenants do not have to be included for preapplication concept plan and GDP. 2. Conditional approval may be granted subject to other regulatory approvals. (Code 1985, § 25-51; Ord. No. 93-142, § 1(art. VII), 6-22-1993; Ord. No. 95-153, § 1, 11-14-1995; Ord. No. 97-131, § 1, 7-8-1997) 
Secs. 25-52—25-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LIST OF TABLES, APPENDICES, AND ILLUSTRATIONS 
[Sec. 25-96. - Summary of tables, appendices and illustrations.] Table I-A Minimum Standards for Street Design City of Albany Table I-B Minimum Standards for Street Design Dougherty County Appendix 1. Subdivision Approval Process 2. Listed Thoroughfares 3. Street Hierarchy Illustration 1. Cluster and Conventional Development 2. Concept/Sketch Plan 3. General Development Plan 4. Planned Unit Development  
[Sec. 25-97. - Minimum standards for city street design.] TABLE I-A. MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN CITY OF ALBANY Street Type Right-of-Way Width (ft.) Pavement Width++ (ft.) Radius of Horizontal Curves of Centerline (ft.) Minimum/ Maximum Gradient (%) Radius of Curb Returns at Intersection (ft.) Minimum Sight Clear Distance (ft.) Tangent Between Horizontal Reverse Curves (ft.) Front Easement (ft.) Arterial 100 NA NA NA NA NA NA 10 Major Collector 80 33 800 0.4/7 35 400 200 10 Minor Collector 80 33 400 0.4/7 25 260 100 10 Local Street Low density 100 0.4/12 25 200 50 10 with curb 50 18 no curb 50 24 100 0.4/12 25 200 50 10 high density with curb 60 24 100 0.4/12 25 200 50 15 Alleys High Density Residential 20 18 NA 0.4/6 NA NA NA Commercial and Industrial 25 20 NA 0.4/6 NA NA NA  + Drainage/construction easements may be required on streets with drainage swales rather than curb and gutter. ++ Pavement widths are in feet measured between edges of shoulders or gutters and thereby exclude curb and gutter widths. +++ Arterial streets will have design standards determined by the director of traffic engineering. ++++ In residential developments, cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a right-of-way (ROW) radius of 50 feet. The pavement shall have a radius of 30 feet on streets with alleys and 40 feet on streets without alleys. In industrial and commercial developments, cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a right-of-way (ROW) radius of 60 feet and a pavement radius of 35 feet. +++++ Density criteria: Low density: Zero to two dwelling units/gross acre. High density: 2.1 dwelling units/gross acre and above. (Code 1985, ch. 25, art. IV, table I-A; Ord. No. 97-1331, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 98-103, § 1, 1-12-1998) 
[Sec. 25-98. - Minimum standards for county street design.] TABLE I-B MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN DOUGHERTY COUNTY Street Type Right-of-Way Width (ft.) Pavement Width++ (ft.) Radius of Horizontal Curves of Centerline (ft.) Minimum/ Maximum Gradient (%) Radius of Curb Returns at Intersection (ft.) Minimum Sight Clear Distance (ft.) Tangent Between Horizontal Reverse Curves (ft.) Front Easement (ft.) Arterial 100 NA NA NA NA NA NA 15 Major Collector with curb 80 33 800 0.4/7 35 400 200 10 no curb 80 24 800 0.4/7 35 400 200 15 Minor Collector with curb 60 27 400 0.4/7 25 260 100 10 no curb 60 24 400 0.4/7 25 260 100 15 Local Street low density 60 27 100 0.4/12 25 200 50 10 high density with curb 50 24 100 0.4/12 25 200 50 10 no curb 60 24 100 0.4/12 25 200 50 15 Alleys High Density Residential 20 18 NA 0.4/6 NA NA NA Commercial and Industrial 25 20 NA 0.4/6 NA NA NA  + Drainage/construction easements may be required on streets with drainage swales rather than curb and gutter. ++ Pavement widths are in feet measured between edges of shoulders or gutters and thereby exclude curb and gutter widths. +++ Arterial streets will have design standards determined by the director of traffic engineering. ++++ In residential developments, cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a right-of-way (ROW) radius of 50 feet. The pavement shall have a radius of 30 feet on streets with alleys and 40 feet on streets without alleys. In industrial and commercial developments, cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a right-of-way (ROW) radius of 60 feet and a pavement radius of 35 feet. +++++ Density criteria: Low density: Zero to two dwelling units/gross acre. High density: 2.1 dwelling units/gross acre and above. (Code 1985, ch. 25, art. IV, table I-B; Ord. No. 97-131, § 1, 7-8-1997) 
[Sec. 25-99. - Appendices and illustrations.] APPENDIX 1 MINOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCESS (ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL) APPENDIX 1 MAJOR SUBDIVISION REVIEW PROCESS APPENDIX 2     Listed thoroughfares to which driveway access is restricted or limited by these regulations.     The following list of public streets or thoroughfares comprise the listed thoroughfares referenced elsewhere within these regulations: Thoroughfare Name From To Antioch Road Stagecoach Road Gravel Hill Road Blue Springs Road Empire Avenue Lily Pond Road Branch Road Cordele Road Sylvester Road Byron Plantation Road Old Dawson Road Gillionville Road County Line Road Harris Road Moultrie Road Eight Mile Road Leary Road Gillionville Road Empire Avenue Hardup Road Blue Springs Road Fleming Road County Line Road Mock Road Gaissert Road Fleming Road Spring Flats Road Gravel Hill Road Moultrie Road Mitchell Co. Line Hardup Road Newton Road Wildfair Road Harris Road Cordele Road County Line Road Helms Road Radium Springs Road Moultrie Road Hill Road Sylvester Road County Line Road Holly Drive Radium Springs Road Moultrie Road Lily Pond Road Old Pretoria Road M. L. King Jr. Drive M. L. King Jr. Drive Lily Pond Road Albany city Limit Mock Road Moultrie Road Albany city Limit Oakhaven Drive Old Pretoria Road Newton Road Old Dawson Road Tallahassee Road Albany city Limit Old Pretoria Road Leary Road Albany city Limit Radium Springs Road Albany city Limit Mitchell Co. Line School Bus Road Radium Springs Road Moultrie Road Spring Flats Road Moultrie Road County Line Road Stagecoach Road Antioch Road Radium Springs Road Tallahassee Road Terrell Co. Line Gillionville Road Vanderbilt Drive Leary Road Newton Road Westover Road Old Pretoria Road Albany city Limit  
[Sec. 25-100. - Street hierarchy.] APPENDIX 3. STREET HIERARCHY     Listed streets within the city to which driveway access is restricted or limited by article IV section C. h. (5)[e]—(9)[i].     Functional classification of listed streets are designated by U.S. Department of Transportation FHA and shown on Functional Classification Map: the county the state 2005. Any street not listed, but shown on Map (or map in force) is regulated by article IV. section C. h. (5)[e]—(9)[i]. Urban Principal Arterials Broad Avenue Dawson Road Oakridge Drive Westover Blvd. Urban Minor Arterials Blaylock Street Broad Avenue Byron Road Front Street (and proposed extension) Gordon Avenue Jefferies Avenue Jefferson Street Lockett Station Road Madison Street Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive Mock Road Monroe Street Oakridge Drive Old Dawson Road Old Pretoria Road Palmyra Road Pine Avenue Radium Springs Road Seventh Avenue Westover Blvd. Collectors Beattie Road Blaylock Street E. Doublegate Drive Johnson Road Lippett Drive Maple Street Nottingham Way Pinson Road Rosebrier Avenue Turner Field Road Westgate Drive Westtown Road Willie Pitts Road (Code 1985, ch. 25, art. IV; Ord. No. 06-132, app. 3, 11-28-2006) APPENDIX 4     Spacing of Driveways. Guidelines for driveway spacing, associated with the construction of new driveways, are provided in Table I—Driveway Spacing Criteria. Driveways should be separated from any other facility, which accesses a city roadway, whether it is another driveway or a public street.     Spacing of One-Way Driveways. Figure 1 shows a typical layout of one-way driveways. The spacing criteria presented in Table I does not apply to the distance between the two (2) one-way driveways (driveway pair).     A driveway pair must be separated from another driveway pair by the distance as shown in Table I. A driveway pair must also be separated from an adjacent two-way driveway in accordance with the spacing criteria in Table I. 
Appendix B - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT[1] Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Printed herein is the Floodplain Management Ordinance of the city, Ordinance No. 09-130, as adopted by the Board of City Commissioners on September 22, 2009. This ordinance repealed the prior floodplain management provisions which appeared at sections 25-101 through 25-162, as amended, in Chapter 25 ("Subdivision Regulations") of the 1985 Code. Amendments to this ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note to this ordinance indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors in this ordinance have been corrected without notation. The same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text has been used in this ordinance as it appears in the Code of Ordinances. Additions made to this ordinance for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets.   In addition, Ord. 09-117, adopted April 28, 2009, approved and adopted the Albany Dougherty Flood Hazard Mitigation Plan. The Plan is not set out at length herein and is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
ARTICLE 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 
Section A. - Authorization.     Article IX, section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a)] have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and board of commissioners of Albany, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
Section B. - Findings of fact. 1.  The flood hazard areas of the City of Albany are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 2.  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazards to other lands which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages. 
Section C. - Statement of purpose.     It is the intent of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 1.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 2.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 3.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 4.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage, and; 5.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
Section D. - Objectives.     The objectives of this ordinance are: 1.  To protect human life and health; 2.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 3.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 4.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 5.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, street and bridges located in floodplains; 6.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 7.  To insure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area, and; 8.  To insure that flood insurance will continue to be available to the residents of Albany. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have it common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application.     Accessory use : a use of a nature customarily subordinate or incidental to, and located on the same parcel, as the principal use of any structure or property.     Addition (to an existing building): means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition that is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction.     Appeal: means a request for a review of the planning and development services department's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a variance.     Area of special flood hazard: is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.     Base flood (regulatory flood): the flood having a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.     Base flood elevation (BFE): the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.     Basement: that portion of a building having its flood grade below ground level on all sides.     Building: any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage.     Critical facility: means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: (a)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; (b)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; (c)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and (d)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines.     Development: any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment.     Elevated building: a non-basement building to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls.     Existing construction: means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before August 15, 1977 [the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community].     Existing manufactured home park or subdivision: means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before August 9, 1977 [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community].     Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision: means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads.     Fair market value: the value of property or structures, as used in the definition of "substantial improvement" shall mean, as determined by the tax assessor, either (a) before the improvement was started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.     Flood or flooding : 1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: a.  The overflow of inland waters; and b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from any source. 2.  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm or force of nature, such as a flash flood, or by some similarly unusual event which results in flooding as defined in (a) above.     Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM): An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood areas have been defined as zone A.     Flood insurance rate map (FIRM): an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.     Flood insurance study: The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles and the water surface elevation of the base flood.     Flood control works: any man-made construction, such as a dam, levee, groin, or jetty designed to alter the flood potential of the body of water on or adjacent to which it is built.     Floodplain: the land within a community which is subject to a one percent chance of flooding in any given year.     Flood-proofing: a combination of structural and/or non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to properties or structures that are subject to flooding and which will reduce or eliminate flood damages to improved real property, water and sewer facilities, structures, and contents of buildings.     Floodway: the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.     Floodway fringe: that area of the floodplain lying outside the floodway.     Floor: the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor or a garage used solely for parking vehicles.     Lowest floor: the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.     Freeboard: Means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.     Highest adjacent grade: the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building.     Historic structure: Means any structure that is; a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.     Manufactured home: a building or structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property.     Manufactured home park or subdivision: a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.     Mean sea level: the mean height of the sea for all stages of the tide.     National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): as corrected in 1929, it is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain.     New construction: means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after August 15, 1977 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after August 9, 1977 [the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.     New manufactured home park or subdivision: means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after August 9, 1977 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community].     Non-conforming floodway use: any residential, commercial, industrial, office institutional, or public building located within the floodway on the date of the adoption of these regulations, and which would not be permitted to be constructed within the floodway after the first date (August 9, 1977 in the City of Albany) of the adoption of this ordinance. Any use of land within a floodway existing on the first date of the adoption of this ordinance, and which will not be permitted as a new use within the floodway.     Non-conforming floodway fringe use: any structure that is located within the floodway fringe on the first date of the adoption of this ordinance and that does not meet standards for finished floor elevations and/or flood-proofing that apply to new construction in the floodway fringe. For example, the finished floor elevation of a single family residence might be three feet below the 100 year flood elevation; such a residence should be defined as a non-conforming floodway fringe use.     Person: any individual or group of individuals, corporation, partnership, association or any other organized group of persons, including state and local governments and agencies thereof.     Recreation vehicle: means a vehicle that is: a.  Built on a single chassis; b.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; c.  Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.     Regulatory flood: the flood having a one percent chance of occurring in any given year. The regulatory flood is commonly known as the "100 year flood".     Regulatory flood elevation: the crest elevation in relation to mean sea level expected to be reached by the regulatory flood at any given point in an area of special flood hazard.     Start of construction: means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.     Structure: a walled and roofed building that is principally above the ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a manufactured home. The term includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration or repair. The term does not include building materials or supplies intended for use in construction, alteration or repair, unless such materials or supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises. The words "building" and "structure" shall have the same meaning for the purposes of this ordinance.     Substantial damage: damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.     Substantial improvements: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, alteration, or other improvement to a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the building official and/or code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."     Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions: is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced.     Variance: A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of these regulations, as provided in Article 4, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance where specific enforcement of this ordinance would result in exceptional hardship.     Violation: means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. No. 12-119, § 1, 11-27-2012) 
ARTICLE 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Section A. - Lands to which this ordinance applies.     This ordinance shall apply to all lands within the City of Albany that are depicted on the flood boundary and floodway map, and the flood insurance rate map as lying within areas of special flood hazard. 
Section B. - Basis for area of special flood hazard.     The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this ordinance.     For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 25, 2009 with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the City of Albany, Georgia are hereby adopted by reference.     Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS.     The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located in the office of the planning and development services department. 
Section C. - Establishment of a development permit.     A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
Section D. - Compliance.     No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted, or structurally altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable ordinances. 
Section E. - Abrogation and greater restriction.     This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance conflicts or overlaps with any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions, the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
Section F. - Interpretation.     In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be: 1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 2.  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
Section G. - Relationship between the zoning regulations and floodplain management regulations.     On March 24, 1970, the City of Albany adopted Ordinance #1341. The Floodplain Management Ordinance that is now established imposes additional requirements on the use of property above and beyond those requirements that are stated in the zoning ordinance. Development of lands located within the floodplain shall comply with all of the requirements that are given in this ordinance, as well as with all of those requirements that are given in the zoning ordinance.     The city commission may change the zoning district classification of lands located within the floodplain by following customary rezoning procedures. 
Section H. - Warning and disclaimer of liability.     The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance can not guarantee that areas outside the floodplain's boundaries or land uses that are permitted within the floodplain will be free from flooding or flood damage. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Albany or by an officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
Section I. - Penalties for violation.     Violation of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with the granting of variances or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof no more than $300.00 or imprisoned for no more than 90 days or both, and in addition shall pay costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Albany from taking such other lawful action as necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATION 
Section A. - Designation of floodplain management administrator.     The director of planning and development services is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section B. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain management administrator.     Duties of the floodplain management administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 1.  Require that if additional federal or state permits are required, and if specific federal or state permit requirements are known, copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit. 2.  Notify adjacent communities and the department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 3.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the planning and development services and shall be open for public inspection. 4.  Interacting with the state and federal agencies and ensuring that all applicable reports and applications are completed. 5.  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
Section C. - Duties and responsibilities of the city engineer. 1.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data has not been provided, the city engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source in order to administer the provisions of this ordinance. 2.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the city engineer shall make the necessary interpretation. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 3.  Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity is not diminished. 4.  Assist the board of review in evaluating proposed projects in relation to flood heights and velocities, threatened erosion, the adequacy of the plans for flood and erosion protection, the adequacy of drainage facilities, and other technical matters. 5.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved buildings. 6.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the new or substantially improved buildings have been flood-proofed. 
Section D. - Duties and responsibilities of the building inspection department. 1.  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 2.  When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular building, the building inspection department shall obtain certification from a registered professional engineer or architect. 3.  The building inspection department shall note on all building permits issued the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor of all new or substantially improved structures. If a structure is to be flood-proofed, then the building inspector shall note on the building permit the elevation (in relation to mean seal level) to which the structure will be flood-proofed. 4.  Issue permits. 
Section E. - Permit procedures.     Applications for a development permit shall be made to the building inspection department on forms furnished by the department prior to any development activities, and may include, but not limited to, the following plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, earthen fill, storage of materials or equipment, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the procedure includes the following: 1.  Application stage. a.  Owner shall submit development application to building inspection department. b.  Inspection staff shall determine if development is in floodplain. If development is not in floodplain, application will go through normal review. c.  If development is in floodplain, the building inspection department shall ask the city engineer to establish the following: 1.  Minimum allowable elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of the building; 2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential building must be flood-proofed. d.  Certificate from a professional engineer or registered architect that the non-residential flood-proofed building will meet the flood-proofing criteria in article 7. e.  The location of the lot of the existing structure, if an addition to the existing is being proposed for construction. The proposed elevation of the lowest floor of the addition shall be indicated. f.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. g.  If all requirements are met, a permit shall be issued to the applicant. A copy of the permit shall be sent to the office of Planning and Development Services for record keeping. 2.  Construction stage. Builder shall provide a floor elevation or flood-proofing certification after the lowest floor is completed, or instances where the building is subject to the regulations applicable to flood hazard areas, after placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor. Upon placement of the lowest floor or flood-proofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the building inspection department a certification of the elevation lowest floor, flood-proofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built in relation to mean sea level. Said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular building, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city engineer shall inspect the floor elevation survey data submitted to ascertain compliance with regulations. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. Upon inspection, the city engineer shall sign the elevation certificate for the lowest floor. A copy of the elevation certificate shall be sent to the department of planning and development services for record keeping. 
Section F. - Establishment of a board of review.     A board of review is hereby established which shall consist of seven members appointed by the city commission. The initial appointees shall serve staggered terms, with three members serving three years, three members serving two years, and one member serving one year. Each member shall thereafter serve a term of three years. Any vacancy on the board shall be filled by the city commission for the unexpired term of such vacancy.     At least two members of the board shall be engineers or land surveyors licensed to practice in the State of Georgia.     The board shall select a secretary, who will prepare and keep all permanent records of the board, including agendas, minutes, legal notices and other required papers. (Ord. No. 12-119, § 2, 11-27-2012) 
Section G. - Duties and responsibilities of the board of review. 1.  The board of review shall adopt rules for the conduct of its business. 2.  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official (including, but not limited to, the director of planning and development services, the building inspector, and the city engineer) in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 3.  The board shall hear and decide applications for special use permits upon which it is authorized to pass under this ordinance. 4.  The board may authorize, upon appeal from a decision of the director of planning and development services, the city engineer or the building inspection department, a variance from the requirements of this ordinance. 5.  The board shall interpret the boundaries of the floodway and the floodway fringe on appeal from a decision of the city engineer, or building inspector. 6.  The board shall hear and decide appeals from the denial of building permits. 7.  The board shall determine the specific flood or erosion hazard at the site and shall evaluate the suitability of the proposed use in relation to the flood hazard, and if a permit is to be issued, may attach appropriate conditions. In passing upon such applications, the board shall consider the technical evaluation of the city engineer all relevant factors and standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and; a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others. b.  The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage. c.  The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and unsanitary conditions. d.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner. e.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community. f.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location. g.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use. h.  The compatibility for the proposed use with existing development and development that is anticipated in the foreseeable future. i.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive development plan and floodplain management program for that area. j.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles. k.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site. l.  The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including the maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
Section H. - Special use permit procedures.     General. A person may appear before the board of review: 1.  To appeal a decision of the director of planning and development services, the city engineer, or the building inspection department; 2.  To make application for a variance; or 3.  To make application for a special use permit. Permit procedures. The board shall conduct a public hearing on all applications for special use permits. Public notice shall consist of publication of a legal advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation throughout the city and county. At the hearing, an applicant may appear in person, or by an agent or by an attorney to present evidence for the record. The board shall arrive at its decision on appeal for special use permits within 30 days after the hearing. In granting a special use permit, the board may impose whatever conditions it believes are necessary to promote the general objectives and purposes of this ordinance. The decision of the board shall be in writing, and it must set forth the specific reasons which in view of the board justify its decision. Required documentation. 1.  Applications for uses requiring special use permits shall be submitted to the office of planning and development services on forms to be provided. Upon receipt of the properly completed application, planning staff shall submit it to the board of review. The application shall contain the following information and any additional information requested by the Board. a.  A map in duplicate, drawn to scale showing the curvilinear line representing the regulatory flood elevation, dimensions of the lot, existing structures and uses on the lot and adjacent lots, soil type, existing flood control and erosion control works, existing drainage elevations and ground contours, location and elevation of existing streets, water supply and sanitary facilities, and other pertinent information. b.  A preliminary plan showing the approximate dimensions, elevation and nature of the proposed use, amount, are and type of proposed fill; area and nature of proposed grading or dredging, proposed flood protection or erosion control works, proposed drainage facilities, proposed roads, sewers, water and other utilities, specifications for building construction and materials included in the flood-proofing. The board is not required to conduct a public hearing on applications for variances or in acting on appeals made from a decision of the city engineer, building inspector, or the administrative officer. In granting variances, the board may impose whatever conditions it believes are necessary to promote the general objectives and purposes of this ordinance. The decision of the board shall be in writing, and it must set forth the specific reasons that in the view of the board, justify its decision. Violation of any condition that may have been established by the board in granting a variance or special use permits will be considered a violation of this ordinance. A violation is punishable under the terms of article 3, section I. 
Section I. - Variance procedures. 1.  The board of review as established by the City of Albany shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance. 2.  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the city engineer or the building inspection department in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 3.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of review or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the Dougherty County Superior Court. 4.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 5.  In passing upon variance applications, the board of review shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other sections of this ordinance, and; a.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; b.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; c.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage on the individual owner; d.  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; e.  The necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; f.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage for the proposed use; g.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; h.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; i.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; j.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site, and; k.  The cost of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 6.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above, and the purposes of this ordinance, the board of review may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. 7.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result Conditions for variances. 1.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and in the instance of a historical building, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building; 2.  Variances shall only be issued upon the following: a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and c.  A determination that granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 3.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation to which the building is to be built and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 4.  The department of planning and development services shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
ARTICLE 5. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
Section A. - General standards.     In all areas of the floodplain, the following provisions are required: 1.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 2.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 3.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 4.  New construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 5.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 6.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 7.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 8.  On site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 9.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvements to a building which is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this ordinance. 10.  An individual who plans to make alterations or relocations in any watercourse within the City of Albany shall notify the department of planning and development services in accordance with article 4, section B(2), and article 4, section C(3) of this ordinance. 11.  The city engineer shall advise the engineer of each proposed subdivisions that additional federal or state permits may be required. If the city engineer knows that specific federal or state permits will be required to allow completion of the subdivision, then the city engineer shall require that copies of such permits be provided by the engineer of the subdivision. Copies of such permits shall be sent to the department of planning and development services for record keeping. 
Section B. - Specific standards.     In all areas of the special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided, as set forth in article 3, section B, or article 4, section C(1), the following provisions are required: 1.  Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of article 5, section B(3). (a)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 2.  Non-residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or non-residential building (or manufactured home) shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation. Buildings located in all A-zones may be flood-proofed in lieu of being elevated provided that all areas of the building below the required elevation are water tight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and use structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be proved to the official as set forth in article 4, section E(2). 3.  Elevated buildings. New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundation and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls. a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both direction. b.  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator); and c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 4.  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 1.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on individual lots or parcels, in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, must meet all the requirements for new construction, including elevation and anchoring. 2.  All manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision must be elevated so that: a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood; or b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than thirty six inches in height above grade. c.  The manufactured home must be securely anchored to adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. d.  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of flood, any manufactured home placed or substantially improved must meet the standards of article 5, section B(4)(2)(a) and (c) above. 3.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or c.  The recreation vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including anchoring and elevation requirements of article 5, section B(4)(1) or (2)(a) and (c), above. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on wheels or jacking system, and is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices and has no permanently attached structures. 5.  Standards for subdivision proposals. a.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; b.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; c.  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. d.  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivisions and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 6.  Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. Located within the areas of special flood Hazard established in article 2, section B, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 1.  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 2.  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with article 4, section B. 7.  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). Areas of special flood hazard established in article 2, section B, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: (1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of article 4, section A(4), "Elevated Buildings." The city engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. (2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in articles 3(B)(1)(c) and (3)(B)(2). (3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 8.  Standards for critical facilities. (1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. (2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
ARTICLE 6. - ESTABLISHMENT OF AREAS WITHIN THE FLOODPLAIN 
Section A. - General.     The floodplain within the City of Albany is hereby divided into three separate areas — the floodway, the floodway fringe, and other floodplain areas. 
Section B. - Floodway. 1.  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to the floodway as shown on the official flood maps. 2.  Restrictions governing development in floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in article 3, section B, are areas designated as floodway. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and has erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: a.  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other developments unless certification (with supporting technical data) by a professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during occurrence of the base flood discharge; b.  If article 6, section B(2)(a) is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article 5. c.  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured home (mobile home) park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of article 5, section A(2), and the elevation standards of article 5, section B(1) and the encroachment standards of article 6, section B(2)(a) are met. 3.  Permitted uses. The following and other similar uses normally have a low flood damage potential. These uses are permitted within the floodway provided that they are not prohibited by the Albany-Dougherty County Zoning Ordinance or by any other ordinance, and provided that they do not require fill, dumping of materials or waste, or storage of materials or equipment. No use shall be permitted which acting along or in combination with existing or reasonably foreseeable future uses would result in an increase in the regulatory flood elevation in accordance with article 6, section B(2)(a). a.  Agricultural uses, including general farming, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, truck gardening, forestry, sod farming, and wild crop harvesting. b.  Non-structural industrial and commercial uses, including golf courses, tennis courts, driving range, archery ranges, picnic grounds, boat launching ramps, swimming areas, parks, wildlife and nature preserves, game farms, fish hatcheries, shooting preserves, target ranges, trap and skeet ranges, hunting and fishing areas, hiking and horseback riding rails. 4.  Special uses. The following uses may be permitted only upon application to the department of planning and development services and the issuance of a special use permit by the board of review as provided in article 4 of this ordinance, and provided the applicant demonstrates (by technical analysis) that he/she is in compliance with the provisions of article 6, section B(2)(a); that the use will not cause any increase in the regulatory flood level, and further provided that such uses are permitted at the proposed location by the Albany-Dougherty Zoning Ordinance: a.  Uses accessory to permitted or special uses; b.  Circuses, carnivals and similar transient amusement or entertainment; c.  Drive-in theaters, lots for the sale of new and used cars, trucks, farm equipment, campers and mobile homes; d.  Extraction of sand, gravel, and other materials; e.  Railroads, streets, bridges, utility transmission lines, and pipelines; f.  Marinas, boat rentals, docks, piers, wharves; g.  Storage yards for non-floatable and readily transportable equipment or machinery; h.  Other uses which the board of review considers to be similar in nature to those listed elsewhere in this section; and i.  A single family dwelling or a manufactured home may be constructed on a lot that was on record in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Dougherty County, Georgia on the effective date of the first adoption of this ordinance if the lowest floor of that dwelling is at least one foot above the 100 year flood elevation. The method used to raise the structure must not increase the regulatory flood elevation, or obstruct the carrying capacity of the floodway in accordance with article 6, section B(2)(a). 5.  Signs to identify floodway. Wherever the floodway boundary crosses a public road, a sign shall be placed by the City of Albany identifying property located on the river side of the sign as lying within the floodway. 
Section C. - Floodway fringe. 1.  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply to all areas designated as the floodway fringe on the official flood maps. 2.  Subdivision development in the floodway fringe. The plat of each subdivision that is developed in the floodway fringe after the effective date when this ordinance was first adopted shall contain a notation clearly stating the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Section D. - Other floodplain areas.     Standards for streams without established base flood elevation and/or floodways: Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in article 3, section B, where streams exist but where no base flood data has been provided or where base flood has been provided without floodways, the following provisions shall apply: 1.  No encroachments, including fill material or structures shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 2.  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with article 4, section C(1). (a)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 3.  Where base flood data has been provided but without floodways delineated, new construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall have lowest floor elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation.     Areas of non-stream related flooding: Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in article 3, section B, are isolated areas designated as unnumbered A-zones on the FIRM maps. These areas may have special flood hazards where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where localized ponding occurs; therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 1.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential buildings shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated, at least one foot above the base flood elevation established by the city engineer. 2.  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential buildings shall: a.  Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood elevation established by the city engineer. b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be completely flood-proofed to our above that level so that any space below that level is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
ARTICLE 7. - FLOOD-PROOFING 
Section A. - Minimum flood-proofing requirements.     Wherever any of the provisions of this ordinance require that a building be flood-proofed or specify that flood-proofing may be used as an alternative to elevating a structure above the regulatory flood level, flood-proofing shall be deemed to include all of the following: 1.  Wherever possible, the location, construction, and installation of all electrical and gas utility systems in such a manner as to ensure the continuing functioning of those systems in event of a regulatory flood; 2.  The location, construction, and installation of all portable water supply systems in such a manner as to prevent contamination from floodwaters during the regulatory flood. No water supply well shall be located within the foundation walls of a building or structure used for human habitation, medical or educational services, food processing, or public services. 3.  Approved backflow preventers or devices shall be installed on main water service lines at water wells and at all building entry locations to protect the system from backflow or back siphonage of floodwaters or other contaminants. 4.  Sanitary sewer and storm drainage systems that have openings below the regulatory flood elevation shall be equipped with automatic backwater valves or other automatic backflow devices that are installed in each discharge line passing through a building exterior wall. 5.  Sanitary sewer systems, including septic tank systems, that are required to remain in operation during a flood, shall be provided with a sealed holding tank and the necessary isolation and diversion piping, pumps, ejectors, and appurtenances required to prevent sewage discharge during a flood. The holding tank shall be sized for storage of at least two days' demand. 6.  All sewer system vents shall extend to an elevation of at least three feet above the regulatory flood elevation. 7.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that any new construction or substantial improvement has been designed to withstand the flood depths, pressure, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with the regulatory flood at the location of the building. The certificate shall state that specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been flood-proofed. The certificate shall be kept for public inspection in the office of planning and development services. 
Section B. - Approval of flood-proofing.     Prior to construction, plans for any structure that is required to be flood-proofed must be submitted to the building inspection department. These plans will be forwarded to the city engineer for review and approval. The city engineer shall review the plans for compliance techniques specified in the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers publication entitled "Flood-proofing Regulations," June 1972, GPO: 19730-505-026 and for compliance with any other applicable building codes or regulations. The city engineer shall approve, reject, or recommend modifications of the plans within 15 days from the receipt of the plans. 
ARTICLE 8. - NON-CONFORMING USES 
Section A. - Non-conforming floodway uses.     All structures located within a floodway on the first date of the adoption of this ordinance and whose construction would not be permitted by right within the floodway after the first date of the adoption of this ordinance, are hereby declared to be "non-conforming floodway uses." The following regulations shall apply to non-conforming floodway uses: 1.  No substantial improvement (as defined in article 2) shall be made to any structure located within the floodway. 2.  A duplex, apartment building, commercial building, office building, or industrial building shall not be replaced, rebuilt or repaired if it has been damaged or destroyed by fire, flood explosion, tornado, hurricane or by other means to the extent that the remaining value of the structure is less than 50 percent of its market value immediately before it was damaged or destroyed. In determining market value, estimates made by the tax department shall be relied upon. 3.  A detached single family residence that is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, explosion, tornado, hurricane or by any other means to the extent that the remaining value of the building is less than 50 percent of its market value immediately before it was damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt. Reconstruction of the single family residence is subject to the requirements listed in article 6, section B(4)(i). 4.  If a non-conforming use in the floodway is discontinued or abandoned for 12 months, the use shall not be resumed, and no other use may occupy the structure. 5.  An existing non-residential, non-conforming floodway use may be modified, altered or repaired to incorporate flood-proofing reassures. (Ord. No. 12-119, § 3, 11-27-2012) 
Section B. - Non-conforming floodway fringe uses.     A structure or use of a structure in a floodway fringe area which was lawful on the date of the adoption of this ordinance, and which does not comply with the various provisions of this ordinance, is hereby declared to be "non-conforming floodway fringe uses." The following regulations shall apply to non-conforming floodway fringe uses: 1.  Any substantial improvement (as defined in article 2) shall comply with all of the requirements of this ordinance for new construction in the floodway fringe. 2.  An non-conforming floodway fringe use that is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood, explosion, tornado, hurricane or by other means may be repaired or restored, but only when such construction fully complies with the requirements that are given in this ordinance for new construction in the floodway fringe. 
ARTICLE 9. - SEVERABILITY     If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this Ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. All Ordinances, or parts of Ordinances, in conflict herewith are repealed. Section 2. This Ordinance shall become effective immediately upon adoption. Section 3. All Ordinances, or parts of Ordinances, in conflict herewith are repealed. 
Appendix C. - SCHEDULE OF FEES[1] CHAPTER 6. ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES Sec. 6-83. Fees—Imposed. Alcohol fees charged for various alcohol licenses issued by the City of Albany are established as follows:     Alcohol license application fee (for all categories) ..... $50.00 A.  Package Sales (Off Premises Consumption) (1)  Liquor (distilled spirits), beer (malt beverages), and wine (6/1/13—12/31/14) ..... $3,262.50 (beginning 1/1/15) ..... $3,775.00 (2)  Liquor (distilled spirits) Only (6/1/13—12/31/14) ..... $2,500.00 (beginning 1/1/15) ..... $3,000.00 (3)  Beer (malt beverages) (6/1/13—12/31/14) ..... $500.00 (beginning 1/1/15) ..... $600.00 (4)  Wine (6/1/13—12/31/14) ..... $380.00 (beginning 1/1/15) ..... $410.00 B.  Sales by the drink (On premises consumption) (1)  Liquor (distilled spirits), beer (malt beverages), and wine (6/1/13—12/31/14) ..... $3,300.00 (beginning 1/1/15) ..... $4,100.00 (2)  Beer (malt beverages) only (6/1/13—12/31/14) ..... $550.00 (beginning 1/1/15) ..... $600.00 (3)  Wine only (6/1/13—12/31/14) ..... $380.00 (beginning 1/1/15) ..... $410.00 C.  Wholesale and manufacturing (1)  Liquor, wholesale/manufacture ..... $3,000.00 (2)  Beer, brewer ..... 3,000.00 (3)  Beer, wholesale ..... 750.00 (4)  Wine, manufacture ..... 1,000.00 (5)  Wine wholesale ..... 500.00 D.  Miscellaneous (1)  Catering license: As per O.C.G.A. § 3-11-2(e), total of license fee for any one licensed location for catering license, and any license described in 3-11-2(a) through (d) shall not exceed $5,000. (2)  Brown Bag ..... $1,000.00 (3)  Non-profit—IRS 501(c)(3) ..... 50.00 (4)  ABC card instructor training ..... 50.00 (5)  ABC cards ..... 15.00 (6)  ABC card renewal ..... 5.00     The annual fees shall be increased each year beginning January 1, 2016, by the Consumer Price Index over the prior 12-month period. As used herein, the term "Consumer Price Index" is the Consumer Price Index published by the United States Department of Labor—Bureau of Labor Statistics All Urban Consumers (CPI-U), 1982-1984 +100. If the Consumer Price Index ceases to incorporate a significant number of items now incorporated therein, or if a substantial change is made in the method of establishing the Consumer Price Index, then a reasonable substitute will be used. (Code 1975, § 4-33; Code 1985, § 4-50; Ord. No. 09-132, § 1, 9-22-2009; Ord. No. 13-R116, §§ 1-2, 5-28-2013) Sec. 6-108. Suspension or revocation of an alcoholic beverage license—Upon sale to minors; on Sundays. (a)  In the case of violations involving selling alcoholic beverages to persons not of lawful age to purchase: (1)  First offense. For the first offense, the license holder will be required to pay a reinstatement fee of $200.00. (2)  Second offense. For the second offense, the license holder will be required to pay a reinstatement fee of $500.00. (b)  In the case of violations involving selling alcoholic beverages on Sunday: (1)  First offense. For the first offense, the license holder will be required to pay a reinstatement fee of $500.00. Sec. 6-139. Issuance; fee.     A fee in the amount of $15.00 shall be charged to cover the expense of processing the application and issuing an alcohol beverage handlers identification card. Sec. 6-142. Expiration; renewal.     The fee for renewal of an alcoholic beverage handlers identification card shall be $5.00 payable at the time of the filing of the application for renewal. Sec. 6-146. Suspension; revocation.     The holder of an alcoholic beverage handlers identification card will be required to pay a reinstatement fee of $50.00. Sec. 6-233. Brown bagging; prohibited; exceptions.     Annual "brown bagging permit fee" of $1,000.00. CHAPTER 8. AMUSEMENTS (ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS) Sec. 8-72. License required.     Annual license fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for an adult entertainment establishment. Sec. 8-77. Adult entertainment establishment employees.     An application investigation fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for an adult entertainment establishment employee permit. Sec. 8-78. Application for license.     A nonrefundable application fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment. Sec. 8-82. License renewal.     Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed for a renewal fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). CHAPTER 10. ANIMALS Sec. 10-164. Animal owner responsibilities.     A person applying for registration or re-registration of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall pay an annual registration fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Any such dog that has been spayed/neutered may be registered or re-registered for an annual registration fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). CHAPTER 12. AVIATION Sec. 12-1000. Airport Department Lounge Rentals: Damage Deposit $500.00, for everyone Rental Fee: $350.00, for non city employees Rental Fee: $200.00, for city employees $100.00 of either Rental fee goes to the officer working the party. If they go past 1:00am, we begin taking $20.00/hour out of the damage deposit to pay the officer as well. CHAPTER 16. BUSINESSES Sec. 16-33. Occupation tax certificate and fee.     Each person, firm, company or corporation engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city shall pay a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per each year, unless exempted. Sec. 16-36. Change of address.     Any person moving their business from one location to another shall pay a license transfer fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Sec. 16-1000. Occupational tax schedule; NAICS profitability list.     The fees for Occupational Tax Certificates are calculated by gross receipts of each business and the occupation tax schedule. The annual gross receipts are multiplied by a tax rate percentage. The tax rate percentage is based upon the profitability classification listed beside each type of business. The minimum fee is $ 125.00 and the maximum fee is $ 9,000.00. Example: A department store (Retail) would fall into the profitability class #2 on the NAICS Profitability List, so they would select the tax rate of .000475 from the Occupation Tax Schedule. The calculation would be: Gross receipts of $1,500,000 X .000475 = $ 712.50 Amount Due.     Definition of Gross receipts: Gross receipts means total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without being limited to, the following: (i)  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; (ii)  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; (iii)  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; (iv)  Proceeds from fees charged for services rendered; and (v)  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. Gross receipts shall not include the following: (i)  Sales, use, or excise taxes; (ii)  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; (iii)  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent subsidiary controlled group of corporations. Occupation tax schedule: Profitability class Rate per $ 1,000.00 Tax Rate (percent) 1 .29 .000290 2 .475 .000475 3 .55 .000550 4 .55 .000550 5 .65 .000650 6 .85 .000850  The profitability class rate for each business is increased by 20%. Each year beginning 2014 this amount shall increase by the increase in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) over the preceding year. The CPI is the Consumer Price Index published by the United States Department of Labor - Bureau of Labor Statistics All Urban Consumers (CPI-U). The due date for occupation taxes is January 31 of each year. NAICS profitability class list: AACCOUNTING SERVICE #4 ADVERTISING #3 AIR COND/HEAT EQUIP. #1 ALARM MAINT. & MONITORING #3 ALTERATION/TAILOR #3 AMUSEMENT: CENTERS/RECREATION #5 FAIRS-CIRCUS-CARNIVALS #5 ANIMAL SHOWS #5 PRIVATE CLUBS #5 GAME ROOMS #5 PROFESSIONAL SPORTS #5 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT #5 ENTERTAINMENT SERVICES #5 ARCHITECT #4 ARMOURED CAR #3 ATTORNEY #4 AUCTIONEER #3 AUTO DEALER #1 AUTO RENTAL #2 BBARBER/BEAUTY SHOP #3 BEAUTY PARLOR EQUIP/SUP. #1 BOARDING HOUSE #2 BOAT DEALER #1 BOAT REPAIR/BUILDING #1 BONDING COMPANY #3 BROKER: COMMODITY #5 BROKER: FARM/BUS. LOAN #6 BROKER: FOOD #1 BROKER: SHIPPING/TRANS. #1 BUS CHARTER #1 BUSINESS MANAGEMENT #3 CCAR WASH #2 CATERERS #2 CERT. PUB. ACCOUNTANTS #4 CLEANING SERVICE, COMMERCIAL #3 COMMUNICATIONS: PAGING/CELLULAR PHONE #5 RADIO/TV BROADCAST #5 SATELLITE/ANTENNA, SALES & SERVICE #5 TELEGRAPH OFFICE #5 COMPUTER SALES & MAINTENANCE #3 CONTRACTORS: ALARM INSTALLATION #2 AWNING INSTALLATION #2 CABLE SPLICING, NON ELECTRIC #2 CARPENTRY, FINISH, TRIM #2 CERAMIC TILE #2 CONCRETE #2 COMMUN. EQUIP. & INSTALLATION #2 DRYWALL INSULATION #2 DEMOLITION #2 ELECTRICAL #2 EXCAVATION #2 FENCE #2 FLOOR INSTALLATION #2 GENERAL #2 GLASS/GLAZING #2 HOUSE MOVING #2 HVAC/REFRIGERATION #2 INSULATION OF PIPES/BOILERS #2 MASONRY #2 PAINTING/WALLPAPER #2 PAVING/ROAD BUILDING #2 PETROLEUM EQUIPMENT INSTALL. #2 PLUMBING #2 ROOFING/ SHEETMETAL #2 SAND BLASTING #2 SEPTIC TANK INSTALLATION #2 SPRINKLER/ IRRIGATION SYSTEM #2 SWIMMING POOL #2 WATER, SEWER, PIPELINE, POWERLINE #2 CONTRACTOR: WATER WELL DRILLING #2 CONSTRUCTION EQUIP/PARTS #1 COUSELORS/CONSULTANTS #3 CREDIT BUREAU/AGENCY #3 DDAY CARE CENTER #2 DESIGNER/DRAFTING #4 DIRECTORIES OF CITIES #3 DISTRIBUTOR: SOFT DRINK #1 DAIRY PRODUCTS #1 FISH, SEAFOOD, MEAT #1 GASOLINE,OIL LUBRCANTS #1 GROCERY, CONFECTIONS, BAKERY PROD. #1 PETROLEUM TERMINALS #1 POULTRY #1 DUPLICATING/BLUE PRINTING #3 EELECTRICAL SUPPLIES #1 ELEVATORS, SALES/SER. #1 EMBALMING #4 EMPLOYMENT AGENCY #3 ENGINEER: CIVIL #4 CONSULTING #4 ELECTRICAL #4 HYDRAULIC #4 MECHANICAL #4 EXPORT #6 FFARM EQUIP, MACH. PARTS SUPPLIES #1 FINAN.ADVISORS, SERVICE, INVESTMENT #5 FLORIST #1 FOOD PROCESSING #3 FOOD STORES #1 FORKLIFTS/MATRLS HANDLING EQUIP. #1 FUNERAL DIRECTOR #4 GHHEALTH: BLOOD BANK/DONORSTATION #2 CLINICS #2 HOSPITAL #2 LABS/X-RAYS #2 NURSE-PRIVATE #2 OCCUPATIONAL THERAPIST #2 PERSONAL CARE HOME #2 HOME INSPECTION #3 HOTEL/MOTEL #2 HOTEL/REST. EQUIP. #1 IINDUSTRIAL SUPPLIES #1 INSURANCE: CLAIM ADJ. #5 INSURANCE: RISK ADM. #5 INTERIOR DECORATING #3 ITINERANT MERCHANT #1 INVESTIGATORS/SEC. GUARDS #3 JJANITORIAL/CLEANING SUPPLIES #1 KKENNELS, BOARDING #3 LLABORATORY-RESEARCH #3 LAND SURVEYOR #4 LANDSCAPE ARCH. #4 LAUNDRY/DRY CLEANER #3 LAWN CARE/LANDSCAPING #3 LOG HAULING #1 MMAIL ORDER SALES #1 MASSAGE/PHYSIOTHERAPY #4 MEDICINE: CHIROPRACTIC #4 DENTISTRY #4 GENERAL PRACTITIONER #4 MEDICINE: OPTOMETRY #4 OSTEO. #4 PODIATRIST #4 PSYCHIATRIST #4 PHYCHOLOGISTS #4 PSYCHOTHERAPIST (EXCEPT MD) #4 VETERINARIAN #4 MOBILE HOMES #1 MOTION PICTURES THEATER #3 MOTOR HOME/CAMPERS/ TRAVEL TRAILERS #1 MOTORCYCLE/GO CARTS/ JET SKIS #1 MORTGAGE/LOAN CO. #6 NNEWSPAPER #4 NIGHT CLUB, DISCO, BAR #2 NUTS, HULLING/SHELLING #3 OPPAPER PRODUCTS #1 PAWN SHOP #1 PEST CONTROL #3 PET SHOP #1 PHOTOGRAPHY #3 PLUMBING SUPPLIES #1 PRINTING/PUBLISHING #4 PRODUCTION STUDIO #3 QRREAL ESTATE: AGENT, BROKER, APPRAISERS #5 MOBILE HOME PARKS #5 PROPERTY MGT. #5 TITLE ABSTRACT COMPANY #5 RECYCLING/SALVAGE #3 REPAIR: APPLIANCES #3 ELEC. MOTOR #3 GUNSMITH #3 LAWN MOWER, SAW, KNIFE, TOOLS #3 LOCKSMITH #3 MACHINE SHOP #3 NOT CLASSIFIED ELSEWHERE #3 SEPTIC TANK/SEWER CLEAN/RODDING #3 TAXIDERMISTS #3 UPHOLSTERY #3 RESTAURANT/FOOD SERVICE #2 RETAIL: AUTO/MOTORCYCLE PARTS #1 BOOKS, MAGAZINE, NEWSPAPERS #1 RETAIL: BLDG. MATERIAL/HARDWARE #1 VENDING MACHINE #1 XMAS TREES #1 CLOTHING #2 DEPARTMENT #2 DRUG STORE #1 FIREARMS #1 FURNITURE, FURNISHINGS,APPLIANCES #1 GAS, LIQUIFIED PETROLEUM #1 GASOLINE/SERVICE STATION #1 GENERAL MERCHANDISE #2 HEARING AIDS #1 JEWELRY #1 LAWN/GARDEN SUPPLIES #1 MEDICAL EQUIPMENT #1 MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS #1 NOT CLASSIFIED ELSEWHERE #1 OFFICE SUPPLIES/EQUIPMENT #1 OPTICAL GOODS #1 SAND, GRAVEL, CONCRETE PROD. #1 SPORTS GOODS #1 RETAIL: TIRES #1 TOYS/GAMES #1 SSAFETY EQUIPMENT #1 SCALES DEALER #1 SCHOOLS #3 SERVICES: AUTO REPAIR SHOP #2 BARTENDER-PRIVATE #3 DATING #3 DOG GROOMING #3 ENGINE REBUILDING-AUTO #2 ENVIRONMENTAL #3 FIRE EXTINGUISHERS #3 MAILING #3 MANICURISTS #3 MOBILE HOME REPAIR/SERVICE #2 POLYGRAPH #3 RENTAL, EXCEPT AUTO #3 REPOSSESSION #3 SALES REPS. #3 SHOPPING #3 TELEMARKETING #3 TELEPHONE ANSWERING #3 TIRE RECAPPING #2 TYPING #3 WATER TREATMENT #3 SHOE REPAIR #3 SOD/TURF/PLANTS #4 TTATTOO PARLOR #3 TAX SERVICE #3 TRADE SHOWS #1 TRAVEL AGENCY #1 TREE SURGEON #3 UUNIFORM SUPPLY SERVICE #3 VVAULTS/SAFES #1 VEHICLES FOR HIRE #1 WWAREHOUSING/STORAGE #1 WATER/IRRIGATION SYSTEM, OPERATOR #5 WEIGHT LOSS #3 WELDING #2 WELDING EQUIPMENT/SUPPLIES #1 WRECKER SERVICE #2 XYYOUTH CENTER #2 Z (Ord. No. 12-120, § 1, 11-27-2012) CHAPTER 22. COURT Sec. 22-165. Administrative fees; collected.     An administrative fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be collected by the municipal court in every case in which a fine is levied and collected, in addition to such fine and all other costs and fees presently imposed. CHAPTER 28. FIRE PREVENTIION AND PROTECTION Sec. 28-1000. Resolution # 98-R222 Plans Review ..... $100.00 Fuel Tank Removal/Installation ..... 100.00 Commercial Burn Pit Permit ..... 50.00 2nd re-Inspection Fee ..... 50.00 Each Additional Re-inspection Fee ..... 25.00 CHAPTER 34. MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC Sec. 34-48. Automated red light enforcement.     Failure to pay the civil penalty or file an appeal within 30 days after notification of the violation shall result in an additional penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Every 30-day period thereafter shall result in another additional penalty of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Sec. 34-85. Overtime and prohibited parking.     Appearance bonds in the amount set forth below are hereby established for any person who causes, allows, permits or suffers any vehicle registered in the name of, or operated by any such person to be parked over time, beyond the time of legal parking time or who allows the vehicle to remain parked on any public street, highway or alley in violation of any posted signs regulating or prohibiting parking in any such location. (1)  Handicapped parking ..... $100.00 (2)  Parking over one hour ..... 15.00 (3)  Parking over two (2) hours ..... 15.00 (4)  Parking beside a yellow curb ..... 35.00 (5)  Double parking ..... 35.00 (6)  Fire lane violation ..... 50.00 (7)  Other improper parking ..... 35.00 CHAPTER 38. OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS Sec. 38-11. Marijuana possession.     A bond in the amount of four hundred eighteen dollars ($418.00) is hereby set for the unlawful possession of one ounce or less of marijuana. Sec. 38-12. Shoplifting.     A bond in the amount of four hundred and eighteen dollars ($418.00) is hereby set for any person who commits the offense of shoplifting of property valued at $300.00 or less. Sec. 38-71. False alarm; offenses. (a)  The first one to five false alarms in a calendar year will have no assessments charged. Any additional false alarms would result in the alarms administrator assessing a service fee as follows: Number of false alarms Calendar Year Fee  6 through 10 ..... $ 25.00 11 through 15 ..... 50.00 16 or more ..... 100.00 (b)  In the event that an owner or occupier fails to register their alarm system, the alarm administer will assess a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to the owner or occupier. CHAPTER 42. PARKS AND RECREATION SERVICE FEES Sec. 42-6. Fees for use of facilities. Picnic shelter rental $25.00 Athletics field rental without lights $50.00 Athletics field rental with lights $150.00 Youth Football $35.00 Youth Cheerleading $25.00 Youth League Basketball $25.00 Youth Girls Softball $25.00 Summer Sports Camp $10.00 Men's Flag Football $450.00/team Co-ed Softball $250.00/team Men's Softball $350.00/team Women's Softball $350.00/team Centers and Gyms rental; $150/3 hours; $50each additional hour; $150.00/3 hours Centers and Gyms Facility rental for parties; $50 each additional hour $300.00 Ceramics fee (Adult - Quarterly fee plus cost of supplies) $5.00 Ceramics fee (Youth - Quarterly fee plus cost of supplies) $3.00 Lil S.T.A.R.S Basketball Camp $25.00 Flint River Golf Course Banquet room rental $275.00/4 hours; $50.00 deposit non-refundable $275.00 Weekday 18 holes green fee with cart $23.19 Weekday 9 holes green fee with cart $18.91 Weekend 18 holes green fee with cart $27.47 Weekend 9 holes green fee with cart $23.19 Twilight 18 holes green fee with cart $19.98 Twilight 9 holes green fee with cart $15.70 Weekend walking fee $17.84 Weekday walking fee $13.56 Power cart fee/18 holes $19.26 Power cart fee/9 holes $10.70 Annual individual membership $560.00 Annual senior membership $350.00 Annual family membership $700.00 Annual senior family membership $560.00 Annual junior membership $150.00 Hamburger/fries $4.50 Chicken tenders/fries $5.00 Hotdog/fries $2.50 Ham sandwich $3.00 Turkey $3.00 Chicken Salad $3.00 Fries $1.50 Onion rings $2.00 Nachos and cheese $2.50 Hot wings $6.00 Coke $1.50 Pepsi $1.50 Bottled water $1.50 Gatorade $1.75 Lemonade $1.00 Tea $1.00 Hook-a-Kid on Golf $35.00 Beer/can $2.50 Code: Chapter 9 Section 9-4 Lot and Grave Service Fees Opening and Closing Fee - Regular Adult (weekday before 4 pm) $575.00 Opening and Closing Fee - Regular Adult (Weekday 4 pm & after/all day Sat. & Sun. $620.00 Opening and Closing Fee - Oversize Adult (weekday before 4 pm) $620.00 Opening and Closing Fee - Oversize Adult (weekday 4 pm & after/all day Sat. & Sun. $675.00 Opening and Closing Fee - Babyland (weekday before 4 pm) $235.00 Opening and Closing Fee - Babyland (weekday 4 pm and after/all day Sat. & Sun. $300.00 Opening and Closing Fee - Cremation (weekday before 4 pm) $300.00 Opening and Closing Fee - Cremation (weekday 4 pm and after/all day Sat. & Sun. $350.00 Opening and Closing Fee - Disinternent (weekday before 4 pm) $575.00 Opening and Closing Fee - Lowering Vault (weekday before 4 pm) $575.00 Opening and Closing Fee - Child Grave (weekday before 4 pm) $325.00 Opening and Closing Fee - Child Grave (weekday 4 pm and after/all day Sat. & Sun. $375.00 Opening and Closing Fee - Perpetual Care $150/6months Opening and Closing Fee - Perpetual Care $325/12 months Monument installation fee $50.00 Code: Chapter 9 Section 9-5 Sale of Lots—Payment of purchase money Single Grave (a $25 administration fee must be added to all pre-need lot sales) $550.00 Each additional space $500.00  CHAPTER 44. PLANNING Sec. 44-1000. Fees. A.  Zoning Residential AG, (Agricultural District) $400 E-1, (Estate District) $400 R-1, (Single Family Residential District) $400 R-2, (Single Family Residential District) $400 R-G, (Single Family Residential District — in the County only) $400 R-4, (Single Family Mobile Home District) $400 R-4A, (Single Family Mobile Home District) $400 R-4B, (Mixed Single Family Mobile Home District) $400 R-3, (Two Family Residential District) $500+50/acre R-5, (Mobile Home Park District) $500+50/acre R-6, (Multiple Dwelling Residential District) $500+50/acre C-1, (Neighborhood Business District) $600+60/acre C-1(N), (Neighborhood Business District) $600+60/acre C-2, (General Business District) $600+60/acre C-2(N), (General Business District) $600+60/acre C-3, (Commercial District) $600+60/acre C-4, (Transitional Business District) $600+60/acre C-5, (Restricted Office District) $600+60/acre C-6, (Transitional Office District) $600+60/acre C-7, (Mixed Use District) $600+60/acre C-8, (Commercial Recreation District) $600+60/acre M-1, (Light Industrial District) $600+60/acre M-2, (Heavy Industrial District) $600+60/acre  $3,500 cap on zoning/special approvals. Any property over .5 acres will be counted as a full acre. B.  Subdivisions 1 to 2 lots $300+$8 rec. fee 3 lots or more $300+ $30/lot+$8 recording fee Special Approvals & Similar uses $400+40/acre Site Plans $400+40/acre  An additional $4 fee is required if the applicant wants the plat mailed to him/her. C.  Variances Residential $100 Commercial $400 Double after the fact  Any property over .5 acres will be counted as a full acre. D.  Maps City/County small map (blue/black line copy) $15 City/County medium map (blue/black line copy) $15 City/County large map (blue/black line copy) $25 Election District maps Board of Education $10 City/County $10 General Assembly $10 Precinct $10 Aerial maps $10 Computer copy of map $20 Complete Set of Zoning Maps $250  Maps that are created from the plotter cost $20 per hour for labor and $10 for each additional print. E.  Documents Zoning Ordinance $30 Street Index $20 Historic Ordinance $10 Comprehensive Plan $110 Sign Ordinance $5 Floodplain Ordinance $5 Soil Erosion & Sedimentation Control Ordinance $5 Tree Ordinance $5 A disk copy of a document $20  The first 2 sheets of documents copied is $3.00. Any additional sheets will cost .25 cents each. F.  Construction Approvals/Permits Tree Permit — No Fee Soil Erosion Control Permit - $100 (an additional fee of $5 per acre shall be charged for each application pertaining to a permit on a parcel larger than five acres.) Site Plan Approval — No Fee Sign Permit - No fee when sign has 32 square feet or less, and has no electrical connections (signs may require a permit even if there is no charge). G.  Building Permit (permit fees will automatically double if caught doing work without permit). BUILDING PERMIT FEES City & County 0 — 99.00 $ N/C 100.00 — 1,000.00 $20.00 per thousand or fraction thereof 1,001.00 - 2,000.00 $25.00 2,001.00 — 15,000.00 $25.00 for the first $2,000.00 plus ($6.00) for each additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and including $15,000.00 2,001.00 to 3,000.00 $31.00 3,001.00 to 4,000.00 $37.00 4,001.00 to 5,000.00 $43.00 5,001.00 to 6,000.00 $49.00 6,001.00 to 7,000.00 $55.00 7,001.00 to 8,000.00 $61.00 8,001.00 to 9,000.00 $67.00 Plan review fee is no  H.  Planning fees are subject to annual Consumer Price Index increase. As used herein, the term "Consumer Price Index" is the Consumer Price Index published by the United States Department of Labor—Bureau of Labor Statistics All Urban Consumers (CPI-U), 1982-1984 +100. If the Consumer Price Index ceases to incorporate a significant number of items now incorporated therein, or if a substantial change is made in the method of establishing the Consumer Price Index, then the parties agree to replace the Consumer Price Index with a reasonable substitute. Planning and Development Services Fee Change Proposal Fee type Current Fee Proposed   Development Building Permit Depends on value of structure Add $25.00 base fee Individual permits-electrical, plumbing, HVAC, gas, etc. Varies depending on scope of work Add $5.00 to base fee Sign Permit Varies depending on size of sign-maximum of $40.00 *Fees are in sign ordinance and will be proposed with revisions to that ordinance   GIS LIDAR data None $200.00   Planning Administrative Review None $50.00 Floodplain Special Use None $100.00 residential/$400.00 commercial Floodplain Variance None $100.00 residential/$400.00 commercial Site Plan Review None $400.00+$40.00 per acre Zoning Certification None $50.00   Historic Preservation COA rehab None $50.00 COA new construction None $100.00 COA demo None $250.00  (Ord. No. 14-110, § 1, 6-25-2014) CHAPTER 50. SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL Sec. 50-5. Application/permit process.     A fee, in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be charged for each application for a land-disturbing activity permit. Sec. 50-1000. Engineering Department. Site Plan Review ..... $100.00 Erosion and Sedimentation Review ..... $40.00, per disturbed acre CHAPTER 52. SOLID WASTE Sec. 52-101. Disposal of tires and solid waste schedule of fees.     Fees in the following amounts shall be collected by the city for picking up tires: Passenger tires as above defined: $1.50 per tire; Other truck tires: $5.00 per tire; Farm tractor tires: $50.00 per tire. Sec. 52-1000. Public Works; solid waste.     Current Solid Waste fees (as of July 1, 2016) are subject to annual CPI increase and/or cost of living adjustment. Increases are in accordance with the most recent annual Consumer Price Index for the South Urban, Size C region on July 1 of each year. References: Ordinance No. 05-111 6/29/05 and Resolution 06-R130 I.  Commercial/Apartments (Master-Metered) A.  Metal Containers: 1.  Two (2) times/week ..... $3.65/CY 2.  Scheduled additional service ..... $3.65/CY 3.  Non-Scheduled (By Request) ..... $35.00 + $3.65/CY 4.  Non-Scheduled after hours, Holidays, etc. ..... $50.00 + $3.65/CY B.  Plastic Barrel Service: 1.  90 Gallon - One (1) time per week ..... $31.46/month 2.  Scheduled additional service ..... $3.65/CY 3.  Non-Scheduled (By Request) ..... $3.65/CY II.  Residential/Apartments (Individually Metered) A.  Metal Containers - Two (2) times/week ..... $31.46/month B.  Barrel - 90 Gallon - One (1) time/week ..... $31.46/month III.  Swa-cars A.  Swa-cars (each trailer load - customer loaded) ..... $50.00 each plus tipping fee B.  Swa-cars (each trailer load - city loaded) ..... $170.00 each IV.  Roll-off Containers A.  One time set-out fee ..... $50.00 B.  Pull fee ..... $95.00 C.  Tipping fee ..... $35.00/ ton D.  Daily Rental Rate ..... $1.50/day V.  Tires A.  Passenger tires ..... $1.50 each B.  Other truck tires ..... $5.00 each C.  Farm tractor tires ..... $50.00 each VI.  Franchise Fee A.  A franchise fee of 5% of gross revenue shall be charged to all private collectors of solid waste within the City. (Ord. No. 10-124, 6-22-2010; Ord. of 7-1-2016) CHAPTER 56. STREETS, SIDEWALKS, AND PUBLIC PROPERTY [2] CHAPTER 58. TAXATION Sec. 58-206. License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.     For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional annual license fee of fifty-two dollars ($52.00) per location. CHAPTER 60. UTILITIES [3] Sec. 60-262. Discharge of groundwater from contaminated sites.     An application for a written temporary class 1 permit for the discharge of any groundwater from contaminated sites shall be accompanied by a three thousand dollar ($3,000.00) fee that covers costs for permit processing and review of the application. Sec. 60-418. Sewer usage and treatment charges.     [No fee amounts in Code] Sec. 60-419. Fees. (a)  Construction associated projects. (1)  Sewers and related work a.  Sewers. By ordinance—Actual cost or $15.00/LF Maximum By individual request 4" at 0—6' deep ..... $9.50/LF 6" at 0—6' deep ..... $11.00/LF 8" at 0—6' deep ..... $15.00/LF 10" at 0—6' deep ..... $18.00/LF 12" at 0—6' deep ..... $21.00/LF 15" at 0—6' deep ..... $25.00/LF 18" at 0—6' deep ..... $28.00/LF Excess depth per foot over 6' feet deep ..... 10 percent b.  Sewer tap fees. 4" Taps Dirt alley ..... $300.00 Paved alley ..... $400.00 Dirt street ..... 350.00 Paved street ..... 500.00 Reconnection fee ..... 225.00 Installation of clean-out at property line ..... $225.00 Larger Taps 6" Tap, cost of 4" above plus ..... $1.50 × (LF at 6") 8" Tap, cost of 4" above plus ..... $5.50 × (LF at 8") 10" Tap, cost of 4" above plus ..... $8.50 × (LF at 10") 12" Tap, cost of 4" above plus ..... $11.50 × (LF at 12") c.  Manholes: 4' diameter 0-4' deep ..... $1,000.00 Excess depth per foot over 4' deep ..... $150.00 5' diameter 0—4' deep ..... $1,800.00 Excess depth per foot over 4' deep ..... $200.00 6' diameter 0—4' deep ..... $2,400.00 Excess depth per foot over 4" deep ..... $250.00 d.  Catchbasins/grate inlets: 0—4' deep ..... $1,000.00 Excess depth per foot over 4' ..... $100.00/LF e.  Driveway culvert installation (Note: pipe cost additional): Standard 24' ..... $200.00 Extra foot, per foot ..... $10.00/ LF f.  Concrete work. Maintenance of driveways and turnouts are the responsibility of the individual property owner. Driveway turnout, standard 11' width ..... $475.00 Driveway turnout, extra width per foot . $40.00/LF Flat work (per CY) ..... $200.00/CY Curb and gutter $10.00/LF (2)  Sewage and treatment related costs. a.  Septic tank dumps: Less than 700 gal. per dump ..... $10.00 Over 700 gal. per dump ..... $15.00 b.  Sanitary sewer system development charge: 1.  Residential. Inside corporate limits per dwelling unit ..... $250.00 Outside corporate limits per dwelling unit ..... $350.00 2.  Commercial service. Water meter size Inside city Outside city 3/4 inch or smaller $250.00 $350.00 1 inch $445.00 $625.00 1½ inch $1,000.00 $1,400.00 2 inch $1,780.00 $2,490.00 3 inch $4,000.00 $5,660.00 4 inch $7,100.00 $9,950.00 6 inch $16,000.00 $22,400.00 8 inch $28,400.00 $39,800.00 10 inch $44,400.00 $62,200.00 12 inch $64,000.00 $89,600.00    c.  Monthly sewer service charge (subject to annual CPI increase). 1.  Residential: $14.137.60 plus $2.252.40 per 1,000 gallons based upon average monthly consumption of water during January, February and March. 2.  For new residential billings with no consumption history, rate will be $4.137.60 plus $2.252.40 per 1,000 gallons for 6,000 gallons per month. 3.  Commercial/industrial not sampled the rate will be $4.137.60 plus $2.252.40 per 1,000 gallons of water used. 4.  All others will be $4.137.60 plus $0.300.31 per pound of BOD plus $0.18 per pound of TSS plus $1.211.29 per 1000 gallons of water used. Oil and grease charge will be $0.03 per pound over 100 mg/l. 5.  All sewer customers within the corporate limits of the city will pay an additional $3.00 per month added to the base rate of $4.13. d.  Rental rate for jet-vac. Unit with two operators $150.00/hr. Sec. 60-1000. Public Works; sanitary sewer; industrial pretreatment & construction.     Current Sanitary Sewer fees (as of July 1, 2010) are subject to annual CPI increase and/or cost of living adjustment. Increases are in accordance with the most recent annual Consumer Price Index for the South Urban, Size C region on July 1 of each year. References: Ordinance No. 05-111 6/29/05, Ordinance No. 91-132 4/23/91, and Code 1985 I.  Monthly Sewer Service Charges (a)  Residential: $8.15 plus $2.57 per 1000 gallons based upon average monthly consumption of water during January, February and March. (b)  For new residential billings with no consumption history, rate will be $8.15 plus $2.57 per 1000 gallons for six thousand (6000) gallons per month. (c)  Commercial/Industrial not sampled the rate will be $8.15 plus $2.57 per 1000 gallons of water used. (d)  All others will be $8.15 plus $0.33 per pound of BOD plus $0.20 per pound of TSS plus $1.39 per 1000 gallons of water used. Oil and grease charge will be $0.03 per pound over 100 mg/1. (e)  For all billing outside the corporate limits of the City of Albany the rates will be the same except that the base rate is $4.74 instead of $8.15. II.  Septic Tank dump charges (for registered haulers only) (a)  Tank size less than 1,000 gallons .....   $15.00/tank (b)  Tank size between 1,000 and 3,000 gallons .....   $30.00/tank III  Industrial Pretreatment Charges (a)  Annual Permit Application fee .....   $100.00/year (b)  Sampling technician hourly rate .....   $ 30.00/hour (c)  Sampling fees: (i)  BOD, COD, TSS, Oil & Grease, pH & temp .....   $110.00/sample (ii)  TDS .....   $10.00/sample (iii)  Sulfides .....   $40.00/sample (iv)  Priority Pollutant metals (each) .....   $30.00/metal (v)  VOC scan (31 compounds) .....   $450.00/sample (vi)  Semi-volatile OC scan .....   $650.00/sample (vii)  Phenol .....   $40.00/sample (viii)  Cyanide .....   $35.00/sample (ix)  Pesticides & PCBs .....   $350.00/sample (x)  Priority Pollutant Scan (128 compounds) .....   $2,150.00/sample IV.  Sanitary Sewer System Development Charges (a)  Residential - inside corporate limits per dwelling unit ..... $250.00 (b)  Residential - outside corporate limits per dwelling unit ..... $350.00 (c)  Commercial Service Water Meter Size Inside City Outside City 3/4" or smaller $250.00 $350.00 1 inch $445.00 $625.00 1½ inch $1,000.00 $1,400.00 2 inch $1,780.00 $2,490.00 3 inch $4,000.00 $5,660.00 4 inch $7,100.00 $9,950.00 6 inch $16,000.00 $22,400.00 8 inch $28,400.00 $39,800.00 10 inch $44,400.00 $62,200.00 12 inch $64,000.00 $89,600.00    V.  Construction Work Costs (a)  Existing Sewer construction by Ordinance, maximum ..... $15.00/LF (b)  Sewer construction - by individual request (i)  4" at 0-6' Deep ..... $9.50/LF (ii)  6" at 0-6' Deep ..... $11.00/LF (iii)  8" at 0-6' Deep ..... $15.00/LF (iv)  10" at 0-6' Deep ..... $18.00/LF (v)  12" at 0-6' Deep ..... $21.00/LF (vi)  15" at 0-6' Deep ..... $25.00/LF (vii)  18" at 0-6' Deep ..... $28.00/LF (viii)  Excess depth/foot over 6' feet deep ..... 10 percent/foot (c)  4" Sewer Tap construction (i)  Dirt Alley ..... $300.00 (ii)  Paved Alley ..... $400.00 (iii)  Dirt Street ..... $350.00 (iv)  Paved Street ..... $500.00 (v)  Reconnection fee ..... $225.00 (vi)  Installation of clean-out at property line ..... $225.00 (d)  Larger than 4"Sewer Tap construction (i)  6" Tap .....   Cost of 4" tap plus ($1.50 x LF of 6" pipe) (ii)  8" Tap .....   Cost of 4" tap plus ($5.50 x LF of 8" pipe) (iii)  10" Tap .....   Cost of 4" tap plus ($8.50 x LF of 10" pipe) (iv)  12" Tap .....   Cost of 4" tap plus ($11.50 x LF of 12" pipe) (e)  4' Diameter Manhole (i)  0—4' deep ..... $1,000.00 (ii)  Extra depth per foot over 4' ..... $150.00/ LF (f)  5' Diameter Manhole (i)  0—4' deep ..... $1,800.00 (ii)  Extra depth per foot over 4' ..... $200.00/ LF (g)  6' Diameter Manhole (i)  0 - 4' deep ..... $2,400.00 (ii)  Extra depth per foot over 4' ..... $250.00/ LF (h)  Catch basins/ Grate Inlets (i)  0—4' deep ..... $1,000.00 (ii)  Extra depth per foot over 4' ..... $100.00/ LF (i)  Driveway Culvert Installation (Note: pipe provided by customer) (i)  Standard 24' culvert ..... $200.00 (ii)  Extra length, per foot ..... $10.00/ LF (j)  Concrete Construction/Installation Work: (Note: Maintenance of driveways and turnouts are the responsibility of the individual property owner). (i)  Driveway turnout, standard 11' width ..... $475.00 (ii)  Driveway turnout, extra width per foot ..... $40.00/ LF (iii)  Flat work per cubic yard ..... $200.00/CY (iv)  Curb & gutter ..... $10.00/ LF (v)  Curb cut & ADA Ramp ..... $475.00 VI.  Equipment Rental Rates (Rental requires City Manager Approval) (a)  Jet-vac truck (with 2 operators) ..... $150.00/hr (b)  Heavy Equipment (with 1 operator) ..... $100.00/hr (Ord. No. 10-124, 6-22-2010) CHAPTER 62. VEGETATION (TREE PROTECTION) Sec. 62-38. Enforcement and penalties.     Any person that commences any tree activity without a tree permit may be assessed a fee, in addition to the provisions regarding stop work orders set out in this division, in the amount of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per required tree density unit for that site. CHAPTER 64. VEHICLES FOR HIRE Sec. 64-1. Bus fare charges; special fares. Passenger Fare Structure Effective July 1, 2008 Base cash fare ..... $1.25 Senior cash fare ..... $.50 Disabled cash fare ..... $0.50 Under age 5 ..... Free 6-12 years old ..... $0.50 Monthly pass ..... $45.00 Weekly pass ..... $12.00 Transfers ..... Free Student Pass ..... $35.00 Senior Monthly Pass ..... $20.00 Disable Monthly Pass ..... $20.00 Footnotes: --- (1) --- Editor's note— Editor's note- Printed herein are the municipal fees established by the board of city commissioners that shall be charged for departmental administration and regulatory purposes for plans, materials, licenses and permits. The section numbers and catchlines appearing in this appendix refer to corresponding sections of the Code of Ordinances where the authorization or establishment of the fee may be found. In those instances where a fee appears in this appendix without a requirement elsewhere in the Code that the fee be paid, then the second-part of the section number for that fee has been designated as "1000" (e.g. "2-1000"; "12-1000"; "16-1000"; etc.) in this appendix and the appearance of that fee in this appendix shall be construed as a requirement that the fee be paid. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform and consistent with those appearing in the Code. This schedule of fees is subject to periodic review and revisions; please contact the city clerk's office for the most current information. All fees should be made payable to: City of Albany, GA. --- (2) --- Editor's note— The schedule of fees under this article shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the offices of the city clerk and the public works department. --- (3) --- Editor's note— The schedule of fees under this article shall be as established by ordinance or resolution of the board of city commissioners, from time to time, and made available for public examination in the offices of the city clerk and the public works department. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1975 CODE This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1975 Code, which are included herein. Sections of the 1975 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 1975 Code Section Section  this Code 1-1, 1-2 1-1, 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-5 1-5 1-18 1-6, 1-7 1-10, 1-11 1-8, 1-9 1-11, 1-12 1-10 1-11 1-11, 1-12 1-13, 1-14 1-13 1-16 1-14 1-8, 1-9 1—4 1-17 2-1—2-4 2-1—2-4 2-5, 2-6 60-1, 60-2 2-7—2-9 2-648—2-650 2-21, 2-22 2-41, 2-42 2-23, 2-24 2-247, 2-248 2-25—2-27 2-44—2-46 2-37 2-75 2-38 2-74 2-39 2-76 2-41 2-77 2-51—2-57 2-102—2-108 2-71—2-73 2-130—2-132 2-75 2-133 2-77, 2-78 2-134, 2-135 2-79 2-137 2-101 2-162 2-102 2-2 2-163 2-111, 2-112 2-195, 2-196 2-121 2-218 2-122, 2-123 2-216, 2-217 2-131 2-674 2-132 2-685 2-133 2-682 2-141 2-676 2-142 2-675 2-143—2-147 2-677—2-681 2-161 2-683 2-164 2-684 2-181 2-8 2-183 2-136 3-1—3-5 12-1—12-5 3-21—3-33 12-29—12-41 4-2 6-2 4-3 6-1 4-4 6-3 4-5 6-39 4-6 6-37 4-7, 4-8 6-40, 6-41 4-9 6-38 4-10 6-42 4-10.1 6-42 4-11 6-5, 6-6 4-13 6-10 4-21 6-73 4-22 6-77 4-24—4-28 6-78—6-82 4-29, 4-30 6-74 4-31 6-76 4-32 6-9 4-33—4-36 6-83—6-86 4-37, 4-38 6-88, 6-89 4-38—4-40 6-90—6-92 4-40—4-43 6-89 4-41—4-43 6-93—6-95 4-44—4-52 6-97—6-105 4-53 6-107 4-54 6-109 4-55 6-106 4-56(1)—4-56(4) 6-136—6-139 4-56(5) 6-144 4-56(7) 6-143 4-56(9) 6-147 4-56(10) 6-140 4-71 6-179 4-72 6-178 4-73 6-180, 6-181 4-74 6-182 5-1, 5-2 10-1, 10-2 5-3 10-1 5-3, 5-4 10-35, 10-36 5-6, 5-7 10-5 5-8 10-6 5-9 10-130 5-10 10-8 5-11 10-104 5-31, 5-32 10-3, 10-4 5-41 10-7 5-42—5-44 10-101—10-103 5-45 10-7 5-46, 5-47 10-105, 10-106 5-61—5-64 10-126—10-129 5-81, 5-82 10-180, 10-181 5-101—5-111 10-61—10-71 6-1—6-3 18-1 6-4—6-9 18-2—18-7 6-11, 6-12 18-8, 18-9 6-21—6-23 18-37—18-39 6-31, 6-32 18-67, 18-68 6-33 18-9 6-34—6-43 18-69—18-78 9-35—9-37 1-19—1-21 10-1, 10-2 24-1, 24-2 11-22—11-25 28-21—28-24 11-27 28-25 11-56(6) 6-141 12-10—12-15 52-31—52-36 13-2 2-138 13-8 38-147 13-9(a), (b) 36-6 13-9(c), (j) 36-5 13-9(e) 62-2 13-9(f)—(i), (m) 36-77 13-9(l) 36-7 13-23(g), (h) 36-5 13-70 38-186 14-2 16-24 14-3—14-8 16-26—16-31 15-3 34-6 15-5 34-2 15-10, 15-11 34-3, 34-4 15-13 34-40 15-15 34-39 15-24 34-47 15-64, 15-65 34-43 15-68 34-44 15-81, 15-82 34-41, 34-42 15-114 34-5 15-122 34-46 15-145, 15-146 34-80, 34-81 15-148 34-76 15-150 34-78, 34-79 15-157 34-77 16-2 38-1 38-121 16-5 38-2 16-21(a) 38-43 16-22, 16-23 38-44, 38-45 16-26(a)—(c) 36-147 16-41—16-43 38-121—38-123 16-45, 16-46 38-124, 38-125 16-61, 16-62 38-144 16-64 38-145 16-66 38-146 16-81—16-84 4-19—4-22 16-86, 16-87 4-23, 4-24 16-127—16-129 38-198—38-200 17-3—17-8 42-1—42-6 17-9 42-6 17-12 42-8 17-13 42-6 17-21—17-26 42-39—42-44 18-1, 18-2 16-103, 16-104 18-6 16-105 18-8 16-106 19-55, 19-56 2-589, 2-590 20-1 44-1 21-1—21-3 60-878—60-880 21-4 60-3 22-2 32-20 22-4—22-7 32-21—32-24 22-8, 22-9 38-1 22-21 32-53 22-22 32-60 22-31, 22-32 32-54, 32-55 22-33 32-61 22-34, 22-35 32-56, 32-57 22-36 32-59 22-37 32-58 22-39 32-19 23-2 8-19 23-21—23-24 8-44—8-47 25-1 40-1 25-1, 25-2 40-102, 40-103 25-4—25-8 40-104—40-108 25-21—25-23 40-46—40-48 25-31—25-40 40-70—40-79 26-2 38-123 26-3 46-1 26-5 38-123 26-8 46-2 27-21 48-57 27-22 48-56 27-23—27-26 48-58—48-61 27-41, 27-42 48-20, 48-21 27-44 48-22 27-62 16-25 29-1 56-1 29-3, 29-4 56-2, 56-3 29-6—29-8 56-4—56-6 29-21 56-141 29-23—29-25 56-142—56-144 29-26 56-146 29-27 56-145 29-41—29-48 56-147 29-61—29-68 56-161—56-168 29-81—29-83 56-169—56-171 29-83 56-172 29-85, 29-86 56-173, 56-174 29-101—29-107 60-909—60-915 29-109—29-113 60-916—60-920 29-121, 29-122 56-191, 56-192 29-123(a) 56-193 29-124—29-128 56-194—56-198 31-5 58-1 31-21, 31-22 58-114, 58-115 31-41—31-45 58-109—58-113 31-61, 31-62 58-144, 58-145 31-65 58-146 31-81—31-89 58-56—58-64 31-91 58-65 33-1—33-3 60-461—60-463 33-6 60-464  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1985 CODE This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1985 Code, as supplemented through October 28, 2008, and updated through March 24, 2009, which are included herein. Sections of the 1985 Code, as supplemented and updated, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 1985 Code Section Section  this Code 1-1—1-21 1-1—1-21 2-1—2-4 2-1—2-4 2-6 2-6 2-6.1 2-7 2-7, 2-8 2-8, 2-9 2-21, 2-22 2-41, 2-42 2-22.1 2-43 2-23—2-29 2-44—2-50 2-36—2-38 2-74—2-76 2-40, 2-41 2-77, 2-78 2-46—2-52 2-102—2-108 2-66—2-69 2-130—2-133 2-71—2-75 2-134—2-138 2-86, 2-87 2-162, 2-163 2-96, 2-97 2-195, 2-196 2-106—2-109 2-216—2-219 2-161, 2-162 2-247, 2-248 2-164 2-249 2-171—2-174 2-279—2-282 2-181—2-189 2-313—2-321 2-191—2-193 2-346—2-348 2-194—2-198 2-370—2-374 2-206—2-208 2-411—2-413 2-211—2-214 2-440—2-443 2-215 2-470 2-216—2-221 2-472—2-477 2-222.1—2-222.5 2-505—2-509 2-230, 2-231 2-589, 2-590 2-286—2-288 2-648—2-650 2-301—2-312 2-674—2-685 2-341 30-39 2-351—2-365 2-714—2-728 2-367 2-729 2-369 2-730 3-16, 3-17 4-19, 4-20 3-19—3-22 4-21—4-24 4-1—4-11 6-1—6-11 4-13—4-15 6-13—6-15 4-21, 4-22 6-37, 6-38 4-24—4-27 6-39—6-42 4-41—4-43 6-73—6-75 4-43.1 6-76 4-44—4-54 6-77—6-87 4-54.1 6-88 4-55—4-76 6-89—6-110 4-86 6-136 4-88—4-92 6-137—6-141 4-92.1 6-142 4-93—4-97 6-143—6-147 4-111—4-115 6-178—6-182 4-126—4-135 6-203—6-212 4-140—4-142 6-233—6-235 5-16 8-19 5-26—5-30 8-44—8-48 5-51—5-71 8-70—8-90 5-72—5-74 8-107—8-109 6-1—6-8 10-1—10-8 6-21 10-35 6-21(g)—(i) 10-1 6-22 10-36 6-36—6-46 10-61—10-71 6-61—6-66 10-101—10-106 6-91—6-95 10-126—10-130 6-96, 6-97 10-160, 10-161 6-98 10-1 6-99—6-104 10-162—10-167 6-106—6-108 10-180—10-182 7-1—7-5 12-1—12-5 7-16—7-28 12-29—12-41 8-3 14-4 8-4—8-6 14-23—14-25 9-1—9-9 18-1—18-9 9-16—9-18 18-37—18-39 9-26—9-37 18-67—18-78 10-1—10-5 22-1—22-5 10-6—10-9 22-29—22-32 10-15—10-19 22-53—22-57 10-26—10-32 22-88—22-94 10-38—10-52 22-117—22-131 10-53—10-61 22-161—22-169 10-63—10-65 22-170—22-172 11-1, 11-2 24-1, 24-2 11-4 24-3 11-9 24-4 12-1—12-7 26-1—26-7 12-21—12-23 26-37—26-39 12.5-1—12.5-10 50-1—50-10 12.5-11 54-21 12.5-12 54-20 12.5-13—12.5-18 54-22—54-27 12.5-19—12.5-28 54-48—54-57 13-18—13-23 28-21—28-26 13-36 28-57 13-38—13-43 28-58—28-63 13-61—13-63 28-85—28-87 13-63 28-88 13-65 28-89 13-81—13-85 28-107—28-111 14-26—14-32 52-31—52-37 14-50—14-52 52-1—52-3 14-53—14-57 52-71—52-75 14-58 52-37 52-101 14-59 52-121 14-60—14-64 60-123—60-127 14-65, 14-66 60-194, 60-195 14-68—14-70 60-196—60-198 14-71—14-74 60-220—60-223 14-75—14-82 60-255—60-262 14-83—14-90 60-288—60-295 14-91—14-99 60-324—60-332 14-100, 27-28 60-333 14-101—14-103 60-334—60-336 14-104—14-107 60-361—60-364 14-108—14-111 60-156—60-159 14-112, 14-113 60-128, 60-129 14-114—14-124 60-160—60-170 14-125 60-387 14-126 60-130 14-127 60-418 14-133—14-137 60-131—60-135 14-138 60-419 14.5-10—14.5-26 30-19—30-35 14.5-29—14.5-31 30-36—30-38 15-1—15-6 34-1—34-6 15-7 34-39 15-9 34-40 15-21 34-7 40-2 15-22—15-27 34-41—34-46 15-29 34-47 15-31 34-48 15-46—15-55 34-76—34-85 15-71—15-74 34-114—34-117 15-91—15-93 40-46—40-48 15-101—15-110 40-70—40-79 16-1—16-3 36-1—36-3 16-4 36-69 16-16—16-22 36-124—36-130 17-1 38-1 17-3—17-7 38-2—38-6 17-8 16-23 17-9—17-13 38-7—38-11 17-16—17-19 38-43—38-46 17-20 36-147 17-31 40-1 17-31, 17-32 40-102, 40-103 17-34—17-38 40-104—40-108 17-42—17-45 36-179—36-182 17-46 38-66 17-47, 17-48 38-68, 38-69 17-49 38-67 17-50 38-70 17-50.1 38-71, 38-72 17-51—17-57 38-121—38-127 17-72—17-75 38-144—38-147 17-76 38-174 38-177 17-78 38-12 17-86 38-186 17-106—17-108 38-198—38-200 17-111—17-120 38-220—38-229 17-120.1—17-120.5 38-250—38-254 17-151—17-162 60-56—60-67 17-181, 17-182 60-93 17-183—17-186 60-94—60-97 18-3—18-10 42-1—42-8 18-21—18-26 42-39—42-44 19-16—19-20 16-103—16-107 19-102—19-105 16-130—16-133 19-107—19-111 16-134—16-138 19-113 16-139 19-121 16-167 19-131—19-137 16-188—16-194 19-141—19-148 16-212—16-219 20-1, 20-2 44-1, 44-2 20-16—20-21 44-23—44-28 21-16—21-21 32-19—32-24 21-32 32-53 21-34 32-54, 32-55 21-35—21-40 32-56—32-61 22-1 46-1 22-5 46-2 23-16—23-19 48-19—48-22 23-36, 23-37 48-56, 48-57 23-37, 23-38 48-58, 48-59 23-40, 23-41 48-60, 48-61 23-81—23-83 48-110—48-112 24-1—24-5 56-1—56-5 24-7 56-6 24-31—24-35 56-141—56-145 24-35 56-146 24-46—24-53 56-147 24-66—24-73 56-161—56-168 24-81—24-87 56-169—56-175 24-101—24-107 60-909—60-915 24-109—24-113 60-916—60-920 24-121—24-130 60-946—60-955 24-146—24-153 56-191—56-198 ch. 25, art. IV 25-51 ch. 25, art. IV, table I-A 25-51 ch. 25, art. IV, table I-B 25-51 25-1—25-9 25-1—25-9 25-21—25-26 25-21—25-26 25-28—25-33 25-28—25-33 25-41—25-43 25-41—25-43 25-51 25-51 26-3 58-1 26-4, 26-5 58-25, 58-26 26-17—26-26 16-24—16-33 26-27—26-29 16-64—16-66 26-30 16-1 26-31 16-67 26-32—26-35 16-34—16-37 26-35.1—26-35.3 16-68—16-70 26-35.5 16-71 26-35.6 16-2 26-36—26-46 58-56—58-66 26-61—26-67 58-109—58-115 26-76, 26-77 58-144, 58-145 26-80 58-146 26-91—26-94 58-180—58-183 26-106—26-110 58-205—58-209 27-1—27-4 60-1—60-4 27-21 60-127 27-24, 27-25 60-133, 60-134 27-25, 27-26 60-135 27-28 60-194 60-196 60-220 60-222 60-255—60-262 60-288—60-295 60-324—60-332 60-335, 60-336 60-361—60-364 60-387 27-29 60-131 27-30 60-160—60-162 60-165 60-361 27-30—27-32 60-163, 60-164 27-31 60-162 60-165 27-33 60-131 27-71—27-73 60-461—60-463 27-76 60-464 27-111—27-113 60-878—60-880 ch. 28, art. III, div. 1, app. A, app. B 62-41 28-1 62-1 28-16, 28-17 36-5, 36-6 28-19 36-77 28-20 36-7 28-21 62-2 28-31—28-46 62-25—62-40 28-51—28-53 62-71—62-73 28-61—28-65 62-105—62-109 29-1.1 64-1 29-3, 29-4 64-2, 64-3  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1985 Code, as supplemented through October 28, 2008, and updated through March 24, 2009, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1985 Code, as supplemented and updated. This tables contains some ordinances which precede March 24, 2009, but which were never included in the 1985 Code, as supplemented and updated, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since October 28, 2008, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not a general and permanent nature. Ordinance Number  Date Section  Section this Code (Ord.) 1(16-14.1)— 1(16-14.7) 36-191—36-197 75-178  7-22-1975 3 1-7 3(a) 1-9 81-117  2-24-1981 1 6-42 81-136  4-14-1981 1 56-168 81-137  4-14-1981 1 6-39 2 6-37 3, 4 6-40, 6-41 5 6-38 6 6-42 7 6-7 8 6-77 9 6-82 10 6-103 12 6-107 13(4-56(2))— 13(4-56(4)) 6-137—6-139 13(4-56(5)) 6-144 13(4-56(6)) 6-141 13(4-56(7)) 6-143 13(4-56(9)) 6-147 13(4-56(10)) 6-140 13(4-56(11)) 6-146 13(4-56(12), (13)) 6-108 13(4-56(14)) 6-145 81-148  4-28-1981 1, 2 52-35, 52-36 81-149  4-28-1981 1 18-70 81-137  5-12-1981 13(4-56(1)) 6-136 81-152  5-12-1981 1(4-5) 6-39 1(4-5.1) 6-4 2 6-37 3, 4 6-40, 6-41 5 6-38 6 6-42 7 6-7 8 6-77 9 6-82 10 6-103 12 6-107 13(4-56(1))— 13(4-56(4)) 6-136—6-139 13(4-56(5)) 6-144 13(4-56(6)) 6-141 13(4-56(7)) 6-143 13(4-56(9)) 6-147 13(4-56(10)) 6-140 13(4-56(11)) 6-146 13(4-56(12), (13)) 6-108 13(4-56(14)) 6-145 81-153  5-12-1981 1 34-42 81-155  5-12-1981 1 24-3 6 24-3 81-160  5-26-1981 1(15-84) 34-41 81-161  6- 9-1981 I(a) 6-1 I(b)—(i) 6-203 II—X 6-204—6-212 81-182  7-28-1981 1 34-42 81-183  7-28-1981 1 6-141 81-187  8-25-1981 1, 2 34-42 81-190  9- 8-1981 1(d) 38-186 81-218 11-10-1981 1 6-6 81-224 11-24-1981 1 6-7 81-225 11-24-1981 1(4-11.1) 6-8 81-228 12-22-1981 1 52-34 82-134  4-27-1982 1 6-138 82-158  6-30-1982 1 10-1 3, 4 10-180, 10-181 5(5-21) 10-182 82-177  9-14-1982 1 6-6 82-194 11- 9-1982 1 2-649 83-103  1-25-1983 1 6-95 83-112  3-22-1983 1(16-24) 38-46 83-121  4-12-1983 1 1-17 83-123  4-26-1983 1 38-126 83-129  5-24-1983 1(4-57) 6-96 83-133  5-24-1983 1 6-108 83-163  9-13-1983 1—5 2-47 83-196 12-27-1983 1—4 2-6 84-108  2-14-1984 1 6-3 2 6-179 84-111  2-14-1984 1 34-42 84-116  3-13-1984 1—4 42-7 84-126  4-24-1984 1 34-42 84-161  7-24-1984 1 24-3 84-166  8-14-1984 1 12-33 84-183  9-11-1984 1 34-42 84-209 11-13-1984 1 34-42 85-140  3-28-1985 1 6-11 85-141  3-28-1985 1 6-107 85-167  5-30-1985 2—7 44-23—44-28 85-200  8-13-1985 1 6-96 85-206  8-13-1985 2, 3 2-137 85-211  8-27-1985 2—4 2-137 85-214  8-27-1985 1 6-136 2 6-141, 6-142 85-215  8-27-1985 1—4 38-3 85-223 10- 8-1985 1 6-1 2 6-37—6-42 85-239 11-12-1985 1 6-6 85-240 11-12-1985 1 10-66 85-252 11-26-1985 1 2-47 86-109  2-11-1986 1 56-175 86-110  2-11-1986 1 28-57 3—8 28-58—28-63 86-121  2-25-1986 1—3 34-82 86-135  4- 8-1986 64-2 86-143  4-22-1986 1—3 2-9 86-148  5-13-1986 1 38-4 86-157  6-10-1986 1 56-142 86-176  6-26-1986 1(1) 44-28 1(2) 44-26 86-183  7- 8-1986 1 34-82 86-184  7- 8-1986 1 2-649 86-198  7-22-1986 1 62-1 86-R220 10-14-1986(Res.) 1 1-7 86-240 10-28-1986 2 6-41 86-241 10-28-1986 1 34-42 86-242 10-28-1986 1 16-107 87-113  3-10-1987 1 34-42 87-137  5-12-1987 1(1) 10-1 1(1), 1(2) 10-35 1(2)(g)—(i) 10-1 87-169  8-25-1987 1 24-1 87-173  9- 8-1987 I—IX 2-313—2-321 87-181  9-22-1987 1 58-57, 58-58 87-185 10-13-1987 1 34-42 87-187 10-13-1987 1 24-1 87-196 11-10-1987 1 2-47 87-205 11-24-1987 1 6-107 2 8-48 4 16-32 87-208 12- 8-1987 58-25 87-210 12- 8-1987 1, 2 60-946, 60-947 3 60-913 4—11 60-948—60-955 87-226 12-22-1987 1—5 28-85—28-89 88-105  1-26-1988 1 38-5 88-110  2- 9-1988 1 6-11 88-118  3-22-1988 1 2-137 88-128  5-10-1988 1(1)—1(5) 28-107—28-111 88-129  5-10-1988 1 2-47 88-152  8-23-1988 52-37 88-153  8-23-1988 1 12-1, 12-2 12-5 12-36 88-161  9-17-1988 1, 2 2-7 88-171 10-25-1988 1—5 64-1 88-172 10-25-1988 1—3 64-3 88-176 11- 8-1988 1—3 44-2 88-187 12-13-1988 1 38-6 89-104  2-14-1989 1, 2 6-5 89-111  2-28-1989 1 56-3 89-120  3-28-1989 1 34-42 89-128  4-11-1989 1 64-1 89-137  6-15-1989 1, 2 28-26 89-142  6-27-1989 1 2-130 89-148  7-25-1989 1 30-39 89-151  8- 8-1989 1 34-42 89-154  8- 8-1989 1 2-649 89-159  8-22-1989 1—5 58-26 89-172 10-24-1989 1—3 48-110—48-112 89-175 11-14-1989 58-25 89-183 12-27-1989 1 32-22 90-103  1-23-1990 58-25 90-112  3-13-1990 2 14-4 90-113  3-13-1990 1—5 34-83 90-121  4-24-1990 1, 2 2-48 90-128  5-22-1990 1 34-42 90-131  6-12-1990 1—15 2-714—2-728 17 2-729 90-146  9-11-1990 12-32 90-171 11-27-1990 2—5 36-179—36-182 90-174 12-27-1990 1 6-13 91-109  1-22-1991 58-25 91-110  1-22-1991 1—5 2-370—2-374 91-113  2-12-1991 1 14-23 91-121  3-14-1991 1 2-718 91-129  4- 9-1991 1 1-17 91-132  4-23-1991 1(28-1) 60-127 1(28-4), 1(28-5) 60-133, 60-134 1(28-5), 1(28-6) 60-135 1(28-8) 60-194 60-196 60-220 60-222 60-255—60-262 60-288—60-295 60-324—60-336 60-361—60-364 60-387 1(28-9) 60-131 1(28-10) 60-160—60-162 60-165 60-361 1(28-10—12) 60-163, 60-164 1(28-11) 60-162 60-165 91-155  8-13-1991 1 6-75 91-156  8-13-1991 1 6-87 91-164  9-10-1991 1 34-42 91-178 11-12-1991 1 34-42 91-182 11-19-1991 1 6-101 91-185 12-10-1991 1 34-42 91-188 12-31-1991 1 6-3 91-189 12-31-1991 1, 2 52-37 98-101  1-28-1992 1 2-219 92-102  2-11-1992 1 34-42 92-103  2-11-1992 1 34-42 92-109  2-25-1992 1—3 2-411—2-413 92-111  3-10-1992 1—7 26-1—26-7 92-124  5-12-1992 art.II, § 1— 62-71—62-73 art.II, § 3 art.III, § 1— 62-105—62-109 art.III, § 5 92-128  5-26-1992 (art. I) 16-130—16-132 (art. II, §§ 2.00, 2.01) 16-133 (art. III, § 3.01) 16-167 (art. IV, § 4.00)— 16-188—16-194 (art. IV, § 4.06) (art. V, § 5.00)— 16-212—16-219 (art. V, § 5.07) (art. VI, § 6.02)— 16-134—16-138 (art. VI, § 6.06) (art. VI, § 6.08) 16-139 92-132  6- 9-1992 1 34-42 92-161 11- 9-1992 1 28-107 92-163 12- 8-1992 1 34-42 93-102  1-11-1993 1—4 2-440—2-443 93-118  3-23-1993 1 14-4 93-126  5-11-1993 1 36-77 93-127  5-11-1993 1 36-5 93-128  5-11-1993 1 36-6 93-142  6-22-1993 1(art. I, A)— App. A, § 25-1—App. A, § 25-7 1(art. I, G) 1(art. II, A, B) App. A, § 25-8 1(art. III, A—F) App. A, § 25-9 1(art. IV, I) App. A, § 25-29 1(art. IV, A)— App. A, § 25-21—App. A, § 25-26 1(art. IV, F) 1(art. IV, H) App. A, § 25-28 1(art. IV, J)— App. A, § 25-30—App. A, § 25-32 1(art. IV, L) 1(art. VI, A)— App. A, § 25-41—App. A, § 25-43 1(art. VI, C) 1(art. VII) App. A, § 25-51 93-144  6-22-1993 1—21 8-70—8-90 93-146  7-13-1993 1 6-14 93-150  7-27-1993 1 6-15 94-101  1-10-1994 1 2-47 94-133  6-29-1994 1 App. A, § 25-22 94-140  7-22-1994 1—3 26-37—26-39 94-150  8- 9-1994 1, 2 16-23 94-158 10-11-1994 1 App. A, § 25-22 94-159 10-11-1994 1 34-42 94-160 10-11-1994 1 34-42 94-161 10-11-1994 1 34-42 94-162 10-11-1994 1 34-42 95-101  1- 9-1995 1 34-45 95-106  2-28-1995 1—4 58-180—58-183 95-119  5-23-1995 1 56-3 95-146 10-10-1995 1 2-43 95-152 11-14-1995 1 16-33 2—4 16-64—16-66 5 16-1 6 16-67 7—10 16-34—16-37 11—13 16-68—16-70 15 16-71 16 16-2 95-153 11-14-1995 1 App. A, § 25-8 App. A, § 25-23 App. A, § 25-32 App. A, § 25-41 App. A, § 25-51 1(art. III, G) App. A, § 25-9 95-155 11-14-1995 1—10 38-220—38-229 95-156 11-14-1995 1—5 38-250—38-254 95-158 11-21-1995 1—5 58-205—58-209 95-160 12-12-1995 1—5 6-13 95-167 12-21-1995 1, 2 38-10 96-105  2-27-1996 1 14-4 96-110  3-26-1996 1, 2 60-131 96-116  5-14-1996 I 2-470 II—VII 2-472—2-477 96-221  5-28-1996 1 38-9 96-270  6-25-1996 1 14-24 96-299  9-10-1996 1 2-7 96-325 10-22-1996 1 2-162 96-329 10-22-1996 1 2-723 96-332 11-12-1996 1 2-7 96-338 12-23-1996 1—3 38-7 96-339 12-23-1996 1—9 38-8 97-107  3-12-1997 1 2-7 97-118  5-28-1997 1 2-75 97-119  5-28-1997 1 38-174 38-177 97-120  5-28-1997 1 34-84 97-123  6-10-1997 1 36-179 97-131  7- 8-1997 1 App. A, § 25-8, App. A, § 25-9 App. A, § 25-22, App. A, § 25-23 App. A, § 25-25 App. A, § 25-51 1(M) App. A, § 25-33 97-1331  7- 8-1997 1 App. A, § 25-51 97-134  8-12-1997 1—5 60-4 97-153 12- 9-1997 8-3-200—8-3-202 30-19—30-21 8-3-204—8-3-209 30-22—30-27 8-3-211—8-3-218 30-28—30-35 8-3-221—8-3-223 30-36—30-38 98-103  1-12-1998 1 App. A, § 25-51 98-105  1-27-1998 1 38-223 98-112  2-24-1998 1 2-7 98-115  4-14-1998 1 16-64 98-128  6- 9-1998 1—16 62-25—62-40 app. A, app. B 62-41 98-136  7-14-1998 1 14-25 98-140  9- 8-1998 1—6 38-127 98-143  9-22-1998 1, 2 36-5 98-147 11-10-1998 1 26-2—26-4 98-148 11-10-1998 1—4 34-85 98-149 11-10-1998 1—4 38-12 98-150 11-10-1998 1—3 38-11 98-151 12- 8-1998 3 2-130 98-153 12- 8-1998 1 6-74 99-111  4-13-1999 1 2-47 99-113  4-27-1999 1 4-21 99-137 12-14-1999 App. A, § 25-22, App. A, § 25-23 00-114  4-11-2000 1 2-1 00-115  4-11-2000 1(1), 1(2) 6-108, 6-109 00-121  6-13-2000 1 6-75 00-128  6-28-2000 1(1) 6-108 1(3) 6-110 00-131  7-11-2000 2 38-66 3, 4 38-68, 38-69 5 38-67 6—8 38-70—38-72 00-133  7-25-2000 1 22-1—22-5 22-29—22-32 22-53—22-57 22-88—22-94 22-117—22-131 22-161—22-164 22-166—22-172 00-134  7-25-2000 1 2-7 00-140  8-22-2000 1 12-32, 12-33 00-144 10-11-2000 1 2-41 00-146 10-24-2000 1—3 2-346—2-348 01-100  1- 8-2001 1 12-32, 12-33 01-107  4-24-2001 1 62-39 01-125  5-30-2001 1 2-41 01-127  6-19-2001 1 2-41 01-128  6-27-2001 1(exh. A) 36-1—36-3 36-69 36-124—36-130 01-146  8-28-2001 1—3 2-249 01-147  8-28-2001 2(1) 16-1, 16-2 16-33 16-36, 16-37 16-68, 16-69 16-71 2(2) 16-37 01-155 10-23-2001 1—6 34-48 01-156 10-23-2001 1 34-42 01-158 11-27-2001 1—3 2-505—2-507 3, 4 2-508, 2-509 02-110  4-23-2002 1 38-174 38-177 02-111  4-23-2002 1 38-71 02-114  5-28-2002 1 22-164 02-116  5-28-2002 1 32-57 02-121  6-26-2002 1 22-164 02-122  7-23-2002 1 2-47 02-124  8-27-2002 1 2-49 02-127  8-27-2002 1—5 2-730 02-133 10-22-2002 1 6-146 02-139 11-26-2002 1 6-5 04-111  3-23-2003 1 6-1 03-107  4-22-2003 1 6-75 03-118  5-27-2003 1 6-5 03-129  9- 2-2003 1, 2 22-165 03-132  9-23-2003 1 6-73 2 6-108 03-133  9-23-2003 1 6-136 3 6-137 03-134  9-23-2003 1 6-139 03-135 10-28-2003 4, 5 16-103, 16-104 7 16-66 03-137 11-25-2003 1 10-1 10-160—10-167 03-143 12-23-2003 1 8-107—8-109 04-100  1- 6-2004 24-4 04-102  1-27-2004 1 6-1 04-108  2-26-2004 1, 2 36-179 04-109  3-23-2004 1, 2 36-179 04-110  3-23-2004 1 2-137 04-111  3-23-2004 3 6-233—6-235 04-116  5-25-2004 1, 2 38-69 3, 4 38-71 5, 6 38-72 04-117  6-22-2004 2 50-1—50-10 04-125  8-24-2004 1, 2 8-109 04-126  8-24-2004 1 36-3 36-69 2 36-3 3 36-69 04-128  9-28-2004 1, 2 34-42 04-134 10-26-2004 1, 2 2-49 04-136 11-23-2004 1, 2 16-33 04-139 12-14-2004 1 6-5 04-140 12-14-2004 2 34-114—34-117 05-100  1-25-2005 1 6-5 05-102  2-22-2005 1 2-78 05-107  4-26-2005 1 58-66 05-108  4-26-2005 1 2-279—2-282 05-111  6-29-2005 1 52-1—52-3 52-37 52-71—52-75 2 52-1—52-3 52-37 52-71—52-75 52-101 52-121 60-123—60-135 60-156—60-159 60-161—60-170 60-194—60-198 60-220—60-223 60-255—60-262 60-288—60-295 60-324—60-336 60-361—60-364 60-387 60-418, 60-419 05-112  6-29-2005 1 2-50 05-113  6-29-2005 1 6-5 05-126 10-25-2005 1 38-71 05-132 12-20-2005 1 38-174 38-177 2 38-174 38-177 06-100  1-24-2006 1 58-57 06-103  2-28-2006 1(16-6) 36-4 1(16-7a) 36-1 1(16-7b(1)) 36-8 1(16-7b(2)) 36-40 1(16-7b(3)), 1(16-7b(4)) 36-74, 36-75 1(16-7b(5—6)) 36-76 1(16-7b(7)) 36-78 1(16-8) 36-70 1(16-9) 36-39 1(16-10), 1(16-11) 36-71 1(16-12) 36-73 06-109  3-28-2006 1 16-66 06-114  5-23-2006 1, 2 6-74 3 6-75 06-120  6-28-2006 1(17-76.1)— 1(17-76.5) 38-173—38-177 06-124  8-22-2006 1, 2 60-465 06-128 10-24-2006 3 54-20—54-27 4 54-48—54-57 06-131 11-28-2006 6-111 06-132 11-28-2006 app. 3 App. A, § 25-51 h., (5)—(9) App. A, § 25-23 06-134 12-19-2006 2 6-5 07-115  5-22-2007 2-41 07-124  9-25-2007 1       Added 47-1—47-13 07-125  9-25-2007 2(26-27)— 2(26-29) 16-64—16-66 2(26-35) 16-37 2(26-35.1) 16-68 07-133 11-27-2007 2 6-3 07-134 11-27-2007 2 6-102 07-135 11-27-2007 1 6-1 08-103  1-22-2008 2 34-42 08-104  2-26-2008 1(16-13.1)— 1(16-13.3) 36-97—36-99 1(16-14) 36-100 1(16-14.1)— 1(16-14.4) 36-101—36-104 08-106  3-25-2008 22-164 08-111  5-27-2008 1 2-473 2, 3 2-475 08-118  6-25-2008 3(8-39) 14-2 3(8-40) 14-26 08-120  6-25-2008 2(29-16)—2(29-22) 64-29—64-35 2(29-23)—2(29-25) 64-59—64-61 2(29-25)—2(29-29) 64-62—64-66 2(29-30)—2(29-40) 64-91—64-101 2(29-41), 2(29-42) 64-131, 64-132 2(29-44) 64-133 2(29-45)—2(29-61) 64-165—64-181 08-129  7-23-2008 2 34-42 08-130  7-23-2008 1 2-527—2-530 08-134  8-26-2008 1(1.1)—1(1.3) 2-761—2-763 1(1.5), 1(1.6) 2-765, 2-766 3(1.4) 2-764 08-135  8-26-2008 1 6-75 08-138  9-23-2008 2(23-19), 2(23-20) 48-22, 48-23 08-140 10-28-2008 1(16-15(a)— 1(16-15(g) 36-203—36-209 08-143 10-28-2008 1(1)—1(12) 60-56—60-67 2(1, 2) 60-93 2(3)—2(6) 60-94—60-97 08-145 11-25-2008 1(17-14) 38-13 1(17-14.1)— 1(17-14.4) 38-14—38-17 09-100  1-12-2009 2(29-25) 64-62 2(29-42) 64-132 09-101  1-12-2009 1 14-1 4(8-3.1)—4(8-3.19) 14-4—14-22 09-109  2-24-2009 3 14-1 14-22 09-110  2-24-2009 1(1.01), 1(1.02) 56-31, 56-32 1(2.01)—1(2.05) 56-55—56-59 1(3.01)—1(3.03) 56-77—56-79 1(4.01)—1(4.05) 56-102—56-106 1(5.01)—1(5.03) 56-126—56-128 1(6.01) 56-33 09-111  2-24-2009 1(17-79) 38-18 09-116  3-24-2009 1 16-3 09-119  5-26-2009 1, 2 6-7 09-129  9-22-2009 1(E-1(a))—1(E-1(g)) 4-52—4-58 09-131  9-22-2009 1 2-41 09-132  9-22-2009 1 6-83 09-141 12-15-2009 1—12 Adopt. Ord. 6 38-69(d) 7 52-33 8 60-127 9 60-196(c) 10 60-131(f) 11 60-949(1) 10-104  1-26-2010 1       Dltd 48-110—48-112 2       Added 48-110—48-113 10-105  1-26-2010 1       Dltd 32-60 2 32-19(c) 10-106  1-26-2010 1 10-1 10-117  3-23-2010 1       Added 6-5(e) 10-119  4-27-2010 1, 2 10-1 10-120  6-22-2010 1—17       Rpld 8-70—8-90       Added 8-71—8-87 10-122  6-22-2010 I—X       Rpld 50-1—50-10       Added 50-1—50-10 10-124  6-22-2010 App. C, § 52-1000 App. C, § 60-1000 10-127  7-27-2010 1, 2 34-42 09-137 10-27-2009 1, 2       Added 16-33(e) 09-138 10-27-2009 2 6-5(b) 09-139 11-24-2009 1, 2 6-42 09-142 12-15-2009 2(3-51—3-61)       Added 4-71—4-81 10-136 11-23-2010 1       Rpld 38-147 2       Added 38-147 10-137 11-23-2010 1       Dltd 36-147 36-178—36-182 36-191—36-197 2       Added 36-147 36-178—36-182 36-191—36-197 10-138 11-23-2010 1       Dltd 2-724 2       Added 2-724 10-141 12-14-2010 1       Added 60-465(c), (d) 10-142 12-14-2010 1       Added 8-49 11-105  4-26-2011 1       Rpld 38-127 2       Added 38-127 11-107  5-24-2011 2 38-9 11-110  6-28-2011 1, 2 16-103(3) 3, 4 16-105 5, 6 16-104 11-116  8-23-2011 1, 2 16-3 09-117  4-28-2009 App. B, ed. note 12-100  1- 9-2012 1 2-41 12-101  2-28-2012 1 34-42 12-103  2-28-2012 1, 2 2-475 12-112  9-25-2012 1(exh. A) 24-4 12-115 10-23-2012 1       Added 2-724(4)q, r. 2 2-724(11) 12-116 10-23-2012 1 12-30 12-117 10-23-2012 1 2-41(a) 12-119 11-27-2012 1 App. B, Art. 2 2 App. B, Art. 4, § F 3 App. B, Art. 8, § A.5. 12-120 11-27-2012 1 App. C, § 16-1000 2 16-37(a) 3 16-37(c) 4 16-65 12-122 12-18-2012 1 58-57 13-108  2-26-2013 1 2-317(a) 13-110  3-26-2013 1 12-36(b)(5) 13-111  3-26-2013 1 24-4 13-115  5-28-2013 1—3       Added 16-4 13-R116  5-28-2013 1 6-83 1, 2 App. C, § 6-83 13-117  5-28-2013 1       Added 58-236 2       Added 58-237 3-5       Added 58-238 6       Added 58-239—58-242 13-120  6-25-2013 2 34-47 13-121  6-25-2013 3 2-49 13-127  9-24-2013 1       Added 40-109—40-115 13-132 11-26-2013 1       Added 60-5 13-133 11-26-2013 1       Added 54-1—54-15 13-134 12-17-2013 1 6-75(1),(1.1) 13-135 12-17-2013 1       Added 6-112—6-113 14-105  4-22-2014 1       Added ch. 38, art. II, div. 3, §§ 38-81—38-84 14-109  6-25-2014 1       Added ch. 36, art. VIII, §§ 36-210—36-214 14-110  6-25-2014 1       Added App. C, § 44-1000 H. 14-119  8-26-2014 1 34-42 14-123  9-23-2014 1, 2 6-96(b)       Rpld 6-96(c) 3       Rnbd 6-96(d)—(g)       as 6-96(c)—(f) 14-124  9-23-2014 1 2-648, 2-649(a)(2), (3) 15-102  1-27-2015 1 16-4(b) 15-109  3-24-2015 1       Added 2-649(d) 15-111  4-28-2015 1       Rpld ch. 4, art. IV, §§ 4-71—4-81 2(Exh. A)       Added ch. 4, art. IV, §§ 4-71—4-81 15-114  4-28-2015 1 34-42 15-116  5-26-2015 1, 2 6-3(c) 15-117  5-26-2015 1       Rpld ch. 62, div. 1, §§ 62-25—62-41 ch. 62, div. 2, §§ 62-71—62-73 ch. 62, div. 3, §§ 62-105—62-109 2(Exh. A)       Added ch. 62, divs. 1—3, §§ 62-25—62-50 15-124 10-20-2015 1       Added 2-651 15-128 12-15-2015 1       Added 34-8 16-107  3-22-2016 1 2-41 16-108  3-22-2016 1 2-41 16-115  6-29-2016 1 2-41 Ord. of  7- 1-2016 App. C, § 52-1000 16-118  7-26-2016 I—X       Rpld ch. 50, §§ 50-1—50-10       Added ch. 50, §§ 50-1—50-10 16-121 10-11-2016 1       Added 6-114 17-100  1-10-2017 1       Added 2-652 17-105  5- 9-2017 I—X 50-1—50-10 17-111  9-26-2017 1 1-17(b) 17-112  9-26-2017 1       Added 36-8(e) 17-117 11-14-2017 I—X 50-1—50-10 18-113  9-11-2018 1 6-1 2       Added 6-115 18-114  9-11-2018 1 34-42  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE This table shows the location within this Charter, Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state laws. O.C.G.A. Section Section  this Code 1-1-7 1-5 1-3-1 et seq. Ch. 1 1-2 1-3-3 50-3 60-465 1-4-1 1-2 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 6 3-3-2.1 6-114 3-3-2.1(a)(1) 6-114 3-3-20(b)(2)(A) 6-6 3-3-22 6-4 3-3-23 6-1 3-4-49 Ch. 6 3-4-50 6-83 3-5-42, 3-5-43 6-83 3-7-1 et seq. 6-1 6-8 3-11-2(a)—(d) App. C, 6-83(d)(1) 4-8-1 et seq. Ch. 10 4-8-20, et seq. 10-161 4-8-25(c) 10-164 4-11-1 et seq. Ch. 10 4-11-10 10-35 5-3-29 36-78 6-1-1 et seq. Ch. 12 7-4-16 54-12 8-2-1 et seq. Ch. 14 36-1 8-2-20 et seq. 14-2 8-2-20(9) 14-1 8-2-25 Ch. 14 8-2-25(a) Ch. 28 8-2-26 Ch. 14 14-15 14-24 8-3-200 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II 8-3-201 30-20 8-25-1 et seq. 36-1 9-11-1 et seq. 30-27 9-11-6 1-2 9-11-26—9-11-37 30-30 10-1-390 et seq. Ch. 48, Art. III 10-1-393.4 Ch. 26, Art. II 10-1-425 Ch. 48, Art. III 10-14-1 et seq. Ch. 18 12-2-8 50-4 12-4-72 50-3 12-5-20 50-2 Ch. 52 Ch. 60 12-5-23(a)(5) 50-5 12-5-30(f) 50-2 50-4 12-5-282 50-2 12-5-286 50-4 12-5-440 et seq. 50-2 ch. 12-7 50-2 12-7-1 et seq. 50-4 12-7-6 50-3 12-7-6(b) 50-4 54-49 12-7-6(c) 50-4 12-7-7(e) 50-6 12-7-7(f)(1) 50-5 12-7-7.1 50-3 12-7-8 50-2 12-7-8(a) 50-5 50-6 12-7-17(9), (10) 50-5 12-7-19(b)(1) 50-8 12-7-19(b)(4) 50-8 12-7-20 50-5 50-8 13-10-1 et seq. 2-648 15-6-67 et seq. App. A 15-8-1 et seq. Ch. 22 15-11-200 38-7 16-1-1 et seq. Ch. 38 16-3-22 32-58 16-6-8 8-77 8-81 16-6-17 Ch. 8, Art. III 16-7-21 38-121 38-125 16-7-23 38-121 16-7-25 Ch. 52 16-7-42 38-173 16-7-42 et seq. Ch. 36 16-11-32 38-43 16-11-36 38-123 16-11-39 38-43 16-11-43 40-107 16-11-103— 16-11-104 38-144 16-12-4 10-35 16-12-35(d)(1)(B) 8-49 16-12-35(d)(1)(C) 8-49 16-12-80 4-72 16-13-20 et seq. 36-1 16-13-21(16) 38-13 16-13-25— 16-13-29 38-13 16-13-49 38-17 16-13-71 38-13 16-13-90 38-198—38-200 17-4-1 et seq. 32-56 17-15A-2 38-127 tit. 21 R.L. § D-15 21-2-1 et seq. Char. § 20 Char. § 20-A Char. § 21, Char. § 22 Ch. 24 21-2-45 R.L. § D-1 21-2-156 24-3 25-2-1 et seq. Ch. 28 28-57 25-2-12 28-107 25-2-13 28-58 25-4-31 12-41 25-9-1 et seq. Ch. 60, Art. VI 60-132 60-913 60-948, 60-949 62-44 25-9-3 60-947 26-2-370 6-1 26-5-1 Ch. 38, Art. IV, Div. 4 31-12A-1 et seq. 38-224 31-12A-2 38-222 31-19-1 et seq. Ch. 10 32-4-90 et seq. Ch. 56 32-4-92 Ch. 56 32-4-92(A)(7) 56-3 32-4-94 56-195 32-4-115 56-144 32-6-1 et seq. Ch. 56 32-6-70 et seq. 4-78 32-6-97 56-173 32-6-150 et seq. App. A 32-6-190 46-2 33-3-5 58-205 33-3-5(1) 58-208 33-8-4 58-207, 58-208 33-8-8.1, 33-8-8.2 58-207, 58-208 33-34-4 64-62 35-8-1 et seq. Char. § 23 28-61 Ch. 32 38-174 35-8-1—35-8-18 12-41 36-1-15 38-2 36-1-20(a) App. B, Art. 1 36-15-9 22-170 36-18-1 50-3 36-30-6 2-46 2-724 36-32-1 22-171 36-32-1 et seq. Ch. 22 36-32-6 38-11 36-33-1 et seq. 2-9 36-33-3 Ch. 32 36-34-2 Ch. 2 36-34-2(4) Ch. 2, Art. V 36-34-3 2-5 Ch. 42 Ch. 56 36-34-5 Ch. 52 Ch. 60 36-35-3 Ch. 1, Ch. 2 36-35-4 Ch. 2, Art. V 36-35-6(a)(2) 1-17 Ch. 38 36-37-1 et seq. 2-8 36-37-4 et seq. Ch. 18 36-38-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 2 36-44-11 R.L. Art. I, § 3 36-44-22 R.L. § H-2 36-60-3 4-72 Ch. 8, Art. III 36-60-12 Ch. 38, Art. II, Div. 2 36-64-1 et seq. Ch. 42 36-66-1 et seq. App. A 36-70-1 et seq. 2-5 Ch. 44 54-56 36-80-19 1-1 36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 36-82-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI, Div. 2 36-82-62 54-1 36-91-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 26 38-3-3(7) 26-38 40-1-1 34-1 40-1-1 et seq. 22-92 40-1-1-(32) 34-115 40-5-58 64-92 40-5-64 64-92 40-6-1 et seq. 34-116 40-6-1—40-6-395 34-7 40-2 40-6-3 34-4 40-6-20, 40-6-21 34-48 40-6-183 34-41 40-6-220 34-83 40-6-221(5) 34-83 40-6-330 34-116 40-6-331 Ch. 34, Art. IV 40-6-370 et seq. Ch. 34 Ch. 40 40-6-371(a)(2) 34-5 40-6-371(a)(10) 34-41 40-6-371(a)(18) 34-39 40-6-372 34-1 40-6-372—40-6-376 34-7 40-2 40-6-373 34-1 40-6-393—40-6-394 34-7 40-2 40-11-1 et seq. 36-73 Ch. 38 40-13-21(a) Ch. 34 Ch. 40 41-1-1 et seq. Ch. 38 41-2-1 et seq. Ch. 36 41-2-5 36-73, 36-74 Ch. 38 41-2-7 36-1 Ch. 62 41-2-8 36-1 41-2-9 36-78 41-2-9—41-2-17 36-1 41-2-12(c) 36-78 41-2-13 36-76 41-3-1 Ch. 8, Art. III 42-8-60 et seq. 64-60 64-92 43-8-1 et seq. Ch. 8, Art. II 43-32-1 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. IV 43-39A-1 et seq. 36-75 43-46-1 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. IV 44-3-1 et seq. App. A 44-10-1—44-10-8 2-473 44-10-22 2-472 44-12-130 48-19 44-12-130 et seq. Ch. 48 44-12-134 48-22 45-5-6 2-725 45-10-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VII 45-11-1 1-15 45-19-40 30-30 46-3-1 et seq. 58-180 46-3-14 Ch. 60, Art. V 46-8-20 et seq. Ch. 46 47-5-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 48-3-1 et seq. Ch. 58, Art. IV, Div. 2 48-3-9 36-1 48-4-1 et seq. 36-78 Ch. 58, Art. IV, Div. 3 48-4-21 Char. § 33 48-4-40 et seq. Char. § 33 48-4-78 36-78 48-4-80, 48-4-81 36-78 48-5-1 et seq. Ch. 58 48-5-48.2 58-25 48-5-48.2(b)(1)—(3) 58-25 48-5-50.1 58-26 48-5-350 et seq. Ch. 58 48-5-352, 48-5-353 Char. § 27 48-5-359 Char. § 33 Ch. 58, Art. IV, Div. 3 48-5-359.1 36-78 48-5-380 et seq. Ch. 58 48-6-93 Ch. 16, Art. III 16-66 48-6-93(d) 16-66 48-8-50 6-206 48-13-5 et seq. Ch. 16, Art. III 48-13-16 16-25 48-13-21 16-33 48-13-26 16-66 48-13-50 et seq. Ch. 58, Art. III 48-13-51(b)(1)—(6) 58-57 48-13-51(a)(1)(C) 58-59 48-13-52 58-61 48-13-93 58-212 48-13-94 58-213 48-17-1(2) 8-49 48-17-1(2.1) 8-49 50-13-1 et seq. 2-509 30-24 30-30 30-32 50-14-1 et seq. 2-48 50-18-70 et seq. 2-7 50-18-90 et seq. 2-6 51-7-80 et seq. 30-34 52-7-4 et seq. 38-9  